 S .&amp;. : Let 's begin with your family background and how far back your family goes in the South, in their own traditions in t he South. Stone: On both sides of my family we've been in the South since coming to the United States, from England and Scotland and Ireland. The Stones were English, as were the Matthews, on my mother's side, whereas the Coxes and Ca.rsons, my paternal grandparents, were from Scotland a.nd Protestant Ireland. We a.re in the DARs. But the journey of southerners from the days of the 17th century was moving south as the land wore out. So they moved--the Matthews and Wilmot families from Virginia down through South Carolina into Georgia and the Stone family from Maryland down. Thus my heritage is southern all the way. ThE:: Alabama home was in the area that used to belong to the Creek Indians, so it was settled first by .MY great grand.father and his sons. In the Stone family there were always /-William Cars on 7 for many generations a William, a Michael and a Thomas. - But my father/ - /Thomas/ was an only son because his father/ died rather young. He had sisters and a ha.lf-brother, but he was the only son. And his own sons he named William Franklin and Thomas Jackson. The Jackson not for General Stonewall Jackson but because it had come down through the family in another line. I was born in the little town of Dadeville, which is in eastern Al.a.bama. about half wa:y between Birmingham and Montgomery. It is in what's 2 ca.lled the Piedmont area, nearer Georgia than not. My &#183;Mother grew up on a. plantation in Georgia. The nearest place was Pineville and the adjoining plantation was that of her uncle and aunt. In fact she met my father at that home, where his aunt had married her uncle. There were ten years difference in age and she was with the children in the nursery, a ten- or eleven-year-old, when he was a grown man in the drawing room with the older guests. He got a little bored and ca.me back and found she was so easy to tea.se--they tell this story, it may be half legendary--that he picked her up and said "Oh, you would make a nice sweetheart. I think I'll marry you someday." And she blushed beautifully, as they looked back on it later. That was not her first love, or his either. They were related to the same people but from different sides. The way Mother grew up was that the aunt and uncle on the adjoining plantation had a governess who taught art. And Mother's and her brothers~ governess taught literature and music. They rode to and fro, to ea.ch other's estate and they were taught in what was ca.lled the school room in their own house. I have one or two printed programs of concerts given on the Matthews plantation with Mother as principal. pianist. Other numbers included tableaux and recitations, duets a.nd choruses &#8226; Mother bad nothing except tutoring until she went to Wesleyan College. She graduated with honors there and took an advanced degree in music. That's her general background. Wesleyan is in Macon, Georgia.. It competes with Mt. Holyoke as the oldest college for women. S.G.: What did she plan on doing? Had her life been defined as the southern lady? Stone: . Yes, I think it had. She had a sister who died of typhoid 3 fever. I' 11 cane to that. But Mother taught the younger brothers &#8226; Aunt Evie was retarded, I gather, from some things that were told. A sweet person, but she didn't go to college. She steyed at home and helped her mother. There was one much older brother who marrled and left the home. But the two younger brothers, Mother was supposed to teach after she graduated from college. And she did tutor them and their young cousins from the adjoining plantation for a while. When the brothers, 5 and 8 years younger than she, were ready for college the f'ami~&#183; moved over to Auburn, Alabama. Not far away. See, they grew up in western Georgia and Auburn is in eastern Alabama. That was origina.11.y the Alabama Polytechnic Institute, now calJ.ed Auburn University. Uncle Frank and Uncle Wilmot went there. Uncle Frank died before he finished his degree, but he was a brilliant student and Auburn awarded him a Certificate of Honor on June l2, 1889. He and Aunt Evie both died of typhoid fever that year. Doctors didn't know how to control these diseases. In Alabama, Grandmother's brother a.nd his wife lived next door, so that the Matthews family were again with relatives nearby in an old-fashioned large home. A:rter the loss of two children and the sadness connected with that, the family moved back to Georgia to the city of Americus. It was in Americus in 1892 that Mother and Dad married. Earlier than that I must say that while in Auburn--probably mid- 188os--Mother and Lettie Dowdell became co-eds at Auburn's Polytechnic Institute. She and Miss Lettie were great :friends in Auburn. Af'ter ioother's younger brothers were in college and she didn't have responsibility for their education, she traveled with an aunt and cousin to New York, Boston, &#183;and elsewhere and wrote things in her journal about national I 4 and southern history. She was a very loyal Confederate~ you know. But she and Miss Lettie applied to take courses at Auburn. They took Chemistry and French. They were allowed to do so, as far as I can learn, as the first co-eds at Auburn, provided they would sit in the rear of the room and wouldn't speak. S.G.: Why had she decided to go to Auburn and take these courses? Did she ever talk about what she had in her &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226; ? Stone: A feminist career? No, her first young lover I think had died. That marriage did not materialize. So here she was, at home, as a tal.ented young lady, and had to occu:py hersel.f, of' course, in the way that young women did in those days. By going to literary societies or organizing them. And concerts and travel. Well chaperoned, no doubt. And of course to church. I've been disappointed in her journals. I didn't seem to have saved ones that told about her co-edship. One recounteq visits to New England, Baltimore, Montganery, Richmond, Washington, D.C. and elsewhere, and things that she was scouting out were whatever was colonial history or brought glory to the dear old Confederacy. Miss Lettie Dowdell subsequently married her chemistry professor, Benjamin Ross--and they've named a building for him and another for her, I think. When I later taught high school in Auburn, all those cousins by the name of Wright on my mother's side, her mother's side, and Dowd.ells who married into the Wright family, taught me something of' the family history there. And I met dear Dr. Ross, who Wa3 a great hulk of a man, brilliant but so m.00.est. When he went to Germany one time to take a course or so, they asked him to fill out an application to see if he was qualified. They sa.id, "If you can pass an examination on B. B. Ross' 5 Chemistry that will be admission enough." He said, "Well, now, I wrote tha.t book." But he didn't go in, you know, claiming a great deal. He just wanted to .take a course in Germany. But to go back to the co-ed days, all I know is that apparently Mother didn't get French at Wesleyan, or not as much French as she wanted. And chemistry was completely unknown to young women--well, maybe they had a. little, but not very much in science. So they decided to take that. And they sat, as I said, in the back of the class and g0t credits for their courses (and Miss Lettie won a husband). They enjoyed socializing and being in the connmmi ty. I don't kilow how many years they were there. Not very long. Because a.:rter the typhoid epidemic swept the area, and the youngest son, Wilmot, had completed college, they returned to Georgia. S.G.: So out of those children just your mother and the one younger brother survived? Stone: No, the oldest brother did, but he had already married and left home when they moved from the plantation*. I lmow he did both mercantile work a.nd farming. We visited him o:f'ten in Moultrie, Georgia, where he pioneered an area--more or less pioneered--tbat was not as well developed. He had many farms around and a. store in the city. There was a. rule a.round the house that we young ladies, on some of those visits, had to be up for six o'clock breakfast because he wanted to go to the farms immediately a.fierwa.rds. We could go back to bed and sleep if we'd been out late the night before. That was his discipline. He prided himself on raising everything that he needed except matches and coffee. S .G.: What a.bout your father'~ background? S.tone: He lost his own father when he was rather young. I think I ""My uncle and &#183;my grandfather were railroad developers in Georgia and Alabama.. 6 he was two. One sister was not yet born and the other sister was older than he by two years. So he helped grandmother, who had moved, as a Cox, trom Georgia to&#183; Alabama. They came from Scotland and Wales and the &#183; carsons from Protestant Ireland, settled first in Virginia and moved on down. It was the Stones who started in Maryland and moved south. Grandmother Stone, who was a Cox, had these 3 children to educate. Her brother established a college in Lagrange cal.led the Georgia Female Seminary. And rtf3 father helped put his sisters through thn.t college. It later was named Cox College and was moved to Atlanta where it became a college specializing in the fine arts because some of the descendants were musicians. (I later visited a cousin enrolled in Cox College and heard Caruso in his last year with the Metropolitan Opera Co. --Atlanta. sea.son.) S.G.: How did this widow manage? Stone: She later remarried, a Johnston. My father bad a hal:fbrotber whose name was Lee Johnston and .they were as close as brothers except they differed in age by about ten year~. Because grand.mother didn't remarry right away she was helped by other Stones in the vicinity--my greatgra. ndfather and great tmcl.es, William and Michael. Uncle William was prosperous, judging &#183;by land titles and a cousin was both a planter and an M.D. One anecdote I recall was of my Father or my Uncle's getting sick from smoking rabbit tobacco. He rushed home, crying out "Pull out the trundle bed and send for Cousin Tyler!~ ~&#183;: Was your father brought up in as comfortable circumstances as your mother? Stone: No, no he wasn't. He was brought up in rather austere circumstances but had the heritage of believing in education and wanting to &#8226; 7 promote it. He grew up in a. place called Eagle Creek, a little suburb of Dadeville. And Dadeville was a very cultured town long before the Civil War. It had a male and a female academy and a medical college. It ha.d. groups of people who believed in literature and fine arts. It was a county seat and the headquarters of people from rural areas who bad farms or estates. Same of them lived on them. My father moved into town :from their place when he was grown and ready to go into business of his own. He set up first a hardware store and later a. cotton oil mill and gin. He was very experimental minded. on the fa.rm he raised everything--sheep, cattle, peanuts, fruit trees-diversified instead of exclusively cotton and corn. I have a blanket woven from the sheep's wool on our place. He used to bring me a little lamb or something like that from time to time. He was getting ready before his death in 1926 to instaJ.l a peanut butter plant with the machinery that he had down e.t the oil mill and loved that .kind of experimentation. He sent his sisters to college and he himself finished the male academy. He had a marvelous appreciation of literature and a beautiful. ear for music. I think Mother, though a.n accomplished musician, was not nearly as musical as he was as best I sense it and remember it. And my brother Jack, who was exceedingly musical and passed the highest tests when he went to New England, thought music a feminine art and he wouldn't go nea.r it. He had a. little flute when he was a small boy a.nd played beautif'ul tunes on it. And Frank, who was much bolder, the older brother--older than he, not older than I am--had a saxophone a.nd I accompanied him to the great distress I dare--sey of neighbors within three blocks. Well, we had a big place in. the little town of Dadeville, so they didn't have to put up with ii 11 &#8226; 8 too much discord. S .G. : So your father never went to college. Stone: Never went to college, just went to academy. He went into business a.f'ter that. Kept his farm and loved farm life and was a. true optimist. The farm was up on the Ta.llapoosa. River where we used to camp and go picnicking and learned to swim. He loved to fish. And he'd say to Mother, "Gussie, you don't need to ta.ke any lunch. We' re going to the fa.rm, but I'll catcll enough fish. You just bring a.long sa.la.ds and dessert." Mother alwcey-s fried several chickens, you know. And then he'd say "That was -very thoughtful of you." But he always expected fish, and it was a great joy on my pa.rt to be chosen as the one to go out in the row boat with him to see how all the fishing lines that had been set out the dey" before bad fared. Years later the power company bought up a good deal of this land and flooded it and made a lake and a hydro-electric p1ant. Saneone said "Mr. Stone, what do you think of all this? You'll lose your best farms." He said 0 Yes, but it will be mighty good for fishing." Never could down him. We grew up in a home that was rambling, with rooms added here and there. Very large. As people in our circumstances did, we had several. servants, including a wonderful nurse wham we called Sally. Servants were, unhappily, poorly pa.id and mother tried several times to raise wages. But couldn't. Rumor got out and la.dies of the town waited upon her and said this would never do; it would lead to great dissatisfaction if you paid too high wages. So we had the system of what they caJ.1 "tote." The system wa.s that servants got certain cash wages, the use of a house, and any food &#183; they wanted to ta.ke home. When we had one pan of biscuits, for 9 instance, our cook would prepare another one or two for. her family and ta.ke them home and warm them u:p, along with other food, meat and everything. Ours was a wonderful cook. She used to see, when we were at college, that we got boxes :periodically of her wonderful homemade candies, divinity and chocolate. S.G.: These were a.11 black? Stone: Yes, black servants, or mulatto, as many servants were. S.G.: And their housing was actually on the grotmds? Stone: No, it was farther down. Our cook's was near the :pasture which we owned too. She ~o had the privilege of gathering fruit in the orchard. We had thirteen fig trees besides apricots, pears, peaches, apples, strawberries, and everything. Our experimental father always saw that we had evecy kind of vegetable, every kind of fruit. Once in a while mother got a little outdone because her flower garden--the roses that she wa.nted--would get overshadowed by his sunf'lowers. But he wanted to feed the seed of the sunflowers to the chickens. We had ponies and we learned to ride. And we had a tennis court and we learned to play. But we didn't do either one correctly, I learned later. We just did it in sort of a homemade wa:y. S .G.: How large was the house? Stone: Oh, four or five bedrooms and a back sitting room a.nd a front parlor, which was more proper but we were never forbidden to play there. We usually played in the back sitting room. But we could turn the nice furniture over to make trains or doll houses. Especially rainy days when you got restless about having to stay in-doors. When the weather was good we played outdoors. We had many parties with Japanese lanterns. From &#8226; 10 the time I can remember, Bliss and I wrote novels and our little chums did. We shared them with each other. Oh, great romances, you know. And we also put on plays, which we loved very much. We could improvise stages. Bliss and I bad a sorority (SSS for Seven Silly Sisters) which met in our attic. We expelled a &#183; member for divulging secrets. We had a fairly large place with a play-house, a lattice play-house up under the largest oak tree, and elsewhere a tree house requiring a ladder. Our brother was telling us in Georgia recently--see, he was much younger than the rest of us--he said "One day I was playing up at the play-house and a man came and emptied a great big load of the whitest sand I have ever seen in rtf3' life &#8226; And I thought 'Oh, I 'm afraid to touch it. Oh, all that beauti:ful sand.'" He said when his Dad came home he said "It's all for you, Jack. You ca.n play in it. That's why I sent it." So then he had a great time building sand houses and so on. But he was a fairly lonely pre-school child because the rest of us were older and awa;y a lot of the time. S.G.: Who were your ccmpa.nions as a child? Stone: Oh, the family and all the neighbors. From kindergarten days on people gathered at our house. As I say, we :put on plays. Jack had lots of good friends, too. But I mean before he went to kindergarten he tended to be a little lonely. Mother was busy with club work a.nd organizing literary groups and community a.f'fairs, such as bringing Chatauqua to town. S .G.: I was going to ask you that. If she was involved in the women's club moveirent? Stone: Yes. I don't think consciously asserting women's rights. &#8226; 11 Except she was shocked to find, at my father's .death in 1926--he was 70 when he died, but she, you see, wa.s just 6o then and she lived to be 72. So she outlived&#183; him twelve years. With his death she became less ~ctive except in church work. A group of men from the connnuni ty came down a.f'ter the mourning period was over to invite her. (We did the traditional. things in many aspects of our life and untraditional. in others, which I'll mention.) They came down to a.sk her if she would serve on the City Council, the first woman to be so invited. We thought it would be very nice because she had been a community leader, and always with our Dad's approval. He didn't feel the least bit threatened by having a wife who was busy and active. But she was so shocked she declined at once. I guess his death made her feel, you know, I just can't do that. "If he were living, I could be active. But it looks as if I'm ta.king &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226; " She didn't ever say this to us, but we sort of reasoned it out a.f'terwards; tha.t it was ha.rd.er for her to asswne leadership roles a:f'ter his death than it might have been before. I den 't know. That's unclear to me because we didn't discuss it. I was at the University of Chicago and my sister was &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; well, we were e.ll. scattered. My brother Frank was married and living in Houston. He came home to straighten up the estate. It was during the early farm depression when cotton prices were down to five cents and Dad didn't ha.ve the hea.rt to collect from farmers for ginning their cotton and ad.va..~cing their fertilizer. So we had enormous outstanding debts. And my brother came home--he was an accountant--to straighten out the farm and oil mill and gin. He briefly coached footba.11, which my younger brother was pl~ing in high school. And since I was a graduate student, I could st~ home and help mother with bill . collection and other things. Then I went back 'i 12 to college to finish my degree. In time, she ga.ve up the home and moved with me to Huntingdon College when I was Dean of Women there. That was a good deal later&#183;. Until then she lived on in Dadeville. We divided up the house and rented out apartments. She kept her apartment for a while. But neighbors would write us. One time when she didn't tell us that she had the flu, I found it out from someone else a.nd I came dashing home to see. But, you know, we felt uneasy, her living there alone, even with peep.le living in the house and many friends and neighbo-rs who kept in touch with her. We felt safer having her with one of us. She lived with me until I went on for TifY Doctor's degree and with my sister a.f'ter that. It was at rI1Y sister's home that she died, while I was teaching at William and Mary. She didn't want to leave her only grandchild in Houston. She joined me to see "The Lost Colony" on Roanoke Island and for music and theatre elsewhere. She had earlier trekked around to my sister's art colonies in New York and Rhode Island and my brother's New England assignment. S.G.: What sort of club work was she involved in? Stone: In DadeviTh she organized something called the Worth While Club, which was sort of a literary group. I recently sent the printed agenda or club calendars . for those to the Dadeville Library. S.G.: So it was primarily the literary 'clubs she was involved in. Stone: Yes, and the church and patriotic organizations, e.g., what was ca.lled the UDCs. It's the United Daughters of the Confederacy. A wit said one time and I've always remembered it, "I've heard of the Pharisees and the Sadducees, but who on earth are the UDCs?" Mother was a DAR as well but&#183; the United Daughters of the Confederacy was very dear to her. .. 13 Let me see what else she did start. She brougl;lt a. kindergarten teacher to . . at Sund~y S~hool Dadeville l.Il 1900 and organized a children's departmeny. They named a Sundey school room for her, the ''Gussie Matthews Stone Sunday School Room" in Dadeville. I send an annual contribution. S.G.: Well, was church a very important part of your li:fe as you were growing up? Stone: Yes, it was :for a while. At three years of age I announced that I wanted to be either a missionary or 8.&#163;~ actress--besides a wif'e and mother. My f'a.ther was not very religious. He was very tolerant and was not anti-religious and certainly not an agnostic. He took things in stride. Mother was quite dedicated. We lived not :far fran the Methodist Church to which we belonged. Remember--my sister and I went to Huntingdon College, which is a Methodist school--and I recall how in some of my fantas~es I thought &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; when I go a.way &#8226;&#8226;&#8226; Chica.go for instance, if anyone talked about not believing in God! I would get up and tell them, defending, you know, the traditional religions. S.G.: You mentioned that in some wa;ys the family was very nontraditional. Stone: The ways that it was not traditional was a strong belief in social or applied religion &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226; Well, in a. way it was in line with what was happening. When Alabama. put on a.n illiteracy drive way back in the 'teens--! went to college in 1914 and it was before that--my sister undertook to teach old men in a rural community wh.6 had never gripped anything smaller than a plow handle how to hold a pencil. They said, you know, ''my hands are gnarled and stiff." She taught them to read and write. She 11 ve:d in a home in the neighborhood and came home weekends &#8226; The home 14 bad bedbugs and things like that, so quite primitive conditions existed. They were white farmers. She didn't tea.ch black people, although I later did some things of this kind. A lot of my research is in black comStones munities. But rural. reform was a little unusual. I mean, we/ had a lot of civic pride &#183;and social responsibility. Mother felt that she wanted to help others and encouraged my sister and me. One of our civic projects was to make a sitting room in the basement of the courthouse for the country people to use when their husbands brought cotton to market. I got donations of rocking chairs and other furniture and fixed it up. We and al.so promoted public health/hygiene. In World War I, Mother was very busy with the Red Cross and she and my sister went to New Orleans to take courses in how to help the Red Cross. Selling bonds. Bandage rolling. We had victory gardens at college. For my senior essay in high school, I wrote a history of Dadeville. Mother helped me find the documentary sources on which to build it. We went up to the courthouse and got the probate judge, who had files of the newspapers way back a hundred years or so, to let us use them. And she did a. little guiding because my teachers didn't know that much a.bout Dadeville and so on. I wrote what became a prize winning essay on the history of Dadeville. Recently I sent the essay and history medals I won in high school to the Dadeville library,- together with my original handwritten ess83" on the history of Dadeville. I wrote the local Historical Association that I wanted to give them the two medals because I was sure none of my descendants would care a hoot about them, but only if they would exhibit them as types of medals given by the high school 15 during such and such year to such and such year. They tho~t I meant not to tell who wrote the history. That seems veey awkward. Eveeybody knows that from 1914, when I graduated from high school, numerous journalists and anyone else doing a feature story or history pertaining to Dadeville used my material.. Mother used to send clippings to ~ and say ''I'ou see, your history came in handy." And I was glad it was used tba.t way. Now they've got a great old history binge, you know, everywhere. Local history. I thought somebody might like mine. Neither Mother nor Dad tried to influence our choice of career. They only wanted to surround us with enriching opporttmities to study a:nd to be useful. I aJ.ways loved theatre. And I can say of this interest that it was never a dilettantism. From the time I was three, when I was chosen to be one of the twins in 'Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; " A traveling woman who went around getting up :plays, took the dominant role and she chose local :people to fill other parts. I was three years old when I was asked to be a twin. The ma.in thing I remember is that I got a terrible spanking from her and it hurt. Never had a spanking at home. We grew up as young southern women did in our time, to learn all the arts. And we had very talented teachers in our conmnmity. Miss Rennie Bulger taught us art. My sister took to that. The teacher always bad to touch my paintings up. Here are three of my sister's water colors and one of her oils. I took to drama. But we all had music. Mother found it a little ha.rd to listen to us :practice, you know. So we didn't take music :from her but fran outside teachers. We all (brothers and &#8226; ij 11 J 16 sisters a.like) took art and music and expression as they called it in those days instead of theatre arts. My sister pursued art vocationally (advanced degree from Columbia and as a teacher) whereas I in time took only an avocational interest in theatre. S .G.: And was theatre acceptable for a southern lady? Stone: Oh yes &#8226; Probably not to go on the stage. But we didn't get that far. But in terms of aspirations to teach drama. or to put on plays or to be in plays. I was in many local theatre groups. In Houston, Texas, it was called Green Mask Players. Right out of college I taught English a.nd drama. Then I spent so much of my time with girl scouts or campfire girls or Epworth League, which was the Methodist organization, writing pageants and putting them on in New York a.t camp and so forth, that I decided to take a. course a.t the YWCA/called Girl Reserves but now ca.lJ.ed group work. Later I went into socia.1 work. But my earliest aspiration was tC? do something in theatre. I expected to get married. You know, southern ladies were supposed to be well rounded and well versed in all the arts but to more or less carry them on avocationally because you had no notion but that you would marry and rear your family and so forth. I mean that was the general thought and feeling. Following my graduation from Huntingdon, my teacher of theatre a.rts, who had graduated frcm the famous Emerson College of Oratory--a. school of drama in Boston--took me there. That was a year a:fter I graduated frcm Huntingdon. Then the World War ended and my fia.nce wanted me to come to France to marry. I wanted a proper wedding, so he ca.me by Boston, picked 17 me and my sister up and took us to his home in Aberdeen, North Carolina, near Pinehurst. We spent several days in the Sharpe home, meeting family and friends. I remember an especially delightful cousin of Brooke's. I laughingly said this marked the "end of my theatrical career." S .G.: Let's backtrack slightly. You went to Huntington in 1914. Stone: Yes. Wocxlrow Wilson was elected for his second term because he kept us out of war. We students sent him a stirring telegram and he answered us and it's framed somewhere. He kept us out of war. As you lmow, he didn't. I think it was 1917 he was reelected wasn't it. S.G.: Yes. Stone: That was his second term. I was in high school when he was first elected, I guess. S .G.: When did you meet your fiance then? Stone: During college days &#8226; He was at Emory University. I was elected student bcxly president my junior year. A friend of mine and I went to a southern conference of student bcxly presidents and vice-presidents. We went by way of Atlanta to Rockhill, South Carolina. Leila's fiance came down to meet us at the train and brought Brooks Sharpe to take me off his hands so he could have a private visit with Leila. We liked each other right away. He was studying for the ministry and became a chaplain in the army. But got so carried away with "making the world safe for democracy" he later changed to the Marines and went abroad and was wounded in the Argonne. He survived that and was at base hospital for a while and then came home. S .G. : Let me ask you one thing back on your family background and then I think what we should do is sort of sketch out, very briefly, the 17a rest so then we will know how to proceed. In terms of your family background, do you have a sense of where some of your own values that eventually brought you to so-called progressive causes came from in that family background? Stone: Yes. Two things in my family background. The creativity and flexibility -of my parents. They allowed us, encouraged us to build and to fulfill our &#183;own aspirations. We would meet our Father at the corner and he would bring us on his shoulder down to the house. My Mother was finishing supper. Southerners had dinner in the middle of the d&amp;&#165; and he came home for that, had a little nap and went back to the office. While she was busy with supper we sat on his knee or else beside him and narrated the adventures of the d&amp;&#165;. Some of them were just plain devilment. And he shook his head or listened disapprovingly, but also approved things that were good that we were able to tell. My Mother was really the leader, the more dominant member of the family. Because she had a better education and m&amp;&#165;be a better mind, I don't know. I think she didn't, probably. But, because she was later marrying than many women [at 28] she had acquired a certain amount of independence. Although she did the proper thing when she went traveling or studying in New England briefly, for the piano, and then in Auburn, I think she did stand for very progressive things. In the church. I mean through the 18 proper channels, but a little ahead of the main population. And encouraged us to, I think. There was an unusually fine group of women in Dadeville. They later celebrated something called the ''Brides of the '90s" and had a picture made of that fifty years a.f'ter they were married. As I looked at them and had lmown them earlier, I thought this really was quite an outstandllig group. My sister and I still ha.ve, in our baby books, the wishes they wrote as they were invited to do, somewhat as the good fairy would. But the type of thing that they wished for us when we were first born does sound as if they stood for a little more than you'd ordinarily find in a small town. So I think a little of it did come there. I would say creativity on my parents' part and t olerance. A tremendous amount of tolerance. As far as I could ever tell, there was no race prejudice. They didn't try, defiantly, to work against the custans. But they taught u.s to be good and kind and we grew up with &#8226;&#8226;&#8226;&#8226; But that didn't necessarily make us liberal, actua.lly, because we were accustomed to the subservient position of Negroes. S.G.: What was your relationship to the children of the servants? Stone: We played with them. I was not conscious of the fact that probably at adolescence the friendship ended. S .G.: In your childhood, do you see your parents' attitude toward the servants as being different than the other towns people? Stone: Not at first. Because while we youngsters had many visits together we were not in each others ' homes for meals as much as you might expect. It's such a small town, twelve hundred inhabitants, that we knew everybody and we went to clubs or parties or Sunday school or school and 19 were in plays or in concerts or whatever together. And in each others' homes briefly but probably not long enough to sense the &#183;difference in atti tud.e toward blacks. Gradually I did come to appreciate my parents' attitude very, very much. And to notice that, when at periods of crisis when people would like to blame somebody, you know, many Dad.evillians would pick on the Negroes. And I didn't approve of tha.t at all and neither did my pa.rents. One episode that doesn't show anything about tolerance, but just a.bout humanity. &#8226; &#8226; &#8226; Jack, my younger brother, had been playing with a little Negro in the pasture with some other boys, too. This child, I believe, was the son of our cook. Jack ran up saying, "Mother, I killed a ll ttle boy with my be bee gun. " She said ''Bring him here at once. " And she hitched up the horse to the buggy and got the little boy and his mother and they went to the doctor immediately--it was a skin wound, didn't amount to very much, but Jack was sea.red out of his wits of what he might have done and Mother was concerned .too. She would never have dismissed anything that might have been dangerous. But that's not really an ex_ample of tolerance. S .G.: You told me about the incident where she wanted to raise the pa.y. Did the other women in the town come to her? What was that confrontation like? Stone: I don't lmow because I was little then. But I did hea.r about it. She told our servant that we couldn't do this, that the other white women had said they couldn't pay the higher wage. And so we'd have to make it up in other ways. But mother hated to give cast off clothes and things of that kind, you know. She and Dad did defend a. woman who 20 became a widow on one of our farms when she was raped by a--the typical name in the South was--redneck. She came in to us with tears going down her cheeks. And she was so upset she didn't know what to do. Mother and Dad discussed it and they realized that they could never do anything in court; that nobody would believe but what she caused it or led to it. The same thing is true with any rape case, you know. People wonder if the girl isn't to blame a.:f'ter aJ.l. Ida used to come down and we visited her, too. But she was not at a.1J. of the calibre that nry namesake Olive Elizabeth's family was and that she became. Many a night a Negro, Who was on Dad's work force down at the oil mill or on a farm and who had gotten in trouble, e.g., had drunk too much or had been in a fight with a rival, would came, when Dad would be in bed and talk under the window. They knew which his bedroom was &#8226; And asked if Dad could pay their fine so they wouldn't have to go to jail. And he would always do it. S .G.: But there was never an occasion or an event when your family in any way would have an open difference with the other townspeople? Stone: Not that I recall. During the time when Dadeville and Tallapoosa County became involved in the civil rights cases of Scottsboro and the Sharecroppers Union (1931-1933) our family had moved. My involvement belongs to a later period...