 EUGENE WALKER: I want to acknowledge first of all that in most of the literature I've read, they've spoken rather highly of you. Some of them have gone so far as to dedicate works to you: Howard Zinn and his SNCC: The New Abolitionists and Pope and his work on the Mississippi Freedom Summer. These men felt that you were one of the main cogs in this wheel that these subsequent movements followed. So I'm honored to talk with you this morning, and I'd like for you to share with me some of your experiences and accounts of the role you played in SCLC and your interpretations of roles other individuals played in the organization that you might feel are necessary to give me more insight as to the dynamics involved in the programs that SCLC ultimately initiated. My first question to you, as I was saying earlier, is, can you point out to me other factors aside from the Montgomery movement and the 1954 Supreme Court decision which may have contributed to the founding of SCLC when it was founded in '57? ELLA BAKER: Well, I think what you have is a question of continuity of struggle. You said that people had referred to me largely in terms of maybe being a factor. That I think sprang from the fact that several years before that, in the forties, late thirties and in the forties in particular, I was working with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and a primary function of mine was to go into the areas&#8212;maybe some of the areas that had not been visited in a long while. For instance, I used to leave New York sometime in February and go into Florida. I'd start at St. Pete[rsburg] and Tampa and that was because the Association didn't have an active branch in Miami at the time. So we'd work around Tampa and up the east or the west coast, Palm Beach, West Palm Beach and on and on and up, Pampano and small places and hit Jacksonville; from Jacksonville to Tallahassee; from Tallahassee to Pensacola; Pensacola into Mobile; Mobile through Alabama; from Alabama into Georgia; Georgia up till you came into Virginia. So that had been my itinerary for several years. Then in the process it was not to be unthought of that I had touched a number of people who had not been visited for a long time by Association personnel. That may account for whatever historical impact I may have had. In addition to that, the '54 decision was frequently interpreted by people as being the end of the struggle because the N.A.A.C.P. struggle had been one of legal action to a large extent. The 1954 decision culminated an effort on the part of the lawyers of the Association to raise the question of the constitutionality of racial segregation. This was the case on which that got verbalization. So that becomes an historical monument and to some people it almost was interpreted as being the end of the struggle. But as we have seen from the history of racial segregation and discrimination, we've had court action that has been nullified from time immemorial. You must go back to the Reconstruction period and I'm not going into that, but you go back there. Much of what was supposedly gained in the forties and fifties legally, had been supposedly secured to us right after the Reconstruction period. And you know those laws were nullified. So, S.C.L.C.; why? It was&#8230;. [interruption] EUGENE WALKER: You were about to speak to the "why" of S.C.L.C.. ELLA BAKER: I think the basic "why" of S.C.L.C. has to do with what has taken place in the '54 decision and the unthought of Montgomery bus boycott. But before you can evaluate the bus boycott, you have to understand how it came about. And it didn't come out of a vacuum. There were two people in Montgomery who had functioned with the N.A.A.C.P. over the years and they were Mrs. Rosa Parks and E.D.Nixon. Where did E. D. Nixon get his fire? He got his fire and his sense of social action from being a member of the Brotherhood of Sleepingcar Porters and the struggle that it had waged through the years. So when the Montgomery bus boycott ended successfully here you had a social phenomenon that had not taken place in the history of those of us who were around at that time, where hundreds of people and even thousands of people, ordinary people, had taken a position that put them in a very uncomfortable&#8212;at least made life less comfortable for them&#8212;when they decided to walk rather than to ride the buses. And this was a mass action and a mass action that anybody who looked at the social scene would have to appreciate and wonder. Those of us who believed that mass and only through mass action are we going to eliminate certain things, would have to think in terms of how does this get carried on. So, whatever the reasons, or however the historical accidents of history or whatever else that precipitated Martin as the president&#8212;that's quite a story I'm not going into because you didn't come here for that&#8212;but whatever those factors were, he was there as the spokesman for the boycott. And out of the boycott he became a worldwide known individual articulating the strivings and the hopes and so forth of the people who were involved in the boycott. EUGENE WALKER: At this time, you were working with the N.A.A.C.P.? ELLA BAKER: No, at '54? EUGENE WALKER: No, in '57. ELLA BAKER: No, no, no. See, I left the N.A.A.C.P. nationally in '46,and I worked with a local branch. I think I was the president somewhere in the fifties. In 1957, at the time that S.C.L.C. was formally organized&#8212;I think that's when it was formally organized&#8212;I was doing a program of trying to educate or trying to stimulate action on the part of black and Puerto Rican parents in respect to the school situation. See, New York City had taken, had set up a commission on de facto segregation, I believe. I'm not sure, but they were supposed to be eliminating de facto segregation in the school system in New York. So, for the summer of '57 we had weekly meetings with parents in the different boroughs for getting them to deal with the question of their schools, what was happening to their children. That's where Kenneth Clark came into the picture in the whole area of&#8230;. EUGENE WALKER: You mentioned the fact that E. D. Nixon probably got a lot of his fire from his earlier affiliation with the [unclear] Porter's and Mrs. Rosa Parkshad been N.A.A.C.P. member for a long time. But I also read an account where Mrs. Parks had attended earlier, the Highlander Folk School. This was a place in Monteagle, Tennessee, as you know, where young people would go aspiring to be leaders in the community to get different kinds of training as to how they could best go about doing it. And it was right after that, that Mrs. Parks decided that she wasn't going to give up her seat. So it's a question over here as to where her primary motivation came from as to the reason that she didn't give up her seat. Have you heard that story before about the field influence? ELLA BAKER: Sure. Well, in the first place, the first time Mrs. Parks left Montgomery to go anywhere, she says it was to come to Atlanta to a regional leadership training conference that I happened to have organized. When I was precipitated into the directorship of branches of the N.A.A.C.P., one of the first things that I projected was the idea of the need for the training of the people who were carrying on branch activities. And when I said training, largely in terms of preparing them, giving them the information and broadening the scope of their understanding of what was involved. One of the reasons was that I had seen that to a large extent most of the branches were feeling that their duty was to provide some memberships and some money to the national organization. They had attitudes that were not particularly helpful in terms of change. For instance, say Atlanta or somewhere else. I'm not identifying Atlanta per se as such, but they would be against the idea of going to battle for the town drunk who happened to have been maybe brutalized when being arrested because, who was he? And in some places like Buffalo, New York, for instance, most of the black children were coming out of the high schools with just certificates attesting to the fact that they had been in attendance. But I frequently would have people ask me as I came up from the deep South, up to Virginia and North Carolina, how are things down South? Which meant that to them that's where the problem was and they had not identified the problem in their own area. EUGENE WALKER: This was in the fifties? ELLA BAKER: The fifties. The late forties, up to '46, was when I was travelling. EUGENE WALKER: Now you said when you were working, you did some work in Florida, came up through Mobile and Tampa and all up through that. When was that? ELLA BAKER: That was in the forties. EUGENE WALKER: The forties. ELLA BAKER: With the N.A.A.C.P. when I was serving as an assistant field secretary. EUGENE WALKER: How was it that you moved into a position in the S.C.L.C.? What was the process involved there? The process there was that after the '54 decision, after the Montgomery boycott or simultaneous almost with it, the '54 decision precipitated certain kinds of repressive action against people who attempted to enroll their children in school. Two places in particular come to mind. One was Clarendon County, South Carolina and I think there was Yazoo, Mississippi where the black parents attempted to enroll, and certain repressive actions were taken against them. People who were tenant farmers for thirty or forty years no longer had anywhere to farm. Those who had a little business, they were boycotted; there were boycotts against them in terms of the delivery of goods and services. So, some of us here in New York including two or three ministers&#8212;one in particular, one black minister who is now dead that was Jim Robinson, the Reverend James H. Robinson, who was in the Presbyterian Church, Church of the Master, and he had been associated with the N.A.A.C.P. as a youth secretary&#8212;and Rabbi Weiss, I believe it was (anyway I have the list here); we organized. They were people who had prestige but some of the rest of us like Bayard, George Lawrence, Stanley Levenson of the American Jewish Congress, and some of the labor people, organized what was called "In Friendship." It's purpose was largely to provide some material and legal assistance as much as possible to such people as were being evicted from their tenant farms and households and other situations in Clarendon County and Yazoo and in other places. So out of that came the concept of an enlarged effort. You see, by that time you were running into&#8230; '54 was the decision. People were having their difficulties, say in '55, '56. Then came in that period the Montgomery boycott. And the boycott then moved on the scene as having involved a large number of people. So the question arises, where do you go from here? Also the question arose in respect to mass action&#8212;does the N.A.A.C.P. lend itself to mass action or will it initiate mass action or will it continue its program of legalism? EUGENE WALKER: Pardon me, but this is at the successful end of the Birmingham boycott? ELLA BAKER: Montgomery boycott. EUGENE WALKER: Montgomery boycott. ELLA BAKER: Yes, it had come at that period. So the question in some of our minds is that there was something there that should be continued, that you needed a force in the South that was comparable to the N.A.A.C.P. in some respects. Why? Because the N.A.A.C.P. in the minds of those of us who were concerned at that stage, primarily dealt with legal action. Although it had a program of branch action it had not organized mass action that le$nt itself to demonstrations. So, if you think in terms of something in the South for mass action you'd start with the group that had been involved in something. So there was Montgomery and in connection with Montgomery there were large numbers of black ministers, or a number of black ministers throughout the area who had identified with that struggle. For instance, C. K. Steele in Tallahassee, Florida and Abraham something or other in New Orleans&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Yes, Jameson was in New Orleans. ELLA BAKER: Jameson had had a boycott of his own in Baton Rouge, you see. So what you do then, is stimulate thought of an organization in the South that can spread. EUGENE WALKER: At this point you may be able to help me clear up another question too. There's a question as to where the initial call for this conference came from. Reading a book like Louis, Miller, they suggest that the call came from C. K. Steele. Well, I went down and interviewed Rev. Steele and he assured me that the call didn't come from him. He responded to the call. He said some Jewish-talking, or some funny talking man called him&#8212;he's always thought it was Bayard Rustin &#8212;and asked him if he would go along with the conference in late '56, late December, '56. And he said, yeah, it was just his kind of a thing. He had just finished his Tallahassee thing and they were at the city council. So, I'm trying to pin down, if there's any way possible. ELLA BAKER: I don't know whether you can pin it down because I think Bayard may verify the fact that there were three of us who talked into the wee hours of the morning in terms of, how do you develop a course that can enlarge upon the gains or the impact of the Montgomery bus boycott. EUGENE WALKER: Did the three represent you, Bayard and Levenson? ELLA BAKER: Yes, Bayard and Levenson; largely at Stanley's house. He was the man with some money, and Bayard and I would go over there. He's not living where he use to. Why me? Because I knew the South&#8212;comparatively, in terms of their knowledge of it. They had not had as wide knowledge as I had. Plus the fact that I had been associated with the N.A.A.C.P&#8230; So, we talked into the wee hours and the concep of trying to develop out of the Montgomery bus boycott leadership a force. And when they approached no doubt Martin and whoever else, their response was largely in terms of ministers. That's why you get the ministerial thing. You couldn't think in terms of a leadership around the bus boycott without also thinking of C. K. Steele's efforts and Jameson's efforts. EUGENE WALKER: McCullough of South Carolina. ELLA BAKER: Well, McCullough came a little bit after that. Then you go into the whole question, which was the pattern in the South, who were the leaders? The ministers&#8212;which may or may not be justifiable, but that's how it started. Then, let's say that the call came from Martin. EUGENE WALKER: Yes, well that's the way it was basically reported. ELLA BAKER: Yes. Historically he gets credit for it, but the truth let it be known, no one individual really conceive of an idea like that without somewhere, somehow some other input. EUGENE WALKER: Right. Now I can see a great deal of precipitating happenings leading to the founding of S.C.L.C&#8230; The next question in my mind is, after this was realized there was a need for an instrument to try and spread this movement that was in Montgomery with the hope of bringing about greater social change, what was the notion of the kind of organization you would have? I know you said you had a great deal of ministers, but would it be one with just a president and a lot of lieutenants, a president and an executive secretary with a great deal of power, or was it a democratic organization in conception, or a strong dictatorial organization? What was the thinking about the nature of the organization at this time? ELLA BAKER: Well, the thinking about the nature of the organization would vary with the people who were doing the thinking. Those of us who preferred an organization that was democratic and where the decision making was left with the people would think in one vein and the organizing of active, let's call it, chapters or units of people. But when you reckon with the fact that a majority of the people who were called together were ministers and the decision as to who was called together emanated no doubt both from the background out of which (let's call it) Martin came and maybe lack of understanding (I'm willing to say) of the virtue of utilizing the mass surge that had developed there in Montgomery. Just look at Montgomery. What has happened since Montgomery? EUGENE WALKER: But there's another problem here&#8230;. ELLA BAKER: So I think the nature of the organization became to a large extent a ministerial thing. Out of the one hundred plus (I forgot how many) that were present at the initial meeting where the formal organizing of the organization took place, I think Whitney Young and a guy from Mississippi&#8230; who I worked with for a number of years, I can't think of his name&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Dr. Henry? ELLA BAKER: No, no, no&#8230; Anthon Moore in Cleaveland, Mississippi, were among the maybe two or three non-ministers present. I was the only woman. I think maybe there was another person who came and sat in . EUGENE WALKER: Do you think the reason for that was because most of the ministers at that time had the power to&#8230; ELLA BAKER: Well, not only&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: &#8230; the power to bring people together? ELLA BAKER: No, not only the power. When you haven't been accustomed to mass action, and they weren't&#8230; You see basically your ministers are not people who go in for decisions on the part of people. I don't know whether you realize it or not. And they had been looked upon as saviors. So what happened is, here they are faced with a suggestion that goes against the grain and with which they are not prepared to deal. So they come together. EUGENE WALKER: There's one other question of particular importance to me, namely, the question involving Dr. King's first two years as president of the S.C.L.C&#8230; At the same time, he was still president of the M.I.A&#8230; I'm wondering if that ever caused any friction? ELLA BAKER: Friction, where? EUGENE WALKER: On the part of the people in Montgomery&#8212;M.I.A. people who were trying to get funds and the S.C.L.C. people who were trying to get funds. It seems to me that Dr. King would have been the main instrument for both organizations for bringing funds in to operate. Was there any problem in that regard? ELLA BAKER: I think your best person for focusing on that problem, if there were one, would be such as Nixon because he was the treasurer, and he resigned, and he resigned for certain reasons. But it wasn't so much the problem of (let's call it) the dual function of King. Unfortunately, you're looking in retrospect but at the initial stages you have to reckon with the fact that most of the people involved had never had any experience in developing mass action. They functioned largely in the church vein; that if you had a meeting and you preached to the people the people would go out and do what you said to do and come back. So it wasn't a question of opening it up. It was largely ministers and just about all ministers. EUGENE WALKER: Well, Rev. Tilly was the first executive director of S.C.L.C.. ELLA BAKER: That's right. EUGENE WALKER: One of the persons contending for executive director, according to the sources I've looked at, was Rev. Martin Luther King, Sr. It was a constant thing of his. In each one of the few minutes I saw&#8212;I haven't been able to see all of them&#8212;he would tell them, don't forget we've got to get an executive director. You know, you always try to look for little nuances of things that will give you some kind of a hint. I got the impression there that he was hoping that they would hurry up and get somebody to take some of the pressure and heat off of his son. What's your thinking in that regard? ELLA BAKER: Well, it could well be because I don't think at the stage even of the Montgomery bus boycott Martin Luther King, Sr. was ready for the role that Martin was catapulted into&#8212;and I use the term advisedly. I don't think Martin Luther King, Sr. nor Jr. had thought in terms of Jr.'s being in Montgomery in terms of developing a mass action program. You see, they were still ministers. He was probably thinking in terms of an executive director to take some of the pressure, as he conceived of it, off of Martin. Plus the fact that S.C.L.C. as such was formally organized over a year before it had any office or any executive at all. How do you explain that? EUGENE WALKER: How do you explain that in the middle of 1959 they reduced the executive staff to one, namely you? ELLA BAKER: I was in the office. I set up the office of S.C.L.C&#8230; That's a story I'll tell some other time. I'll not go into detail now. I went there primarily to do their first program which was to have twenty-odd meetings in different cities simultaneously on the same night which was February twelfth. EUGENE WALKER: Citizenship Committee. ELLA BAKER: Yes, for the vote. I had anticipated being there for about six weeks. Gave myself four weeks to get the thing going and two weeks to clean it up. But they had no one. How did they get Rev. Tilly? They wanted a minister. I knew that. They couldn't have tolerated a woman. EUGENE WALKER: Let me review something with you. I had occasion to look at the criteria for selection that was suggested by Dr. King and a couple of people to the selection committee? ELLA BAKER: When was the criteria suggested though? EUGENE WALKER: Well, in '58. ELLA BAKER: Well, that's a difference. EUGENE WALKER: It was '58, prior to the time. And Dr. King emphasized that they shouldn't just confine their consideration just to ministers. I thought it was kind of strange that he made that point but I think it was made advisedly in that he wanted to encourage bringing in people with a few more administrative skills than he believed ministers had. Anyway, they wound up getting Dr. Tilly. As soon as Dr. Tilly resigned, you stepped in and became executive director and from sources I've seen I also see where you conceived this idea of the Citizenship Crusade and you spelled out in detail some of things you felt should be done. Did you encounter any difficulty in trying to get this problem over, or was S.C.L.C. glad to get it over? ELLA BAKER: In the first place, Rev. Tilly became the executive largely because I knew Tilly. I knew they wanted a minister. Bayard was scheduled to go down even at the time I went instead of me&#8212; I hadn't thought of it; I hadn't participated&#8212;to set up the office. After setting up the office and after the program of February the twelfth had taken place, there came pressures from the ministers who were involved for an office and organization&#8212;a person whom you might talk to if you ever get around to it is a minister in Nashville, Smith. EUGENE WALKER: Kelly Smith? ELLA BAKER: Kelly Mill Smith, yes, a very perceptive young man at the time. When they hadn't found anybody or at least they hadn't decided on any&#8230; they thought in terms of Dr. Pitts, a young man now dead who became president of Birmingham College. Pitts was a teacher in Georgia and I had know him in my N.A.A.C.P. days. I went to him and talked with him; he asked me to talk with him. They had made some slight overtures to him and then he decided that he couldn't do that. They had waited, gone around; nothing was happening. What was happening was nothing except what I was doing in the office. So I suggested that they had to have a minister. I had heard that Tilly had been responsible for a voter registration drive in Baltimore which may or may not be quite accurate because that was no doubt masterminded by the president of the Baltimore branch of the N.A.A.C.P.&#8212; Mrs. Jackson and her daughter Juanita who was the wife of Clarence Mitchell who was with the N.A.A.C.P. Washington bureau. Anyhow, they never got around to calling anybody so Stanley and I met Tilly here in New York. Tilly said he would be interested and then he went down to see them. He became the executive director but he maintained his church connections in Baltimore which meant he was in and out. Whatever was being done in terms of continuity had to be done by whoever was there, namely me. EUGENE WALKER: These first three years of S.C.L.C. operation, '57 to '60, you were, if not an intimate participant, right there where you could see most of what was going on. My question to you is just what was the roll of the executive director of the S.C.L.C. in contrast to the roll of president of S.C.L.C., Dr. King? ELLA BAKER: Different from the roll of director of such organizations as N.A.A.C.P., C.O.R.E. and so forth. The executive director was more or less nominally under direction. The personality that had to be played up was Dr. King. The other organizations (if you know this), the executive director was the spokesman. But they couldn't tolerate having an old lady, even a lady, and an old lady at that. It was too much for the masculine and ministerial ego to have permitted that. [Laughter] There you are. EUGENE WALKER: You show great insight in this period I've been looking over. You may call it hindsight but it seems to me that you knew what was going on. You made some recommendations to S.C.L.C. over some long range things you felt they should do. Two things you felt they should do in particular, namely: trying to create a program where they could get more women involved in the program and try to come up with some program to try and get more of the youth involved in the movement. This was before the Greensboro thing. I regard this as being of a great deal of insight. What was it you had seen which made you realize at that point in time that women and youth would eventually be playing vital rolls or they should be included at that point in time in trying to bring about whatever social change was taking place? ELLA BAKER: I guess my own experience but basically in terms of the church. All of the churches depended in terms of things taking place on women, not men. Men didn't do the things that had to be done and you had a large number of women who were involved in the bus boycott. They were the people who kept the spirit going and the young people. I knew that the young people were the hope of any movement. It was just a normal thing to me. The average Baptist minister didn't really know organization. This I know most people would be highly critical of, as they were. What happened was, a minister would come in to a church and he would follow the pattern that had been there all along. You have a Sunday school, a ladies' auxilary&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: They weren't creative at all. ELLA BAKER: All he did was to change the person who was in charge. It wasn't creative. EUGENE WALKER: Was there anything that happened in the latter '59, '60, which triggered the S.C.L.C. to start moving having used that stage '57 to '60 for organizing? ELLA BAKER: What triggered it was the formation&#8212;triggered it more than anything else to get into a broad program of action&#8212;of the existence of S.N.C.C&#8230; The sit-ins became S.N.C.C. and S.N.C.C. was an action group, an activist group. Have you read The Making of a Black Revolutionary by James Foreman? EUGENE WALKER: Yes. Everybody gives you credit for bringing about two almost profound compromises in terms of S.N.C.C. and S.N.C.C.'s relationship to S.C.L.C&#8230; The first one&#8212;and I'd like for you to help &#8212;took place in that second organizational meeting. No, the first one led to the actual calling of the meeting. You believed, you expressed that in the papers I've seen, that in order to keep the spirits going among these young people, keeping them from being discouraged and resorting to violence, we've got to get them some kind of co-ordination and direction going right here, an organization. So you talked the S.C.L.C. into underwriting this Raleigh Conference at your former school. And that's where you first got together, where you brought all these students together from North and South and some leaders. The young people, from what I could gather, were a little skeptical about Dr. King at that time but they were somewhat high on Rev. Lawson. But they went along with adding non-violence to their platform because of the influence of people like you and Rev. Lawson in addition to the charisma of Dr. King. The second one where you brought about a compromise was in Montego at the Highlander Folk School. This one I think was a little bit more significant in that it almost led to the breaking up of S.N.C.C&#8230; You had a group there that wanted to be engaged in militant action, confrontation ahead. You had another group that was being enticed to engage in the poor force and voter registration. So you suggested that they go both ways. And the young people bought that. ELLA BAKER: What they really were fighting over was a question of dominance. Those who came out of the nonviolent resistance struggle, like Diane Nash and some who came out of Nashville, were more deeply indoctrinated in the real philosophy and practice of non-violence than many others. Those who were advocating voter registration had been influenced to a large extent by their meetings with such personalities as Bobby Kennedy. Bobby Kennedy had tried to almost buy them in terms of saying concentrate on getting black people registered. Of course he had in mind the next election which would have brought his brother back in. So at the Highlander meeting there were those who contended very heavily for their points of view to the point that they looked like they were splitting. I had been accused by a couple of the grown-ups there of not letting them more or less split because those who were very dedicated to the concept of non-violence did not see that voter-registration would precipitate a conflict, a confrontation with violence, had to, because of the kinds of areas to which they were going. The young people decided&#8212;after months and months, weeks and weeks, all night and so forth&#8212;recognized that going to southwest Georgia, going down into deep Alabama and Mississippi meant you were going to be faced with violence. So if they compromised, it was largely in terms of the fact that the strength of the movement lay in being together not in division. That was the basis. Nine was not a choice of non-violence versus the other. Mine was in terms of the knowledge of history that I at least had and the recognition that where their strength would ultimately lie would be in involving people in mass, but together, not one fighting for non-violence. EUGENE WALKER: During that time what was N.A.A.C.P. and C.O.R.e. s reaction to the S.C.L.C.? ELLA BAKER: Outwardly it was friendly, let's put it that way. Maybe subterraneously there were concerns about the extent to which S.C.L.C. might pre-empt their roll in certain places, but you didn't have any outward conflict. EUGENE WALKER: The organization pulled an awful lot of people from the N.A.A.C.P&#8230;. ELLA BAKER: No, I don't think so. EUGENE WALKER: That was because you didn't accept individual membership. ELLA BAKER: That was one of the basics. EUGENE WALKER: That was one of the basic rules of S.C.L.C. in all of the time&#8212;placate organizations like N.A.A.C.P&#8230;. ELLA BAKER: That was a basic projection from the beginning when those of us who thought in terms of organizing an S.C.L.C. or some force in the South&#8212;was to avoid individual memberships which would not place you in competition with the N.A.A.C.P&#8230;. EUGENE WALKER: Miss Baker, your idea of Crusade for Citizen-ship did create somewhat of a furor. I'm mindful of the fact that you tried to get an advisory committee together for this thing and you sent names out to all of the big people just so they would lend their name to it; you weren't asking them to really give money but just to lend their name to it. You sent to the Rappaports; you even sent to Roy Wilkins and Mr. Wilkins subsequently declined but he recommended somebody from his group. Mr. said explicitly that he didn't want to be involved with this citizenship project because he was already on the board of the N.A.A.C.P. and they were engaged in similar action and he didn't want the N.A.A.C.P. to feel that he was encouraging another organization that was doing basically the same thing that they were doing. And beyond that there were reports in the New York Amsterdam News and one or two other papers that Wilkins was a little peeved at this kind of thing. They didn't state specifically what he said but they got the implication that he was peeved. Obviously Dr. King felt the same way because on a memo that he wrote to the executive board that he was going to try once more to try and get co-operation between his organization and the N.A.A.C.P&#8230; Can you shed any light on that situation for me or did you detect any kind of antagonism or friction or tension between the two groups at that time? ELLA BAKER: I think what you're faced with is a normal situation in the period, in the context of the period. Here was an organization, the N.A.A.C.P., which in 1950 was at least forty-one years old. I think it came into being in 1909. They had carried on certain kinds of programs. And here was an individual who had not had any real connection, hadn't grown up in the struggle. Martin had not, historically, been any part of the struggle. He was the son of a well-to-do minister and he was in search of a higher status in terms of education. I don't think there's any record of his being involved in any movement of any kind prior to that. So what do you have? Somebody could say, there's an upstart. And I guess these are the human factors. I'm sure there were strains. For instance, Roy would have to be sort of convinced, let's say to put it politely, to participate in such as the March on Washington, the famous march, and prior to that there were the 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage and there were a couple of marches involving students in terms of the question of school segregation. The mass action type thing like that, the N.A.A.C.P. at that stage had not been involved with. Naturally there was this sense of priority of right (let's call it). Who was the bridge between that? That was Philip Randolph. You look at the record. Never did they have a conference in terms of working out without Phil Randolph. Phil had the respect of both. Phil had articulated the concept of mass action and had attempted the thing that got called off. EUGENE WALKER: The March on Washington. ELLA BAKER: The March on Washington in the '40's. And Mrs. Roosevelt and Mayor LaGuardia&#8212;you know our good angels of the liberal angels&#8212;talked him out of it. But N.A.A.C.P. could not afford, Roy could not afford to absolutely turn thumbs down over the situation because they could have been left out in the cold, number one. Number two&#8212;their deep respect for Phil Randolph. EUGENE WALKER: He was certainly a monument in that whole scenario&#8230; ELLA BAKER: Certainly he was, yes. EUGENE WALKER: &#8230; because when you look at it he initiated the idea to go and talk to the president and he wanted to have a call-up meeting but he wanted a forum. Roy turned thumbs down on that idea; they didn't go along with him on that. Martin Luther was whole-heartedly in favor of it&#8212;having other leaders aside from themselves coming in to talk with the president. The Urban League and N.A.A.C.P. didn't think that would be the wisest thing at that time. ELLA BAKER: You see, they couldn't trust C.O.R.E. [Laughter] in their minds. What you have there is the division between those who have some respect for mass action and pressure and those who believe that your best results came from negotiations from the knowledgeable people. The negotions from the knowledgeable and the legal action were the N.A.A.C.P. and the Urban League. EUGENE WALKER: There are four other names that were frequent in this whole episode and I'd like to mention them to you and get you to give whatever response you can to them. I'll mention them and give you my impresion of what they were doing. You had Stanley Levenson from the time of his involvement in writing the books Strived Toward Freedom clean on up until Beyond the Year of '62. The man was King's constant advisor; he just revered the man. He just regarded King as being some super special and he didn't charge him a penny for all of the legal work he did. Not a penny. He told him that he did not want him to pay him anything. He was doing this because he wanted to participate in the movement and this was one way that he could try and look out for him. And every important decision that I think he made, he either consulted with Levenson or he got some advice from Levenson. ELLA BAKER: Where did you find this? EUGENE WALKER: In the papers in Boston, Boston University. ELLA BAKER: King's papers? EUGENE WALKER: King's papers. ELLA BAKER: I see. EUGENE WALKER: He put all of them down there. King's papers. That man wrote him on everything&#8212;on his book, on his taxes, on his dealing with Fred Gray down in Alabama when Gray wanted to rip him off for so much money for representing him, on meeting out of Chicago. The whole emphasis of this man was giving King advice and King seemed to have regarded his advice highly. What was your impression of Stanley Levenson, number one? Another individual was Bayard Ruskin. Ruskin gave him a great deal of advice and there's something that's puzzling me in David Louis' book. You mentioned about the middle of 1959 [interruption] King backed out at the last minute on his participation in the Southern Conference on Education, in part because he feared he might be called a communist being sympathetic to communism. But at the same time, he was getting ready to make a recommendation to the board that they hire Dayard Ruskin as his special assistant. There was already rumors out that Ruskin might be associated with or might have socialist or communist leanings. So I can't reconcile how on one hand he would just completely disassociate himself with S.C.E., and on the other hand he was going to whole-heartedly endorse Ruskin when he pointed out in his recommendation that he was mind ful of the fact that this might be misinterpreted&#8212;people might attribute our going in different direction. But he felt Ruskin was so valuable to him that he had to take that chance. And one other person that I want you to speak to is Smiley, Glen Smiley. Now Mr. William Noah, who worked with F.O.R. along with Smiley, wrote King around the middle of 1959. This was when all of this was coming to a head. He suggested to him that there was some friction between Smiley and Ruskin and that both of them were trying to get his attention. And King replied to him by saying, yeah, he had been observing it for a number of months but he was at a loss to know exactly what to do about it. But there's no question about Smiley's committment to non-violent principles and the fact that he was willing to give his all to S.C.L.C. and the cause of non-violence. These individuals, in addition to yourself, keep coming up. ELLA BAKER: He was giving all not to the S.C.L.C. but that was for the Montgomery boycott. Smiley. EUGENE WALKER: Was he permanent in S.C.L.C.? ELLA BAKER: Not that I know of. EUGENE WALKER: Okay, very good. ELLA BAKER: No. So what is your major question? EUGENE WALKER: My major question is: How did you perceive, being close to the whole movement, the roll of these gentlemen? Was it similar to the one I portrayed or do you see it differently? ELLA BAKER: No&#8230;. Stanley, number one, comes out of the American-Jewish Congress. He had some prior knowledge of the value of social action because the Congress was not just an organization of top-heavy individuals alone. The Jewish people did a lot of demonstrating. And he was party to the initial discussions thinking, how do you keep alive what had come out of what has been demonstrated in the Montgomery bus boycott. You're raising the question of his dedication. He didn't have to charge because he had income; he had business. He was knowledgeable about fundraising. Whatever his personal motivations for doing it, you would have to find out from him. The fact that he was involved before in social action&#8230; You see, I met Stanley when I was president of the local branch of the N.A.A.C.P&#8230; He called upon me for trying to get some action out of the N.A.A.C.P. against the Immigration Act. Many times there are other groups, especially in the New York area, that are much farther advanced, further advanced in terms of dealing with social issues that affect the whole population than the N.A.A.C.P. which was concentrating primarily on race. So Stanley and I met. When the boycott came about he knew that Ruskin came out of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, way back, and at that time was with the and League. He had a history of dedication to the concept of non-violence. I have no such history; I have no such committment. Not historically or even now can I claim that because that's not my way of functioning. So here you are. We needed somebody who had the entree to non-violence. And there was another question, how do you pay for these things? That explains, I hope. EUGENE WALKER: It rather does. It goes a long way in explaining it because Levenson was a contact in the circles around New York and other places on the east coast whereby he could get money. And money was a vital ingredient for this whole thing. He also knew people who were specialists in certain areas, especially when it came to the income tax thing. He could recommend certain people. ELLA BAKER: Yes, he was a real estate man, lawyer. EUGENE WALKER: Yes. Is he still in New York? ELLA BAKER: As far as I know. I haven't seem him; yes he's still in New York. Stanley's still here. I don't know exactly where he's living. It just happened that when I thought I had a heart condition I happened to be recommended to the same doctor as his. [END OF TAPE 1, SIDE A] [TAPE 1, SIDE B] [START OF TAPE 1, SIDE B] [unclear] EUGENE WALKER: We'll be taking about some of Miss Baker's experiences and perceptions of the S.C.L.C&#8230; Miss Baker, I'd like to begin the questions this morning by asking you if you could discern to me the role you played in setting up the office of S.C.L.C. in Atlanta, Georgia. ELLA BAKER: Well, the office of the S.C.L.C. was set up I think at the end of 1958, the beginning of 1958. I was asked to come down in order to facilitate a program that they anticipated having on the twelfth of February, which was to have twelve, at least several&#8212;they wanted at least twenty different southern cities to have meetings simultaneously on the twelfth of February. And in order to do that, there had to be somebody to pull together the program and to make contact with these cities and the like. So, when I came in, there was no office. For the first couple of days, whatever functioning there was I had to function out of a telephone booth and my pocketbook&#8212;keep my notes in the pocketbook. Through the help largely of the Reverend Williams, Samuel Williams who was professor of philosophy at Moorehouse at the time, we did get an office set up. Without him I don't know how I would have found an office that quickly. EUGENE WALKER: The S.C.L.C. didn't move its headquarters to Atlanta until late [unclear] . ELLA BAKER: No, a year after. EUGENE WALKER: But in the meantime you operated out of whereever you could find some space in Atlanta to try and coordinate this simultaneous meeting you had planned for these cities in the South. ELLA BAKER: Well, yes, you see as I had said when I came there there was no space. Nobody had made any provisions for space, hadn't even thought about it&#8212;apparently had not. I had assumed that certainly we might have been able to function with some degree of sustained effort out of the church office of Ebenezer Baptist Church since the Rev. Dr. King, Sr. was the father of the Re. Dr. King, Jr., but this was not provided for in the full sense. Well, I had to accomodate myself to whatever time the manager of that office felt that the mimeograph machine and other facilitites could be available usually after office hours. And so, as I indicated, Re. Samuel Williams, we talked and we pointed out of course that it was obvious you couldn't function effectively that way. So he succeeded in getting space in the orginal office&#8212;I've forgotten the name, the address now of S.C.L.C. on Auburn Avenue. EUGENE WALKER: Was Rev. Williams acting in the capacity of con- cerned official of S.C.L.C. in trying to help you find space or was he acting just as concerned citizen in trying to get you as decent a place as you could to co-ordinate your program? ELLA BAKER: Well, he was part of the S.C.L.C. and I think we'd have to credit him with both factors. He was an official and he was knowledgeable enough to be, to realize that you couldn't function without some space. EUGENE WALKER: Very good. Then, S.C.L.C. as an organization, didn't seeem to regard this as a serious problem&#8212;the fact that you didn't have office space in Atlanta? Otherwise they would have made some concessions, wouldn't they? ELLA BAKER: Well, I would think so. You see, S.C.L.C. had not, I suppose, grown to the point of understanding themselves or understanding organization sufficiently to be aware of the loss of momentum that could come from just coming in and trying to create out of air, you see. EUGENE WALKER: Do you have any knowledge at all about who may have recommended you for that position? ELLA BAKER: Well, I think I know who recommended me&#8212;I don't think it was a recommendation. At that point, I was drafted. I was drafted without my own consent. EUGENE WALKER: Explain that to me please. ELLA BAKER: I think I had indicated to you some time earlier that there had been a series of conversations and dialogues with and between myself and Stanley Levenson and Bayard Ruskin. That was even prior to the, let's call it, the formation of the S.C.L.C&#8230; And at the initial meeting at which the S.C.L.C. was organized, in '57 I believe it is, of course I was down in Atlanta with Bayard and preparing materials for that meeting. EUGENE WALKER: You might be interested to know that I have a number of those work papers that were prepared. I don't know who prepared them but I do know that work papers were prepared at the first meeting in January and the one in February in New Orleans. ELLA BAKER: Well, the work papers in the first meeting in January were prepared, the content, largely by Bayard and the format I did because I like to set things out in a form that you can see esily, you see. So I was sent there by this method. The three of us were to meet and Bayard and Stanley had gone out to the airport to talk with Martin as he passed through New York going where, I don't know. They came back and told me that I had been drafted to go to Atlanta to set up the program for the Crusade for Citizenship for these twenty-odd meetings. Prior to that it had been assumed that Bayard would go down, but he was not available, let's say. I was very provoked because I had never in my life. EUGENE WALKER: &#8230; given your consent not as a contributor. ELLA BAKER: No, I had not planned to go. To be drafted in the sens of having it be said that I would go when I hadn't been consulted&#8230; my ego isn't very pronounced. But I suppose in that aspect of it, my ego is easily touched; not to ask me what to do but to designate me to do something without even consulting me, but I went. EUGENE WALKER: Well, let me ask you this. This is the first major civil rights undertaking in the history of this country whereby a woman has been granted a seemingly, ostensibly significant policy-making kind of position. Now, were you taken by that? Was that gratifying to you? ELLA BAKER: [Laughter] Oh no, no, no, no. Because I knew I didn't have any significant role in the minds of those who constituted the organization. I'm sure that basically the assumption is, or was, and perhaps the assumption still prevails in the minds of those who remember my being there, that I was just there to carry out the orders of Dr. King and somebody else, but incidental since there was no designation of authority. I wasn't a person of authority. EUGENE WALKER: So, when you first moved into S.C.L.C., your actual work designation was never really specified. You were just called here to assist them in a project that they didn't know too much about&#8212;namely, the co-ordination of voters project throughout the South, a spontaneous one at that? Is that correct? ELLA BAKER: Yes. Getting together the meetings and preparing material for it. In fact, they spelled out nothing because there was nobody to spell cut anything. EUGENE WALKER: They were searching for projects? ELLA BAKER: Well, they had in mind&#8230; the idea was conceived of as having dramatic, let's call it far-reaching, impact. Of having twenty meetings, or twenty-two meetings, simultaneously on February the twelfth&#8212;which I think is the official date of Douglass' birthday, Frederick Douglass' birthday. EUGENE WALKER: And some white president, what's his name&#8212;Lincoln. ELLA BAKER: Lincoln, no. Yes, his is near that period. I think there's a difference of a day in the dates of the two births. But as I remember it, in my thinking, my obeisance was paid to the fact that it was near Mr. Douglas' birthday. EUGENE WALKER: I have read where others gave credit to the fact that it was the white president's. ELLA BAKER: [Laughter] Well, let it be. And my coming, as I said, was to see that this be done. Now how it was to be done, who was to do this, that or the other&#8212;there was nothing spelled out. I guess I must believe that both Stanley and Bayard knew that I knew something about organization&#8212;I had functioned both as a field person and as a national office staff member of the N.A.A.C.P&#8230; I had had other kinds of, call it, professional positions. So, they figured that with the input that would come down, you see, from them and others we'd have something going. EUGENE WALKER: Right, right, I can understand that. ELLA BAKER: So, certainly by no stretch of the imagination can it be considered a conscious effort on the part of the officialdom of S.C.L.C. to provide input from a female, as such. If anything, it would be to the contrary. EUGENE WALKER: Okay. Now, how long was it that you were working on your project before they hired an executive secretary&#8230; ELLA BAKER: &#8230; an executive director. EUGENE WALKER: An executive director, yes. ELLA BAKER: You see, this project which I had given in my thinking, let's call it two months, I had said it would take me a certain number of weeks to set it up. I think I went there the earlier part of January, and this was to come off on February the twelfth. I planned to stay six weeks&#8212;the month to do it and two weeks to clean it up. But it didn't work out that way. Then they began talking about having an executive director and naturally they wanted a minister. EUGENE WALKER: Who brought up this idea about an executive director, do you recall? ELLA BAKER: Oh, I don't know that I can recall anybody in particular. I think it came out of what might be considered what was over ther an executive group, the board, the executive committee. I don't think they had even constituted too clearly, prior to the February twelfth meeting, the delineations of different groupings within it. They had an executive committee, and then they began to see&#8230;. There were pressures. There were pressures for a format and a mechanism to implement whatever they had been talking about doing, providing an organization. EUGENE WALKER: Who was the ELLA BAKER: I think the ministers, many of the ministers, who had been initially a part of the formation of S.C.L.C&#8230; You see, the meetings prior to this&#8212;you referred to the initial meeting in January and then there was a meeting in New Orleans&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: &#8230; in February&#8230; ELLA BAKER: &#8230; which I gather was largely a matter of let's call it a board meeting and big mass meeting&#8212;but the continuance of a program and even the spelling out of a well-defined program and devising the machinery for seeing it through, had not taken place. And there were some people who, I'm sure, would be very much disturbed by this. And some had had certain kinds of experiences. In my way of thinking, I would immediately think of a person like&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Reverence Bill Smith of Nashville? ELLA BAKER: Smith of Nashville. I would also think of &#8212; what's the man that was, not in New Orleans, but&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Simpkins? ELLA BAKER: Simpkins, yes. EUGENE WALKER: Jameson? ELLA BAKER: I like Jameson especially. See, they would be pressing for something concrete. Some others no doubt. I imagine Reed. I'm not sure whether Reed was in that early; Reed of Norfolk. I don't think he was. EUGENE WALKER: What about ELLA BAKER: Well, I imagine he would be concerned but he didn't want to maybe violate his relationships with Martin. There was a certain defferential consideration that they had, maybe sometimes too defferential in terms of trying to force something through. EUGENE WALKER: I want to ask you about that later on because I do think it is crucial that I try and get these kinds of relationships they had. That will be one of the real points. Now I want to move on to the election of the executive director who was Dr. Rev. John Tilly out of Baltimore . But he was eventually chosen as the executive director. Can you explain to me that process? Who selected him? Who recommended him? ELLA BAKER: Well, I'll answer the last question first. I recommended him, largely because of two things. One, they had talked in terms of "finding" an executive director. I knew, number one, that they were biased towards a minister. I felt that it ought to also be somebody who had certain kinds of experience. And prior to reaching Dr. Tilly, I had interviewed (or at least talked with) a person in Atlanta who they had&#8230; whose name had come up occassionally was also a minister&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Dr. Pitts? ELLA BAKER: Yes, Dr. Pitts. And I knew Dr. Pitts from my early N.A.A.C.P. days. There had been overtures made to him. I don't know; I think he called me. At least we talked to each other and he suggested I come by and talk with him. I think he wanted to ask some questions. I know he wanted to. EUGENE WALKER: Did you encourage him to take the position? ELLA BAKER: No, I didn't. I neither encouraged nor discouraged because I felt he had a sufficient amount of knowledge and background and experience to be able to evaluate whether he should or should not. He did not have a great enthusiasm for making that shift. And I think he had reasons for it because I don't think he would have felt quite as free. He didn't feel that there was an atmosphere (now I shouldn't put this in) but there would be an atmosphere of freedom of operation. He didn't feel that there was a clarity of organizational proceedure that would suit him at that point. EUGENE WALKER: That seems to be a pretty accurate observation at that time. ELLA BAKER: Yes. So then the next move&#8212;I guess there may have been others they may have approached, I don't recall&#8212;but I suggested Tilly because I knew Dr. John Tilly. He was a theological senior student at school at Shaw when I was a student there. I knew him as a person and I had read of the credentials that were attributed to him in terms of having conducted a very successful voter registration drive in Baltimore. So, I suggested him and it took a little while before anyone saw him. In fact, nobody saw him until I further suggested to Stanley that we talk to him. And so Stanley underwrote the&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Let me get this now. You first suggested to some members of S.C.L.C.? ELLA BAKER: Yes, I forget the name. EUGENE WALKER: And there was slow response. ELLA BAKER: Yes. EUGENE WALKER: And, subsequent to that, you talked to Stanley? ELLA BAKER: Yes. It may have been almost simultaneous to let Stanley know about that thing. EUGENE WALKER: Yes. ELLA BAKER: But there's still the question of where the initial move officially should come, from which it should come. And so, this information let's say is turned over to Dr. King. EUGENE WALKER: Okay. ELLA BAKER: And no motion. EUGENE WALKER: Okay. ELLA BAKER: And we further suggested, let's have a conference with Mr. Tilly to feel him out. So he came to New York and we met at an ice cream parlor [Laughter] there on 125th Street and St. Nicholas Avenue. I think it used to be called , I don't know what it's called now. But we met there and of course there was no problem with Tilly and me because we knew each other from way back. So he seemed to be interested. Then that was followed up. Eventually it was followed up. He was invited to come to Atlanta, I think, to meet with an executive committee. Eventually he was designated as the executive director. That's how it took place. EUGENE WALKER: Okay. And the inititiative came from this meeting that you and Mr. Levenson had with him in New York. ELLA BAKER: Yes. In New York. EUGENE WALKER: Do you know how long Rev. Tilly served as executive secretary? ELLA BAKER: I can't recall the exact date, but it seems to me it was less than a year. He was not full-time. He had made provisions to continue his pastorate of a given church in Baltimore. So he would commute, at times for several weeks. Seems to me that the initial meeting he attended was the one we had in Mississippi. EUGENE WALKER: Clarksdale. ELLA BAKER: Clarksdale, Mississippi. EUGENE WALKER: That was labelled as the greatest meeting yet. ELLA BAKER: I think I did that labelling, I'm afraid. [Laughter] EUGENE WALKER: Now the question is was that propaganda or was that&#8230;? ELLA BAKER: No. I don't know how it was labelled. Where did you get the label? EUGENE WALKER: I found it in some of my notes. Now, we were talking about Rev. Tilly, his being appointed executive director. You were trying to recall the first meeting he attended. Was this at that Clarksdale meeting? ELLA BAKER: Yes. It was there. It was at Clarksdale. EUGENE WALKER: What kind of a speaker was Rev. Tilly? Was he as dynamic a speaker as, say, a person like Rev. King or Walker? What kind of a delivery did he have? ELLA BAKER: He had very good delivery. It was not as forcefull in terms of what might be called dramatics as Martin's voice. Wasn't as resonant but he had a clear voice and good thinking. He had very good thoughts. Of course, he had been speaking a long time. EUGENE WALKER: Can you recall any frustrations he might have experienced which caused him not to stay on at S.C.L.C. for more than a year? Do you have any idea as to the reasons why he left S.C.L.C.&#8212;that's the point I'm trying to make. ELLA BAKER: I don't think he spelled out &#8212;certainly to me and I'm not even sure he speeled out to the board&#8212;any specific, let's call it, gripes about S.C.L.C. per se. But I think the rationale that was provided was that he found it necessary to give more time to his church work. He didn't find it quite viable to continue to have to commute to Atlanta and be both from home and from church over periods of time. EUGENE WALKER: During the time of Rev. Tilly's tenure he was given the title of executive director. After Rev. Tilly departed, you became acting executive director. Number one, how did you feel about his leaving and what did you think of the position of acting executive director? ELLA BAKER: What did I think about? How did I feel? EUGENE WALKER: How did you feel about it? ELLA BAKER: I had no ambition to be (let's call it) executive director. If I had had any, I knew it was not to be. And why do I say that? Two reasons. One, I was a female. The other, I guess, a combination of female and non-minister, plus the kind of personality differences that existed between me and the Rev. Dr. King. I was not a person to be enamoured of anyone. My philosophy was not one of non-violence per se and I knew enough about organization (at least I thought I knew enough about organization) to be critical about some of the lack of proceedures that obtained in S.C.L.C&#8230; Within the inner councils, whenever there was discussion, I did not try to force myself upon them recognizing the sensitivities that existed. Now, I did not hesitate to voice my opinion and sometimes it was the voicing of that opinion it was obvious that it was not a very comforting sort of presence that I presented. EUGENE WALKER: Was any of these sensitivities regarding a female being in a power position in the organization ever explicitly expressed or was it just a feeling, a presumption that you had in this regard. ELLA BAKER: Well, when you say explicitly expressed I think the nearest to it would be the fact that: number one, when brought down, although I had full responsibilities for doing whatever was being done I was never offered a position, an official position, by way of title. And when there was the bringing in of an executive director, I think there was a willingness on the part of the officialdom to permit me to stay on without even title. So I think it may have been some of my friends who raised the question with me and so I maybe raised the question to at least I should keep some record as to where I'd been. There were a number of occassions on which I differed very sharply when a discussion came up and I never was one to just agree on the basis of the position of the other fellow. When I say position, the international and national prominence of the individual had nothing to do, in my opinion, with the opinion that was expressed with the opinion that I did not concur. The prominence of the individual was not a bar to my saying it didn't concur. EUGENE WALKER: And you are almost certain that your name never figured prominently in the search for an executive director? ELLA BAKER: Well, I know that. After the first meetings and I think it was maybe after the Clarksdale meeting&#8212;I'm not too sure, I think it was Clarksdale&#8212;and there were some subsequent meetings, I had a special meeting with ministers in Mississippi and nobody was there but me, nobody from the organization. I think I did bring one of the persons from Nashville&#8230; I can't recall who came. There was a Methodist bishop&#8212;I'm not sure that he was a bishop, but I believe he was (I ought to check the record)&#8212;who voiced openly, he was so enthusiastic you know of my "demonstration of capacity to get something out of nothing", Because I had to create materials. I not only created but had to break it down so they could use it. Occasionally I had opportunities to raise questions in council. So some people he recommended openly, immediately, that I become the executive, you see. EUGENE WALKER: How was that handled? ELLA BAKER: How was it dealt with? EUGENE WALKER: That's right. ELLA BAKER: [Laughter] I don't recall any verbalization at the time. They probably were to the effect that: well, at this stage, you know, its's not ready or something to that effect. But nobody ever took it seriously, I mean the officialdom didn't take it seriously. In fact, if anything it was an irritant. As far as I was concerned, I knew it couldn't be. So I had no aspirations and I had no illusions as to the possibilities of it being. You see, I was not a young person&#8212;that's number one. I was old enough to be the mother of the leadership of the organization. And I was dealing with ministers whose only sense of relationship to women in organization was that of the church. And the roll of women in the southern church&#8212;and maybe all of the churches but certainly the southern churches&#65533;&#65533;&#65533;was that of doing the things that the minister said he wanted to have done. It was not one in which they were credited with having creativity and initiative and capacity to carry out things&#8212;to create programs and to carry them out. Certainly that was not my concept of functioning. EUGENE WALKER: This is the dilemma that I see in this whole episode and I'd like to hear your reaction to what I'm about to suggest. As I can see it, they had a fantastic respect on the one hand for your ability but an equal amount of fear for your potential of independence on the other hand because they never did make you an official, a bonafide type of official of the organization. Yet, they gave you bonafide top responsibilities&#8212;namely, the establishment of this program that they wanted to have such profound impact on the country at the time. This is the kind of ambivalence that is difficult to digest. It's hard to understand that. ELLA BAKER: Well, I don't think it's too difficult to digest if you look at it from the perspective that here was a young leadership that came out of a background that had little or no prior experience of working with an effectively trained black (certainly it didn't have to be black or white) an effectively trained and experienced organizational promoter who had had the kind of experience that I had had. And who was not loathe to raise questions. I did not just subscribe to a theory just because it came out of the mouth of the leader. So, it was too difficult; it was much too difficult. I was too old&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: &#8230; to be intimidated by the presence of&#8230; ELLA BAKER: Well, not only that. From their perspective I was too old to create any interest on a man-female, man-woman, basis. I wasn't a fashionplate; I make no bones about not being a fashionplate. [Laughter] EUGENE WALKER: We were talking about their respect for their abilitites on the one hand and a fear of your independence on another. This is the way I perceive it. In addition to that, maybe they didn't regard you as you suggested as a kind of a female animal that fit into their scheme of things. ELLA BAKER: Yes. EUGENE WALKER: You didn't have that kind of relationship with them. ELLA BAKER: No, and I wasn't a showplate. The average attititude toward the southern Baptist ministers at that stage, and maybe still, was as far as their own women were concerned were that they were nice to talk to about such things as how well they cooked, how beautiful they looked, and how well they carried out a program that the minister had delegated them to carry out but not a person with independence and creative ideas of his own, but on whom they had to rely. They could not tolerate, and I can understand that they couldn't, and especially from a person like me because I was not the kind of person that made special effort to be ingratiating. I didn't try to insult but I did not hesitate to be positive about the things with which I agreed or disagreed. I might be quiet but if there was discussion and I was suppose to be able to participate, I participated at the level of my thinking. EUGENE WALKER: Very good. This brings us to another aspect of S.C.L.C. and that is the decision-making aspect. You have mentioned the fact that you did participate in the discussions. Can you recall how decisions were finally made in these kinds of gatherings, discussion groups? ELLA BAKER: Well, I think it would vary from time to time. EUGENE WALKER: Can you recall any outstanding personalities here&#8212;the ones who seemed to dominate the discussions or the ones who seemed to persuade others to their point of view. This is what I'm talking about&#8212;the whole decision-making process and the identification of those individuals who seemed to have had the greatest influence. ELLA BAKER: I'm not sure that I can specify with any degree of accuracy other than to indicate that persons who had been, let's say, number one, closely related to the Montgomery movement&#8212;had a certain, brought with them certain credentials as a result of that. A person like who had on his own initiated a program in Birmingham at the point at which the N.A.A.C.P. activities were banned and persons who had some "standing" in their own communitites. Like the reverend&#8212;I've forgotten his name&#8212;from New Orleans. EUGENE WALKER: Jameson? ELLA BAKER: No, Jameson was Baton Rouge. The one who had a very big church in New Orleans. You see, all of these factors that usually influence one minister in terms of his relationship to another minister especially in the Baptist hierarchy&#8212;such things as the fact that he was big in Baptist circles, had a big congregation, and that sort of thing&#8212;these operated also in terms of how well people were listened to. But in the final analysis there was a deferential consideration on the part of the men themselves both in terms of their not being present, let's call it, at the center of the locale where the organization supposedly had its office and a defferential consideration towards Martin because of his roll internationally and nationally&#8212;the image that had been created. So what you had was a open and blank discussion, I think, and an effort to at least voice their opinions. But in the final analysis, the decision for implementing this was left to a large extent to the president. So I don't know whether this touches upon the point you&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Certainly. It touches upon the point but I can understand the difficulty involved in specifying certain individuals. The categories you mentioned are certainly useful&#8212;mainly that based on the Baptist hierarchy, the minister with the largest congregation, and with standing in his community certainly had a definate influence on the outcome of certain things. But in the final analysis it was left up to Martin as to what would be done. Let me ask you this, can you recall any individuals who refused, other than yourself, who refused to defer in most instances to the wishes of Martin? Were there any coalis ions formed within the body politics, like a decision-making body of the S.C.L.C.? ELLA BAKER: No, I think at that stage, let's see, this was the prevading atmosphere: one of, we have something great; we have a great person and we must try to make use of this and not be divisive. I think this was a consideration on the part of the people who were there. Plus the fact, the lack of prior experience on the part of many ministers with dealing with organizations of this type. This was different from a church organization and it was out in "competition" with other national organizations and it was a movement. So neither their time nor general inclination motivated them to give undivided attention to this organization. And they were willing to&#8212;as is not uncommon in organization&#8212;leave it up to somebody else. Now this however, was one of the reasons that a so-called executive committee was formed. And that committee was supposedly the committee in which great decisions were made and where the differences would be fought out. EUGENE WALKER: Do you remember who had the power to appoint the executive committee? Was it chosen in the general assembly or the general conference or was this responsibility left up to the president? ELLA BAKER: I think initially, it was left up to the president with, let's call it, the concurrence of the general assembly. The meeting at which the name of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference was fought out&#8212;that was an interesting meeting. That was held in Montgomery. There was a great deal of discussion as to how to name it and one of the factors that apparently was persuasive in terms of chosing the Southern "Christian" Leadership Conference was that if it were designated as a Christian organization, it would provide some degree of protective mechanism against the charge of being communist. EUGENE WALKER: We've talked about the officially designated people in S.C.L.C.&#8212;namely, the executive board and the executive committee&#8212;can you recall the roll that the unofficial, influential people played in S.C.L.C.; like Mr. Samuel Evanson. He was never designated an officer of S.C.L.C. but it's quite apparent through looking at literature that he played a kind of significant roll. As a matter of fact, two of you and Mr. Levenson met with Rev. Tilly in New York, recommended Rev. Tilly's name; subsequently Rev. Tilly was named executive director. I'd like you to try and recall as best you can, how was this ex-official roll of Mr. Levenson perceived by the members of the organization? This is something I mentioned to you earlier and I'd like to get it on tape. Did they really know about him? ELLA BAKER: I don't think that there was wide knowledge of Mr. Levenson per se as an "official" or unofficial constant advisor and consultant to Dr. King. I think it was more of a personal relationship, it might have been regarded by others. They didn't know about it. EUGENE WALKER: So rather than use the term official&#8212;like I've been doing&#8212;or constant advisor, you think the best designation to refer to Mr. Levenson and his contribution would be a constant friend of Martin Luther King's? I think you would certainly have to make the combination of friend and advisor because he was not designated as an official advisor by the organization. He was not openly known. I won't suggest that it was a covert action, but it was not considered necessary for all the constituency even of the executive committee to know of all the individuals with whom the president "consulted." And since out of Montgomery situation there had developed a national and international bases for Dr. King's relationships, it was presumed and accepted that if he found it advised, advantageous or necessary to consult with or to receive recommendations from persons other than those within the official organization, it was to be all right. So I don't think they knew too much about Stanley. Stanley, however, had helped to provide initial impetus both for the, let's call it, format of the creation of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, the establishment of a southern base for a national organization supposedly, and to provide or channel some financial assistance. And this was a crucial thing because at the close of the Montgomery situation, such as you historically know, there was a great deal of question about no money. The channels for receiving great amounts of money that Montgomery movement had received were not open to S.C.L.C&#8230; It had to find other channels for support. I'm sure there would not have been any question of his relationship but Martin found it advantageous because he was seemingly as you say (from the records you have) not only dedicated, but he at least was a constant supporter and advisor. He was definately and informed unofficial member of the advisory group of the S.C.L.C.. ELLA BAKER: Yes. EUGENE WALKER: And I was trying to solicate from you the best designation I could give him and you've suggested that I'd have to acknowledge his friendship and advisory&#8230; ELLA BAKER: &#8230; and the advisory relationship. If anyone wished to be venal you could almost say this could be interpreted as having some implications beyond that. There's a venal EUGENE WALKER: That's what I was trying to think about, just what all of this meant. Just what effect did this have on the direction of the organization? You know, the different kind of advice that Dr. King was getting and different kind of advice that he shunned. There were certain people that I don't believe he would listen to too much and he might have been one of those people. I'm just trying to get the direction. I think you can tell a lot about an organization if you can find out where the greates t input is coming from. ELLA BAKER: Well, I think one of the yardsticks that might be used is the fact that I don't think that persons without &#8212;I'll put it his way, I'll put it positive: persons who were in a position to provide both financial aid and public relations assistance to the furtherance of the organization or the furtherance of the career of the president would be certainly high on the list of acceptable advisors. Stanley was in position; I think he ran the money-making campaigns in New York. He comes out of the Jewish tradition. He was part of the American Jewish Congress, I believe; as you know, that's a highly organized money-raising organization. They have a format. He was able to provide that and contact with others who as individuals would provide help. Also he might have been motivated, as other people in that area were motivated, to give advice because of reasons that would be obvious and maybe some that may not have been obvious. I don't know whether this says anything. EUGENE WALKER: It says a whole lot and these are the kinds of things that I'm trying to see. I know that there were certain groups of individuals that he would have a natural almost affinity to, especially the ones that had sustained what he regarded as being his efforts and at the same time bringing in added money, needed money. But let me jump back and try to see if we can come up with some notions of the character of the organization. This is an elusive kind of a thing because in the beginning they just were joined together to try and lend direction or co-ordination to the various activities throughout the South. Beyond the initial idea of the organization, what kind of character do you see the organization as having in its earlier stage? Can you lend any kind of character to it, other than the fact that it was composed of ministers who really didn't know anything about organization? What kind of a character did it have, or is that too broad or ambiva lent a question? ELLA BAKER: Well, I don't know whether it's ambivalent but I think in the nature of the time, the character of the organization can best be defined as something to meet the need of or capitalizing upon&#8212;this was their design&#8212;the mass impact that the Montgomery boycott had. Here you have a situation historically unthought of and unpredicted, where thousands of individuals, just black ordinary people, subjected themselves to inconveniences that were certainly beyond the thinking of most folk. Where they would walk: old women and maids who ran the risk of losing their little income would walk, if they got there, rather than ride the buses. Now this meant that you had a momentum that had not been seen even in the work of the N.A.A.C.P&#8230; And it was something that suggested a higher potential for wide-spread action through the South. So I think this has to be considered in any evaluation of S.C.L.C&#8230; (I may have lost my point.) EUGENE WALKER: We were talking about the character of it. You're describing the spontaneity of it and the exceptional capacity that the people had to sacrifice. ELLA BAKER: Yes, for what they considered to be a point of liberation. This was supposedly designed to escalate that throughout the South. If you recall the first organization meeting in Atlanta was tied up with the concept of transportation, mass action on transportation, which of course was rather limited but this was suggestive to it. I must say, it did not come from the group. It came from somewhere else. The whole concept was we needed in the South a mass based organization that might further the involvement of masses of people similar to what had taken place in Montgomery. It didn't have to be a bus boycott, but whatever. I think this is it. EUGENE WALKER: Yes, you're definately speaking to what I was talking about. You have to go to the inception and the motivation behind it being founded to really get at it. If we were to look at the Bolshevik revolution in Russia, you know that their movement was routed very deeply in ideological kinds of considerations. such an ideology in this movement but it's so ellusive that I'm going to have to conclude I believe that there was no basic ideology involved in the founding of S.C.L.C&#8230; Not really the N.A.A.C.P.&#8212;unless you're going to call the Declaration of Indepence and the Constitution of the United States an ideology because they don't really put out pamphlets, write conceptual frameworks, which is found in ideology dealing with the system per se. They come up with tactis and programs to deal with problems dealing with race relations. ELLA BAKER: Yes. EUGENE WALKER: And I'm trying to really examine it. I thought I'd clear my mind, as you can see, but these are the kinds of things that I am trying to look at. ELLA BAKER: No, I don't think there was an ideology that certainly was comparable to the Marxist-Leninist concept of a changed society. The nearest to an ideology would be, let's call it, the Christian philosophy and that tied in with the philosophy of Ghandian non-violence, non-violent mass action. That was the nearest to it. But this is itself becomes an ellusive sort of a thing when, let's call it, the impact of the need to grow enters in and maybe the influence from individual leadership as to what shall we do next. And the "what shall we do next" frequently comes from sources other than the organization&#8212;like the identification with the anti-war movement. This did not develop out of the organization. It's out of discussion within the organization. It no doubt came as a suggestion to the president and the invitation to the president to come and speak at anti-war rallies. And I know something about somebody saying, "There is a time now for Martin to speak on anti-war. Do you think that this is the time for it?" And somebody would say, "Yes, it is." Somebody would talk to him; somebody that he felt duty-bound, let's call it, to listen to. EUGENE WALKER: Okay. So the character then&#8212;and I'm just trying to theorize here and just give off kinds of responses and I want your reaction to them. The character here then, as I said, would be more and more of an action kind of a movement than one which would lend itself to a long-term plan or an ideology based on bringing about permanent social changes in the system, as such. And this action oriented movement lent itself more spontaneity than it did to the development of a structure which would require a kind of rigid format down through the years. So, this I think more than anything else would reflect the ultimate character that was inherent in what S.C.L.C. was doing. Or would you differ with that? ELLA BAKER: No, I wouldn't differ. I think you're quite correct there because the personnell who provided the leadership for S.C.L.C. had never come to grips with a philosophical concept other than the general concept of nonviolent mass action. I don't think there was much&#8212;I'll be gratious and say&#8212;either time or other bases for in-depth thinking about how far non-violent mass action can go and to what extent can you really involve people. You se, you may talk about it but when you respond&#8212;as the organization did&#8212;to situations&#8212;their major efforts were in response to situations&#8212;and when you exhaust yourself in situations like in Florida or situations in Albany&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Like St. Aug? ELLA BAKER: St. Aug. and Albany&#8212;what do you have? And you see all of this is being done within the time period of two or three years. Let's call it the overthrow of the Czar. It was not a two year thing. And maybe the general format, not only the format but the pattern of communication and training and action, the development of an anti-czarist movement was much more stimulated, I suppose, by the rather harsh physical conditions. And here you have black people living in "conditions" that were great affluence, the president becoming an international figure. These harsh conditions were not&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: &#8230; were never really touched. ELLA BAKER: Never really, yes. [END OF TAPE 1, SIDE B] [TAPE 2, SIDE A] [START OF TAPE 2, SIDE A] EUGENE WALKER: Miss Baker, we'd like to move away from S.C.L.C. per se right now and look at the role that you played in bringing about a compromise between certain factions of S.N.C.C., namely the non-violence group and the voters registration group. I would like to ask you some specific questions about how you were able to bring this compromise about. The first question I would like to ask you is: Can you recall some of the specific individuals you talked to in either one of the factions, and the nature of your conversations with them? I'm trying to get specific information as to how this compromise came about. ELLA BAKER: To sight who was for non-violence and who were for voter registration, proponents of these two points, might have some bearing. The people who had come out of Nashville were more strongly oriented to the philosophy of non-violence than any other because of Lawson. EUGENE WALKER: Rev. Lawson. ELLA BAKER: Rev. Lawson. He had gone to India as a young missionary, I believe, during the days of Ghandi and he believed in it. So you had Diane Nash, Marion Barry&#8212;who is now running for mayor, I believe, of Washington. EUGENE WALKER: Marion Barry? ELLA BAKER: I think he's one of the candidates for mayor&#8212; and John Lewis and maybe a couple of other people from Nashville. On the other hand you had persons who had had some conferences with Robert Kennedy which would include Charlie Jones of Charlotte and Chuck&#8230; EUGENE WALKER: Excuse me, was Charlie Jones a white [unclear] black? ELLA BAKER: No, he was black. EUGENE WALKER: Did you ever hear of a Charlie Jones in Chapel Hill? ELLA BAKER: In Chapel Hill? I know him; a minister? EUGENE WALKER: Right. ELLA BAKER: Yes, I know him. No, no relation at least not on the surface. And Chuch McDue and I believe Timothy Jenkins was at that meeting&#8212;I'm not too sure. They were the people who had had the conference and I think that they were influenced to some extent. So what were the issues? The issue was whether to maintain it, have it just as a non-violent movement. The voter registration group wanted a voter registration program. So the basic difference was whether you could have a mass non-violent movement in voter registration. Whether or not you would have the confrontation that the non-vio..