 Finchum Wynne Today is September 16, 2011. My name is Tanya Finchum. I m with the Oklahoma State University Library, and I m in Enid Oklahoma to speak with Gail Wynne, the middle daughter of Henry and Shirley Bellmon, former Oklahoma governor and U.S. senator. Thank you for inviting me into your home today. Thanks for being interested. Let s start with learning a little bit about you and then we ll move into your mother and then we ll move into your father. When and where were you born? I was born December 6, 1950, actually here in Enid at what was then called, I think, General Hospital. All three of us, my two sisters and I, were born here. My parents lived in Billings, which was about fifty miles away. And where did you go to grammar school? Grammar school? Well, I started in Billings, and I was there until the middle of the sixth grade. And that fall was the fall of 1962, when Daddy was elected governor. So we moved to Oklahoma City, and I did one semester at Wilson Elementary through the sixth grade and then went to Classen, what was then a junior/senior high school. I went there through the middle of the tenth grade and transferred to Billings High School and graduated in 1968 . Before he started campaigning for governor the first time around, what were some of your activities? It was pretty normal 1950s, early 1960s rural Oklahoma stuff, 4-H, and my particular love was sewing. I particularly did not like to can. Still 5 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne don t do any of that, which I should, but I don t. (Laughs) But we did all the 4-H activities, Share the Fun, the Poultry, Cake and Egg Show things they probably don t have any more speech contest and Dress Revue. Mother always cooked for 4-H camp. We went to Lew Wentz in Ponca City. So 4-H and rural-type activities were pretty important. We attended the Presbyterian church in Perry, which was a forty mile round trip. Really, there weren t a whole lot of elementary activities in the church, or weren t in those days, but we were involved with the church in Perry and as a result, had friends in the next big town, which was Perry. Although, when Daddy did get into politics, then we would be stuffing letters all the time. Nobody would come home after school and play with us. (Laughs) They knew they had to work. What were some of the fun things you would do around the farm? Well, I loved when they would come and shear the sheep because they would bring what seemed to be an enormous, like two, three stories tall it was probably maybe eight or ten feet now that I m an adult gunny sack on a metal frame. As they would shear the sheep, they d throw the pelts into this big gunny sack. It was our job to climb up into the sack and pound them down and jump up and down on them. It was also our job to bring the sheep home in the evening. So after school my two sisters and I would go into the field and walk the sheep back. It s not like you can get them there in a hurry so you have to kind of meander and pull the cockleburs out of your socks at the end of the day. Had we known, we could have invented Velcro, but we weren t that smart. (Laughter) Were the chores divided, like household chores, were they divided between sisters or mother/father, that type of thing? I don t remember a list on the refrigerator like I did with my son, but we would take turns. If somebody helped cook, somebody cleaned up. And we were responsible to help with cleaning. Either we did it and blocked it out because I didn t like it, or Mother did a lot and I didn t realize that I I don t remember just a whole lot of work. Except around harvest there was a lot of cooking. Mother would do a big lunch, fried chicken and all that at noon, and then we d come back and do the dishes. And at four o clock, she d take sandwiches and individual homemade pies out to everybody out in the field. So there was a lot of work around harvest. We had chickens so we would gather and candle the eggs. And Mother had an egg route over here in Enid where she would sell eggs. Then the theater in Billings burned down, and Daddy bought all the brick to build the new house, which was built in 1960, where my sister Ann lives, and we cleaned all those bricks one summer with hammers. 6 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne (Laughs) We cleaned all the old mortar off of them and stacked them up so they could then be used for construction of the house. So I m sure it wasn t a whole lot of fun, but I have very fond memories of it. (Laughter) We must have made it fun or we were pretty silly. Mother would tell us to settle down from time to time. We d just laugh at her and she d just laugh back. (Laughs) So we had a pretty what seems to me to be a pretty relaxed. There was not a lot of expectation as far as, You better behave like this, and you better grow up to do that. It was all pretty fun, really. I was blessed. I was very lucky. Sounds like it. When someone needed to be disciplined, who would do it? Mother. As best she could. (Laughs) Mother laughed a lot. (Laughs) She would probably tell a totally different story if she were able to now, but all you get is my version, so. I just don t remember a lot of need for discipline. Maybe when we were little. Mother was nineteen when they married, and Daddy was twenty-five. They had known each other for four days when they got engaged. Five and a half weeks later they got married. So Mother is nineteen, she s left college, she s married a local boy that she didn t really know because he was older than she was, and he d skipped a couple of years of school. She didn t grow up with him. Even though they lived six miles apart, she didn t know him growing up. And so she s dropped out of college, married at nineteen, has a child fourteen months later, who a year later gets polio. I was born two and a half years after Pat, and Ann was born twenty months after me. All the while my grandfather was widowed and living with them, and there was no running water. I describe it as very fun and relaxed. It had to be difficult, initially. I m thinking more of the elementary years. But when we were all little, she had three girls in five years, and she also had a miscarriage so she lost a baby. From the time she was nineteen to twenty-five or twenty-six, it must have been pretty hairy. Her life changed quite a bit. Her life changed a bit. Had she dropped out of college? She was at OSU. She lived at Murray Hall. She was like a lot of young women at that point who married soldiers after they got home. She stopped on a Sunday afternoon to help a young man with a flat tire that he had on the way home from church. He asked her out for Sunday night and she said no, because she was so excited that he asked her out, she wanted to go home and tell her mother. So then he asked her out again 7 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne for Wednesday and they went out on no, they must have gone out on Monday and got engaged he asked her to marry him on Wednesday. None of us knew this story until we were in college. It was a pretty closely guarded secret I think. (Laughter) Didn t want a repeat of that. Yes. But it worked out fine. It worked out great for them. They were married for fifty-some odd years, until Mother died. Her parents were farmers, too? Her parents farmed south and a little bit east of Billings, and my father s parents farmed due east of Billings. Had her family come from Kansas or Missouri, or do you know? I don t know where her family came from. My dad s mother s family had come from Iowa. His father had run away from home when he was about sixteen so we don t know much about. Everyone called him Mr. Bellmon. My mother called him Mr. Bellmon. He died when I was three so I don t recall much about him. My grandmother s family was named Ponton, P-O-N-T-O-N, and I don t know where they came from. I have an uncle who knows it all. When she was at OSU, was she majoring in home economics? Home economics. What were some of her hobbies and things she liked to do? She was crafty before crafty was popular. She loved to sew. She made most of our clothes. She made all of our clothes that we wore to the inauguration. Her suit and coat, and she made a dress and jacket for each of us for the first inaugural. She made her inaugural ball gown, which was a short cocktail-length dress. So she was a very good seamstress. She cooked like every farm wife in rural Oklahoma. She was a great cook. Her claim to fame for her children and grandchildren were her chicken and noodles. Later in life, she took up stained glass. I don t remember at what point she took a stained glass class, at some point when they were living in 8 Finchum Wynne Oklahoma City. She has done lots of stained glass. The new house at the farm has windows and light fixtures, and I have a few pieces that were taken out of that house here at my garden house. When she was in Washington, she and Anne Stephens, Senator Stephens wife, his first wife from Alaska, and Mrs. Moss, Mrs. Frank Moss, I think from Utah, bought old homes and restored them in Washington. So she was a busy, busy person, and Daddy was always very supportive of all of her endeavors. She had a few little businesses. Back in the 60s, she made silk dresses that had Oklahoma motifs on them, like wheat or the Scissor-tailed Flycatcher. They were just little shift-shimmies type dresses. She had a doll factory, First Lady Collection, which happened at the end of the second governor s term, until she died, and then she had the caf in Billings at the time of her death. She never slowed down. Elliott loved going over there when he was little because he came home, my son Elliott, and said, It s great to go to the farm. There s always somebody to talk to in the middle of the night, because Mother didn t sleep a lot, I guess. (Laughs) She was energetic. She was ahead of her time, I think, really, because she cared about home-based businesses and women having a source of income in their homes if they didn t want to leave their children. She was interesting for her generation, the post-World War II brides. But Mother didn t fit that mold in any way, shape, or form. She didn t tell us we had to grow up to marry doctors, lawyers, merchants, and chiefs. She just enjoyed life and did what she did. Now, her life had changed. She married at nineteen and by the time she was thirty-five, Daddy was governor. (Laughs) So it changed pretty rapidly and pretty drastically, but she somehow managed to just go with it. People loved her. People loved her for that, that she was real. There was no pretense about her. When he was trying to decide to run or not, do you think they discussed it to any length? Or he just came in and said, I m doing this, and she said, Okay, go. ? Oh, no. It would have been discussed, I would imagine, because he mortgaged everything he owned to do it. That piece of paper hangs on the wall at the farm. He mortgaged his farms, the farms that had been in his family, his centennial farm as it turns out, now. So I m sure of that I don t remember the conversations in 1962. I would have been ten or eleven. I would have been too young. I do remember the conversations in 86 about running for governor because we all were in on those conversations, because they felt like it would affect us. We were grown and married and had children at that point, and we had a weekend long visit about, Are we going to do this and if we re going to do this. 9 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne At that point, Mother said, I ll do it if you want to. I don t care if you don t want to. I have one rule. I am not riding in parades. (Laughter) And she didn t ride during campaigns or I don t think. If she did, not very many. She was done with parades by 1986. (Laughs) In 1962, I would think theirs was a very egalitarian marriage. And he didn t really set out to seek to be governor. It wasn t some driving force in his life. He had built a Republican Party in the state and there was nobody to run. He kind of got to be the candidate by default. A man named John Tyler, who was the State Republican Committee man at the time from Bartlesville, he was an oilman, I think probably knew before Daddy did. He would show up, oddly enough, after church in Perry, Oklahoma, just passing through and take us all to the Dairy Queen for lunch. And he would tell the three of us stories about the old dead elephant that was lying in the middle of the road, and somebody needed to come along and save it and bring it back to life. (Laughs) So he was a very good politician himself. I don t know how often he did that, but I do recall one instance of him taking us to lunch in Perry after church, telling us about this dead elephant that needed help. He was pretty clever. (Laughter) Once the decision was made and the campaign started, do you want to talk a little bit about ? Campaigning? Yes, campaigning at that age? Campaigning was well, it had to be a lot of work for Mother, but it was pretty fun for us. Although, it did get a little boring from time to time. The election was November 3, 1962, so I m sure they were working for a good year. But our part of it did not happen until school was out, which would have been May of that year, May of 62. Prior to that, we d stay with my mother s parents, my grandparents, in Billings when they were out of town. They d either come out to the house or we d go in town and stay with them. The scenario was, that summer, the summer of 1962, that on Monday morning, we would get in the car, and we would have a plan. Somebody on the staff had made arrangements of where we were going to be. It sounds so novel, now, but we would get in the car, and we would drive to an area of the state, and Daddy would make speeches here or there or someplace. We were just along for the ride. Wherever they went, we went. He would make speeches. We did a lot in little towns, where we would pull into, say, Madill, Oklahoma. Mother would drop Daddy on 10 Main Street and he would go visit the radio station and the newspaper and the banker, and he would go to the caf and shake hands. I m Henry Bellmon and I m running for governor. That was his standard line. After she got him dropped off downtown, she would drop us in the residential areas with brochures in our hands, all three dressed alike, usually. We would ring the doorbell, and when whoever would come to the door, we would hand them this brochure and say, Please vote for my daddy. We did this, and then she d distribute us. I don t know whether she went with us a little bit or what, but she was the driver when we were in town. She d collect everybody back up, and we d head on to the next town. Sometimes there would be something called a two-party tea party. I don t know who came up with that phrase, but Daddy loved nicknames, so it was either he or Doc Jordan, I would presume. A two-party tea party was the very basic grassroots. You have to remember that he was a nobody. Nobody had heard of him. Republicans were out-registered by Democrats, either four-to-one or seven-to-one. It was losing odds, really. So the only way to get elected was to get your name out there. And the only way to get your name out there since they had no money, was just to go along and knock on doors and what they now call networking. It was the original networking as far as in my life. (Laughs) So somebody would say, I have a friend in Madill and she ll have a two-party tea party for you. She ll invite her neighbors and friends. So he would go we would go to these two-party tea parties, and we ate more cookies basically, we lived on cookies because we didn t have a lot of money. (Laughs) He would go to this person s house and they would have invited all their friends, and he d tell them what he thought he could do for the state of Oklahoma and how he could do it. He was such a shy person. He was innately shy. He would stand there with his hands crammed in his coat pocket, looking at the floor, talking. It just drove Mother crazy. (Laughs) She kept talking to him and trying to get him to look up and not cram his hands in his pockets. She thought, Well, I can t make him look up, but I can fix the pockets. So she sewed his pockets shut and didn t tell him. The next Monday morning, when he got ready to go and stuck his hands in his pockets, he couldn t get them in. (Laughs) And, of course, if you can t do this, then you kind of begin to look up a little bit more. So she was a subtle force in his political career and certainly, in his life. (Laughs) We would do this all week long. You d do the Rotary club luncheons and the two-party tea parties and knock on doors and try to get in the newspaper or on the radio. We d just do that until Saturday night when we d wind our way back to the farm, and we d go to church in Perry on Sunday. And Mother would do the laundry and repack us, 11 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne and we d take off again on Monday morning. What kind of car? Oh, we had an old brown Dodge station wagon for a long time. I think that s probably what it was. There was no staff, there was no entourage, there was no security. Didn t need any of that. (Laughs) Stayed at hotels or camp, or what? Stayed in people s homes and hotels. Two homes three homes I remember really well. In Sapulpa, we got to stay with the Franks, Joe Frank, Frankoma Pottery. They had made the tiles for their swimming pool. It was the neatest swimming pool. That was a big deal coming from Billings to even have a swimming pool, but it was a gorgeous swimming pool. We stayed with the Franks. In Oklahoma City, Hubert and Naomi Gragg had three teenage boys, and they also had a nephew, teenage nephew living with them. And we had three pre-teen and teenage girls. I think they must have given Mother and Daddy a key to their house or a secretary would call and say, Unlock the back door, because they had kind of rooms off their garage and bedroom, separate, and we would stay in their home. They had a lovely home, which is now in the middle of Edmond. It was at Danforth and something, I can t recall. The house is still there. I don t think it s owned by the family. We spent a lot of time coming and going out of the Gragg s home. I learned to limbo there. Their boys were rowdy and fun, and we had a great time. There was a doctor in Claremore. His name all the sudden flew out of my head. They had a daughter Ann s age, and we would stay with them. We just stayed with people, and we stayed in hotels, and we were always in a hurry. We were always late, always overbooked. And what would you eat or where would you? Oh, in restaurants and peanut butter crackers in the car. (Laughs) And toward the end of the summer, we got silly and we would make signs about how we d been kidnapped and, Please, come rescue us, and put them in the back window of the car. (Laughter) Luckily, then, nobody took that seriously. Now, it would probably end up with helicopters circling. (Laughter) We learned to do string tricks. Do you remember how you used to make things out of string? We d sit at the back of the room and learn how to do string tricks. One lady was real concerned that we were going to be a disturbance, and so she tried to keep our hands busy. She taught me how to tie bows. I m a great bow-tier to this day. We just spent a lot of time in the car. The towns were close together so 12 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne you could hit a lot of towns in a day without feeling like you d been in your car all day long. Any particular car games or conversations in the car? Oh, bingo. We had those auto bingo cards. Daddy slept when he would drive, and so we would sing to him and poke him in the back. Mostly, it was just keeping him awake, telling stories. Now, having had a child, I can t imagine having a ten, eleven, and thirteen year old girl in a car for a summer. We must have just been really hard to keep happy. I don t remember a lot of bickering or fighting or screaming. (Laughs) I m sure it happened, but I just don t remember it. And probably not air conditioned either. Oh, no. This is 1962 so there s no air conditioning. Not at home, either, when you got there. So you were just as happy when election time came, to have it over with? It was kind of fun. None of my friends had seen that much of the state. You got to meet a lot of people. I don t think we really knew what was happening or what was about to happen to us. I remember election night very well, or parts of it. It was all kind of exciting, but we just could not have known what was coming our way. They may not have known, either, really. I m pretty sure they didn t know. (Laughs) Daddy used to tell the story about calling Raymond Gary after he got elected, the next day or the next week, saying, Now what do I do? I don t think that s uncommon. I d heard stories that Bill Clinton and Al Gore had the same sense of, Oh, my gosh We won, now what do we do? Do you remember first walking into the mansion, the governor s mansion? What you were thinking? I don t remember. I remember a lot about the mansion, but I don t remember my very first visit. There s a tradition that still, I think, still happens today, and that is that the outgoing First Lady invites the incoming First Lady or in this case, now, the First Gentleman to come to the mansion for the tour and talk about life there and give them share the experience so they can come as prepared as possible. We had an odd thing happen when we moved in. Bob Kerr U.S. senator died on the first of January, in 1963. James Howard 13 Edmondson was the governor. He wanted to be appointed to Bob Kerr s seat, but he couldn t appoint himself so he resigned as governor, moved out of the mansion. George Nigh was lieutenant governor, he was a bachelor. The inauguration was January 10th so he was the governor for nine or ten days. Then he appointed James Howard Edmondson, who went to Washington for the completion of Bob Kerr s term. George Nigh moved into the mansion, and then we came ten days later. Flash forward to 1986, George Nigh is governor again. (Laughs) They were very gracious and moved out a month or a week or two ahead of time and left the mansion available, because at that point, all of us were grown and married and had children. On inaugural weekend of 1987, we got to come back and stay at the mansion with our children. It was a wonderful time and a very gracious thing of the Nighs to do. So back to the mansion in 1962, it was a big house to me. We each had our own room. Mine had lots of closets because I was the clothes horse of the family. I had had the smallest room at the farm so I got to pick my room. I picked the one with all closets. Jeanne Edmondson had been there just prior to me. She even left a pair of shoes behind, we discovered one day. The mansion was just a lot of fun. There was a small staff at that time. It was a very relaxed thing. Polly was the cook, Willie was the housekeeper, Willie Schranz. Then there were guards. (Laughs) Guards, who were state capitol police, and they had a little desk on the north entrance to the mansion. There was not a separate guard shack or a separate entrance. The gates would just be flung open. There were two gates, kind of a round drive or a half circle drive-through. They would be flung open in the morning. And I m not sure they ever got locked at night. I mean, it was very relaxed. Mother, at some point, decided to hire med-students and law-students from OU for the night shifts. I think she wanted some younger people in the house, probably for us so they ended up being like big brothers to us. And we still have contact. Before Daddy became governor, James Howard Edmondson reserved a spot at the New York World s Fair in Flushing, New York, but they had not gone so far as to actually make plans for this booth or spot. So one of the first things he ended up doing when he first got to be governor was to find somebody to create a display for Oklahoma. They wanted to try to dissipate the idea that Oklahoma was desert and dry and hot and dusty so they built a pond in the shape of Oklahoma and that was their exhibit. They built it so they would encourage people who were at the World s Fair to sit on the edge of the pond and dangle their feet in it. Somebody came and sold fried chicken. It was a fried chicken franchise from Oklahoma. I can t remember what it was. 14 Finchum Wynne Doc Jordan was in charge of this. He and his wife, Judy, moved to New York for the span of the World s Fair. We visited once or twice. I remember it being green with a lot of water. Chris Horton, on Daddy s staff, interviewed young college men. And I don t know why they were all men, there should have been some girls involved in that. That wasn t like Daddy at all. (Laughs) But they were it was 1963, I guess young college men, to be what they called, Sooner guides. They would spend the summer up there telling people about Oklahoma, helping people. It was just a very fun, positive sort of image builder for Oklahoma. Some of those Sooner guides then came home and went to law school, and Mother hired them as guards at the mansion. Some of them then ended up on staff. They re still family friends. Lee Paden, Charlie Waters were on staff. There s another guy whose name I can t think of. Corky Butler, who is from Tulsa, went to medical school. He became a doctor, kind of lost track of him. We had Skip Beasley, who was from Perry. He was from our church in Perry, was a guard at the mansion. We had all kinds of fun. Anybody who went on staff or worked for my parents in their political life became a second family. So we had these young med students and law students running around the house, who were no more qualified to protect a flea than they were anything. They did have a gun, which was really kind of scary, that they kept under the desk. (Laughs) It was very different than it is now. Even when we went back in 1986, the security was It all kind of actually began to change when we were there when Kennedy was shot. That day, they didn t know, apparently, if it was a conspiracy to overthrow the whole government, or if it was a single shooter that day. When we came home from school that day, there was an FBI agent that had moved into the house. He stayed for about a week until we just couldn t take him anymore, and Daddy called and said, We re done. (Laughs) At that point, I think they had pretty much figured out that it was not a conspiracy. That probably was the beginning of the change. Did the guards act as chauffeurs, too, for you girls? Yes, yes, and we did everything we could to embarrass them. They took us to school, and Ann took dance lessons out (Laughs) Some of the things we did now would be really considered bad. We did this to Lee Paden. He would describe going out to the fairgrounds where Ann took dance lessons from Yvonne Chouteau , a well-known Oklahoma ballerina. Since it was at the fairgrounds, it quite a ways away so he would just wait for the hour. He would sit in the room with all the dance mothers, who were reading or knitting or something. He would have his briefcase, because he would study while he was there. One day, we 15 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne decided to stick our underwear in his briefcase so that when he opened his briefcase in front of all these mothers he would be embarrassed and he was. (Laughter) We were mischievous, but not dangerous, I would say. Did that make it to your father? I don t know. I don t remember getting in trouble with it. He laughed and they were really good sports, and they gave it back. I don t honestly know how much Mother and Daddy knew about some of the things they did while they were not there, harassing each other. But they ve ended up being lifelong friends. They were like big brothers, because we didn t have any big brothers. I understand you had a dachshund for a while? Ann had a dachshund. I think it was the very first Christmas that we were there, we did a television show for OETA, kind of a Meet the governor s family thing. Somebody asked Ann what she wanted for Christmas and she said a dog. There was one on the door by the time we got home. (Laughs) Daddy named it Tandem because he thought he needed an extra set of legs. And he did, so. Tandem was with us for quite awhile. We really didn t have many pets growing up on the farm. They just weren t part of our life so Tandem was our first real dog. Since you were involved in 4-H on the farm, did that continue when you went to the capitol? Yes, it did. We belonged to the Oklahoma County 4-H Club and did all the same things. Went to camp, and Pat may have gone to Washington on the citizenship program, but she and I both did a people-to-people tour and were district officers. I mean, we followed it all the way to college. We did can a lot of pickles while we lived in the governor s mansion. (Laughs) Was your father very involved with any of those activities? No, it was mostly Mother. Mother was determined, whether we were at the farm or in Oklahoma City, that we would all have dinner together, period. That might mean at a normal six, six-thirty, or it might be ten o clock. But we kept dinner for Daddy to get home. He just worked a lot, even when he was farming or when he was governor. He worked a lot so the running of the household and all that kind of thing, which I think is probably pretty typical for that era, it was Mother s domain. The press was very friendly, then. I think it was not just us, I think it was 16 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne just a different nature of the press. The first thing I remember us doing kind of publicly was after school one day we came home, and The Oklahoman was there to take a picture of us getting our polio vaccine. There was a silver tray with a little cloth doily and sugar cubes that had the polio vaccine. Remember when we did polio vaccines on sugar cubes? It was an oral vaccine at that point. They took a picture of all of us eating the sugar cubes, which I didn t really understand until recently when I interviewed some women in their eighties and nineties, who talk about the polio years and how frightening it was as a mother of young children, to have this disease out there that they didn t know how it was transmitted. One lady said, I learned to play bridge during polio summers. Her mother wouldn t let her go outside, but she taught her how to play bridge. The vaccine was probably new and a little bit scary so I think it was probably a big deal that the governor and his wife trusted this vaccine enough for their children. It was an example sort of thing. It was a big thing, I m sure, to mother since Pat had had polio. On a silver tray. On a silver tray, by cracky, which we were not accustomed to. (Laughs) Well, at homework time, would she help or he help or didn t need any help? Oh, I m sure I needed help, especially with math. Mother probably didn t help me with math, it was probably Daddy. (Laughs) I would say we helped each other and probably just depending on the subject. What were some of the conversations around the dinner table? Was it politics always or just totally different? No, not always politics. But we did linger at the table and talk about what everybody was doing. Daddy would just like to tell stories. Like most World War II veterans, he didn t talk about the war until much, much later in life. But they would talk about their travels, they traveled a lot. They would just talk about people and family, just normal sorts of conversations. There wasn t a lot of political talk about what was happening. That was as separate, in my memory, sort of thing. Now, we did act as Mother s kitchen help. One of the things they attempted to do I think this is how it happened early on because the legislature was so heavily Democratic they knew if they were going to get anything accomplished, they had to find some common ground with the Democrats, and that was most everybody. (Laughs) So they would have legislative dinners, I don t know how often, but frequently. The table would seat fourteen or sixteen people so they would have fourteen 17 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne or sixteen during this session. They would have these people to dinner on a pretty regular basis. They would rotate through the whole legislature to invite them to the mansion. My memory was that it didn t include spouses, that it was just the legislators. We would serve those dinners. We would serve from the right, take from the left. (Laughs) We were the kitchen help. Those would happen on school nights. We cleaned our own rooms. When President Obama went in and they made a big deal out of Michelle Obama saying that the girls were going to clean their own rooms, I thought, Good for her, because that s what happened to me. (Laughs) It worked out just fine, even though we had help to do everything else. We cleaned our own rooms, and we did the dishes, and we served the meals. It was good experience for us. Did your mother continue to sew when she was ? Oh, yes. And we sewed for 4-H dress revue. We would put three or four sewing machines on the dining room table and cut out patterns. It was a different use of the room than it probably had before. But we did all that. We did monthly oh, what were they called? They were monthly Sunday afternoon receptions. There was no tour of the mansion, then. The mansion wasn t in great shape, then, either. We would have little cookies and punch receptions for so many counties, each month. Somebody in the office organized that. There was a reporter named Neil Schull who would cover them. I m assuming he was with The Oklahoman, but I don t know. He may have been with a TV or radio station. But he would come every Sunday that we had a reception and fill his pockets full of cookies. We got cookies from Camp s Bakery that were the best little cookies, and he liked them too. (Laughter) So if you were twelve when you got there, you would have learned how to drive, maybe, while you were there? Ah, yes. You ve talked to Lee Paden, haven t you? (Laughs) Just a little. Yes, I learned how to drive while I was there. I turned sixteen about a month before we left so I learned how to drive. The guards taught me how to drive, mostly Lee. He still has the scars to prove it. I jumped the curb and headed for the fence. I took driver s-ed. I had class in one summer. My big memory of taking the test was I was parallel parking and I was about to I guess at that time, if you brushed the curb while you were parallel parking, they had to automatically flunk you for the whole test. I was just about to hit the curb, and the trooper reached over and grabbed my arm and said, Stop He said, You re going to hit the curb. And if you do that I have to flunk you, and I really don t want to flunk you. (Laughter) So we renegotiated the parallel parking, and I passed the test. It was good. 18 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Let s fast forward a couple years when it was time for you to vote for your first time. Was there a discussion around that? Like, what your party affiliation was going to be? No, it was just kind of an assumption. I don t know if that s true for my sisters, but it was for me. I was at OSU then. Back then, you couldn t vote until you were eighteen. Is that right? No, twenty-one. It may have been twenty-one. Twenty-one. I think it was twenty-one, and so I would have not been able to vote until I was married. Or I could ve registered right before I got married because I got married just after turning twenty-one. It was all kind of happening at once, but I don t remember any conversation. I don t think there was a conversation, just, Go register. It probably really didn t matter as long as you did your civic duty, maybe? Yes. I don t know. I don t know. My dad didn t register his father registered him as a Republican when he was gone at the war, I think, or in college. One or the other. It wasn t that he had this big soul searching, read the platforms and come to a conclusion independently. His father did it for him. (Laughs) His father was a Kansas Republican, and he just assumed his son would want to be. Did he register George, too? He had three other sons. I don t know what he did. Daddy was the oldest so he may have if they were not at home at that moment. Even though I m not wild about the direction and some of the things that the party stands for now, I still am a strong believer in the basic tenants of the Republican Party. So I think it was where I needed to be. Then I guess we should back up and say, do you remember actually moving out of the mansion? Oh, yes. It was a very sad day. I had cried when we left Billings going to Oklahoma City. We d cried all the way to Oklahoma City because we were going to miss our friends, and it was big and scary and we didn t know what we were doing. And I cried all the way home four years later so I must have been happy both places. (Laughs) But there was some publicity, and there s a picture of all of us with our suitcases walking down the stairs of the mansion. It happened that the semester ended about two weeks after the inauguration day. 19 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne A woman named Kathy Christie, who was my mother s social secretary, had lived in the garage apartment on the mansion grounds most of the time Daddy had been governor. She was a general s daughter. She was very worldly by our standards and she was single. There had been a murder in Oklahoma City, Judith File had been murdered in a neighborhood that Kathy lived in where all the rooftops almost touched. My dad was real concerned about Kathy living there alone so we picked her up the weekend after that murder and moved her to the garage apartment there on the mansion grounds. At least that s my memory of it. She was kind of our big glamorous sister. When Mother and Daddy would travel she was there close by so it worked out well. She was going to stay on for a little while when the Bartlett s moved in. We just moved from the house over to Kathy s apartment, Ann and I did, for the two weeks to finish class for the end of the semester, and then we moved home. It was very traumatic. I wouldn t recommend doing that because you re watching someone else move into your house, in very close proximity. It was tough. We were glad they were there. We had helped them get elected. It was just hard to go over and get your mail every day. It was hard to leave. Then we moved back to the farm, and I had kept contact with childhood friends. It was the middle of my sophomore year and we knew that Daddy was probably going to run for Senate. And if I kept on my normal track, we would be moving to Washington in the middle of my senior year of high school. So once we got back to the farm, the next fall, I took my junior and senior years of high school in one year and graduated a year early. I went to college when I was seventeen way too young. (Laughs) And that was OSU? That was OSU. And Daddy was running for the Senate that fall. Did you get to help campaign some for that? Oh, yes. We did. We did. We did parades, homecoming parades. (Laughs) I did some on weekends. I didn t, of course, do as much because I was in school that fall, but yes, we campaigned quite a bit that first Senate campaign. Did you graduate from OSU four years later, or did you finish in three years? No, three and a half. (Laughter) Once he got elected that fall, Ann was going to Washington. She was in high school. She was going to Washington with them, and they wanted me to go. Nixon had just been 20 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne elected president and Daddy had been, early on, chairman of that campaign. There was a lot going to be going on. They thought it would be a good experience so I left OSU and went to George Mason College for a semester. It was only about two years old. It is George Mason University now. It s a division of the University of Virginia. We got to go up there, and we did the inaugural, and we did a lot of receptions and things like that for a semester and a summer, and then I came back to OSU the fall of my sophomore year. You graduated when and with what? I graduated in December of 1971 with a degree in home economics with apparel design being the focus. Did you happen to live in Murray like your mother did? No, I lived in Wentz. We all three lived in Wentz. I was president of Wentz Hall. They actually had a petition to get me not to be president of Wentz Hall. I haven t thought about that in years. (Laughter) Okay, this would have been like 1968, 1969, and they were trying to loosen the visitation standards so that there wasn t visitation the dorms were just, like they are now, wide open all the time. A lot of women in our hall said, I don t want to lose that much privacy, and so I was one of the officers that said, No, we don t want to do that. It was not a popular stance amongst some people, and they ended up loosening them, but not totally unrestricting them for a while, at least. It s very different now. Very different, yes. Actually, the physical plants weren t prepared to handle a rapid change. There were no swiping cards or things like that. One of the daughters, I m not sure who was telling this story, that they had one of the guards, student guards, had come to pick up someone from OSU and had used the lights and sirens and all that stuff, was that you? (Laughter) Pat. They purposely embarrassed Pat, yes. I mean, it was obvious people knew that our dad was the governor , but you didn t flout it around a lot. I think it was probably Lee or Charlie that came in in a limousine, lights flashing, into the parking lot of Wentz Hall. Pat was not happy. Payback or something. Yes. (Laughter) Yes, they had a long period of payback. But they could do that. It had to have been Pat because it was when Daddy was 21 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne governor, and she was there her freshman year. His last term in office, she was a freshman at OSU. They got her good. So you spent a little time in DC. I spent that semester and then the next two summers in DC, and I worked at the Interior Department for one of the under secretaries. It was fun. I think it s still true that there are a lot of interns in all these congressional offices in the summer. There d be like Oklahoma intern gatherings, so you d get to see all the kids from Oklahoma or Kansas, interns. And they d have softball teams that would play each other. Do you remember much about the issues that your father had to deal with there? They were big issues. Well, I think some of them were historic. I remember the Equal Rights Amendment was probably his first controversial vote. I don t know whether it or busing came first, but forced busing and Equal Rights Amendment were both votes he made based on information and conscious, but not on polls. His stance was not particularly popular at that time in Oklahoma. Now, they would seem matter of fact, I would think. Not busing, but the Equal Rights Amendment, for sure. But he had three daughters. He was very much for the Equal Rights Amendment. His mother had been a teacher. He understood he was very much for equal rights for everyone. Those two votes, I think, pointed that out. It was not anything that he could be swayed on. He knew that God had created everybody equal, and they weren t being treated that way. Would he bring this type of work home to the house in DC to discuss it around the table? No. Oh, we talked about it, but to my way of thinking, he didn t bring a lot of work home. He kept odd hours by Oklahoma City or Washington s standards. He was a very, very early riser. And you have to remember, when he was in Washington it was an hour earlier still in Oklahoma. (Laughs) So he might call you at four or five in the morning. That was a pretty standard affair when we were in college and when John and I were first married. (Laughs) It took John a long time to get used to that. The summers that I worked in Washington, I would ride into work with him, and we would leave at four because he didn t like traffic. He drove or you drove? One of us would drive in or Ann or whoever was there. We would all 22 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne drive in in the car, and we would leave at four. Especially when we lived the first place, Fairfax, which was way out. That avoided all traffic, remarkably so. He would drop me off at the Interior Department, and I would go to the bathroom and fix my hair and put on my makeup, and then I d go to the cafeteria and have breakfast, and then I d go to work. (Laughs) He would have gone on to the capitol and started making phone calls and working. His staff was such that his administrative had two administrative assistants, and one would take the early shift and one would take the late shift. That s how they covered him through that time. Or at least that s my memory. I would leave the Interior Department at four or five or whatever my time was and ride the bus home back out to Fairfax. He would come home about and he would wait until after traffic was gone. He really had a thing about traffic in Washington. (Laughs) He would wait until the traffic would die down, and then they d head home. Drew and Janet Mason lived very close to the Fairfax neighborhood. I don t know whether they carpooled at some point or what, but he would come home at six or seven and we d eat dinner and he d go to bed. He was always early up and early back to sleep. It also, I think, when people would call, he was done. If you d been there by four or five in the morning, by eight o clock at night, you were done. People would call the house for him and we d say, Nope, he s gone to bed, and they wouldn t believe us, I m sure. So there weren t a lot of long evenings. Mother and Daddy early on did some social things, but they were not some place every night at all. It was pretty quiet. Would she get up that early and fix breakfast for him? I don t remember her doing that. (Laughs) No, I don t think so. She would fix breakfast, but I don t think she did it that early. She wasn t a great sleeper either, at times, so she might be up. Was she still sewing at that time, making clothes for herself and things? Oh, yes. She sewed to the end of her life, yes. In 86, she made her inaugural ball gown. She sewed all along. She made clothes for our boys when they were little. She was consistent with that for sure. I don t recall a lot of political conversations, but we must have had them or else you just get a lot of it by osmosis. I don t remember great debates. I remember a lot of questions. Daddy is probably one of the two most curious people I ve ever known. I once went with him to tour an Easter egg grass factory. I could think of one question, How many colors does it come in? and maybe two questions What do you do after Easter? 23 Finchum Wynne Well, an hour and a half later, he knows what every sprocket and pulley I mean, I couldn t imagine there would be that many questions about Easter egg grass. He was very curious and really, a good thinker. But he wasn t one that had to be I mean, he, like many people in his generation, had an innate sense of right and wrong. You just did what you knew was right. If it was a thing that was beneficial to you, great. If it was harmful to you, so be it. That group of people or that generation, really, didn t have to question a lot. They kind of knew. I don t know whether it was World War II, the Depression, they lived through a lot, and they experienced a lot. When he did begin to talk about the war World War II at the end of his life, you could then see how it affected his entire life, that experience. Did you get to do that very often? There was a book that came out probably ten or twelve years ago or more than twelve years ago, called Flags of our Fathers. It was written by a man named James Bradley, and his father was one of the men who raised the flag on Iwo Jima. This author had gone back and found the families of all the other people. There was some controversy about the first time it went up and the second time it went up and two different groups of people. Because Daddy was on Iwo, then he began to talk about it. He had shared his war experience with us in a very unusual way. I had forgotten to mention this. When Mother and Daddy got married, they didn t smoke and they didn t drink. When they started having kids, Daddy said, I want to take my family back to Maui, where he was stationed during World War II. So they came up with a savings scheme which was to figure out how much money they didn t spend by not drinking and not smoking. They put it in coins in those little blue cardboard envelopes. Remember those? (Laughs) And they saved money that way. And they bought savings bonds for our college. In 1959 just before Pat turned thirteen and had to pay full fare, they booked a trip to Hawaii, back to Maui. We got in the car and drove from Billings to Los Angeles, to L.A. Harbor. We got on the SS Matsonia and traveled by sea to Honolulu, which is amazing because nobody gets more seasick than my father. At one point, he was on a navy carrier for twenty-six days, and he threw up for twenty-six days. So the mere fact that he wanted us to have this ocean liner experience was a true act of love, because he was sick the whole time. (Laughs) We flew then from Honolulu over to Maui. He had contacted some of his friends, and they had made arrangements to rent a house. Now, this is a farmer from Noble County. This was not some grand 24 European vacation. This was a barebones sort of operation. They had found us a house to rent on the side of Haleakala. We left L.A. Harbor on November 13th, which was a Friday he said his father never would have gotten on that boat on Friday the 13th and stayed until New Year s. We went to school there, and they found Daddy a teaching job, which fell through after we got there. So they cashed in all of our college savings bonds while we were there. (Laughs) We lived and went to school in Hawaii for about six weeks, and we met the people who had been so kind to all the marines during the war. At one point, there was a doctor who raised orchids. And this may have been my real first love for flowers, where it s rooted in. But he had a greenhouse full of orchids, and he let the three of us and Mother walk through there and pick as many orchids as we wanted, and we made our own leis. It was just unbelievable. It was so gorgeous. We got to meet some of the same people that had been on that island and that had lived there. The marines were, literally, camped in an open park-like thing. It s a marine memorial now. I ve been back with Daddy. He took Elliott and me back a few years ago. The families would have them into their homes and entertain the marines, and they dated their daughters, and a lot of them were Japanese, have Japanese lineage, that lived on Maui, along with the natives. Daddy said even at the age of twenty-four or twenty-two, whatever he was when he was on Maui, that these people were so gracious to them and welcoming and caring, and they were Japanese. And then you would get on a boat and travel for a month, and the mission was to kill Japanese. He wrote in his book, and he said it very often, that it became apparent to him at that time that wars were not between people, they were between governments. If there was ever a time that he could do anything to improve the way the governments dealt with other governments, that he would get involved. So even though he came back from the war anxious to farm, his die was pretty much cast. We got to go back and have that experience and take hula lessons. And there was a friend of mine that I was in school with named Koalani Han, whose mother, Elizabeth Han, was our hula teacher. Her dad, John, worked for the phone company. After we got home and Daddy pretty quickly got into politics, Daddy decided it would be fun in the summer of 1962 to have Koalani come and hula dance during the campaign. (Laughs) So these people who had known this man for six weeks in 1959, put their twelve-year-old daughter on an airplane in Honolulu and flew her to Oklahoma City, and she lived with us all that summer. She was the fourth girl in the car. I d forgotten about Koalani. She campaigned most of that summer. She would put on her hula skirt and hula dance on the back of the truck and campaign. And she had no idea 25 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne what she was coming into. She d never been off the island. Then they sent her home at the end of the summer. Daddy tells the story about her coming back for the inauguration. And when she got off the plane she had a carnation lei around her neck. And it was so cold when she stepped off the plane in Oklahoma City back when they had the stairs that they pulled up to the plane that her carnation lei immediately froze and wilted. (Laughter) She didn t have a coat. I mean, she had no idea what the weather would be like. We have really good memories of that brief period of time, but it was the commitment on their part to share that part of his life with him, which turned out to be the life changing moment. It had its embarrassing moments because when we got home, Mother and Daddy decided it would be fun if we would since we were such professional hula dancers, if we would hula dance for Rotary clubs. So we had our little hula outfits and I still have my ipu, which is the gourd, and my sticks. I don t have my hula skirt. They booked us at the Rotary club or Lions clubs in Tonkawa and Ponca City or Perry, and I don t think we ever came to Enid, and we would hula dance. There s a great picture at the farm Years later when we were at the New York World s Fair, there was hula dancing and Daddy told the people in charge that his wife and daughters knew how to hula dance, and we would love to get on stage and do it. (Laughs) There s a picture of us, and we re teenagers and terribly embarrassed. And I was having the worst hair day of my life, and we re up on this stage hula dancing. And Mother looks over and sticks her tongue out at Daddy just as the guy takes the picture. So there s this wonderful picture of mother sticking her tongue out at Daddy. (Laughter) That was our hula lineage from six weeks in 1959. (Laughs) Was there payback for that? Yes. (Laughs) It was fun. But it was an important part of his life, and so he got to share it with his whole family. We all remember it very well. Maui in 1959 was without hotels. It was gorgeous, sacred beaches that were untouched. Mother picked up crates of seashells, and she shipped them back home. I mean, crates well, what seemed like crates. It was probably one box. She was a big beachcomber. We still have those things. Probably the furthest she d been away from home at that point. Oh, I m sure. At that point, I m sure. She got to go around the world, but at that point, that was a big trip. And it was. 26 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Were they glad to be coming back to Oklahoma after having been in DC for what, twelve years, I guess? They were. They made a lot of good friends. They got to see a lot of the world and experience and participate, but Daddy liked being governor a lot more than being senator. His famous quote about being in the Senate was he likened it to watching a stump rot, that it moved so slowly and took such effort to get anything done. He would be crazy if he were there now. (Laughs) He would just not be able to do it. But the governorship, you could see progress a lot quicker. They did have good friends. Their political service was at a real interesting time, I think, with the leadership and maybe everybody who s interviewed in a situation like that thinks the same thing. But when he was governor in the 60s, the other governors were John Conley of Texas, George Wallace of Alabama, Nelson Rockefeller from New York, Romney from Michigan, Mitt Romney s father, a guy named Bill Scranton from Pennsylvania who ran for president, Orville Faubus, all the southern guys. When you go see the movie The Help, when they talk about Ross Barnett, well, he was there. (Laughs)There was a man named Ferris Bryant, who was the governor of Florida. There were really, really interesting people. And when he was in the Senate, Everett Dirkson, it was at the end of Everett Dirkson s time. Everett Dirkson is from Tennessee. Howard Baker was actually Everett Dirkson s son-in-law. Bob Dole was from Kansas, they went to the Senate at the same time. Fritz or Ernest Hollings from South Carolina. They just had an awful lot of good friends Sam Nunn, from Georgia many of whom were Democrats. I think he had learned early on in Oklahoma City, when he was governor the first time, that you don t accomplish anything by just fighting all the time. His nature was reconciliatory anyway so he had a lot of friends all over the map. Rubbed elbows with a lot of people. He did. He knew a lot of people, and he never looks in pictures totally comfortable, but I think he was. He never got slick. There s a story, and I should ve looked it up in his book, but it is probably the funniest story from his entire political career. There was a man who bought Oklahoma Highway Bonds named Jim I ll think of it in a minute. He, from time to time, as governor, would have to go to New York and call on the people who bought the bonds to make sure they would continue to buy bonds so that we could continue to build highways and things like that. I cannot remember it all, Ann probably remembers it better. He was also going hunting with a guy named Peter Flannigan, who had been active in Richard Nixon s first presidential campaign where Daddy was chairman. He had gotten to know Peter Flannigan really well, and Peter was a Wall 27 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Street investment banker, I think. He had invited him up for the weekend and while he was there Jim Abrams, he went to see Jim Abrams with the bond company. He decided to take him a gift. For some reason, he picked a jar of honey. So he s walking into a Wall Street Bank with a gun and a jar of honey, trying to negotiate the turnstile. The honey doesn t make it. He drops the honey. (Laughs) So he s stuck in a turnstile with glass and honey and a shotgun, trying to get upstairs to thank Jim Abrams for the people in the state of Oklahoma. The security guards go just a little crazy, and they finally get those things when they slide it was just sliding honey and glass all over the floor. He made a huge mess inside some big office building on Wall Street, and that was his impression as governor. But Jim Abrams and he were friends for a long time, as were Peter Flannigan. He would end up in high places, but he always took a little bit of the farm with him along the way. (Laughs) Was your mother still sewing his pockets closed at that time? No, he got over that. I think she only had to do that for a short period of time. (Laughter) The staff would try to dress him so that he would look good if he had to be on one of the national talk shows or something. Dapper was not his thing. I have somewhere in a letter where he talks about meeting Nikita Kruchev and Anwar Sadat in two different trips abroad. Mostly, they both talked about farming. He met a lot of famous and important people, but he always remained true to who he was. That always interested people. I guess there s a big lesson in that, too. Ordinary, but extraordinary at the same time. Yes it was, for a kid who grew up with absolutely nothing. He told me one time, he said, You realize, I never ran for student class president or He said, I was never an officer for anything in high school or college. He believed that anybody, if they desired it, could grow up to lead and to be a leader. He really wanted to encourage people, young people, to get into government service. He didn t think that it was something that he was born to, necessarily. But it happened in his life and he went forward with it. It seems like every person who crossed paths with him, he impacted in one way or another. He did. Very subtly, he truly did. There will be people who spend a long time with him working for him as a staff, and there will be the people who went to cardiac rehab with him the last five years of his life. I have people walk up to me at the grocery store and say, Did you know your 28 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne dad did this? And you didn t. This is what he did for me. Even until the end, he kept connected and interested. I help with an afterschool tutoring program for kids that need a little extra oomph in their lives, and Daddy was a tutor for several years. When he died two years ago, he was at the capitol on a Friday. His casket was there. I looked up and here came the kid that he had tutored all those years. His mother had taken him out of school and brought him down to say goodbye. What did he remember about Daddy? That he gave him a red model racecar for Christmas one year. (Laughs)That s what he remembered then. He ll remember more later on. So he touched immeasurable lives. They both did, Mother and Daddy both did. They were lucky. They had a pretty good life that took them where they least expected when they started out. But that s okay. That s fun. Did they have some conversations between the capitol and Billings? Conversations? In the car, like traveling back and forth when heading from the capitol to the ? Oh, yes. We went back to church a lot to Perry so there was always conversation, but it was probably more about farming than politics. Probably what he wanted to do. My son helped him farm for oh, he started his first summer over there after the eighth grade, I think, and stayed off and on. Not every summer because he did some other things, but he really cherishes the years that he spent the summers on the farm with Mother and Daddy, just riding around, listening in the pickup, checking cattle, and watching wheat grow. The stories that Daddy and Mother told them about politics and about the farm and about the war, and just your really rich, two-generational conversation, with the generation in the middle missing, which is important. If the parents don t get out of the way then sometimes that connection between grandparent and grandchild can t be made. There was no way to be in the middle with that relationship, Elliott and his grandparents. (Laughs) He was fortunate that we lived nearby. He was the only grandson that always no, Will Pat s son was nearby. But Ann s boys, Brok and Ben, lived on the East Coast much of the time. They re very close, but Elliott spent so much time with them that his relationship is a little bit different than the other boys. He was lucky and realizes that. Having traveled that road, his political road, with him, do you have a couple of things that you d like him to be remembered for? Like his legacy, what s his legacy for Oklahoma, as well as in DC? I guess there are different kinds of legacy. There s legislative legacy. 29 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne And in Oklahoma, his legislative legacy, his big one, comes from his second term and that s House Bill 1017, the Education Reform Act, which was at that time the biggest education reform in the country as far as class size and bumping teacher pay and expectations. It s pretty much been undone twenty years later, at this point. Class sizes are back up and teacher pay is still kind of hovering in the lower numbers. But people still talk about 1017. There s a woman in town who was on the taskforce that helped create the bill. That really is probably his biggest and most well known legacy. But if you look at his first term, he started the State Arts Council, he started Career Tech, but at that time it was known as the VoTech Center. I ve forgotten some of the things. He started the equal women s commission. I ve forgotten the name of the women s commission. Commission on the Status of Women? Commission on the Status of Women. There were a lot of things that happened, and balanced budgets. There were a lot of things that happened in that first term. Didn t he do something with highway systems or turnpikes or something? Yes, I m sure I don t recall turnpikes, but I m sure Hubert Gragg can tell you all about that at some point. As far as nationally, his three big votes three most controversial votes were forced busing, Equal Rights Amendment, and probably the most controversial thing thanks to Ed Gaylord and his newspaper and they were very good friends was the Panama Canal vote, which he defended until the day he died. He truly believed that if the Panama Canal Treaty had not been signed that we would have been in a war. We had just come out of Vietnam. He did not see that that was reason for war. He had had some briefings, some intelligence briefings, that had convinced him of that, that the general public, of course, wasn t privy to. It was kind of a joke at the end of their lives. He and Ed Gaylord remained friends until Ed died. And Ed and Thelma Gaylord and Mother and Daddy were good friends, but they never agreed on that one point. That s kind of the culmination of their lives. You don t have to agree 100 percent down the road to have friends. As a matter of fact, it s kind of more interesting if you have some differences. We don t all have to be exactly alike. He understood and respected the differences in human beings, greatly. I think a lot of it came from his mother. I think his mother, who I never knew and who I spent a good part of my life looking for trying to figure out, Okay, if she is what he says she is, then why is he like this? and those kinds of things that you go through in 30 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum your thirties and forties. His mother was a huge impact on his life. I didn t know her, but she had a sister, Beth Zimmerman. Beth Caskey was their maiden name. Beth Caskey-Zimmerman, who was my great-aunt in Billings growing up, who was the closest as I came to knowing her. She had a huge impact on his life, a very kind and gentle and loving schoolteacher, who married Mr. Bellmon when he had nine children, and then they had four boys in about five or six years after that. She also had guts. (Laughs) I think it was a fairly frantic household. Had some organizational skills, too. Yes, she was a school teacher, so she knew what she was doing with a bunch of kids. I think a lot of the nine kids were already gone. They were mostly girls and a lot of them were quite a bit older. He was very close to his mother. As a matter of fact, she died while he was gone, while he was in the Pacific. We have dozens of letters of him trying to get home, the Red Cross trying to help him get home. After Iwo Jima, they brought the marines back to Maui and they sat there for a long time. It was during that time that she was dying from leukemia, and he was trying to get home, and they wouldn t release him. I think they didn t know for sure how close the end of the war was. He was not happy about it. We have a lot of correspondence between he and the Red Cross and the marines about trying to get him home before his mother died. She may have been the reason that he went on to OSU, Oklahoma A M, at the time? She may have been. If she was education driven? Yes, education was very important. He has had an older brother, Ervin, who was no, Daddy was the oldest. But he had started college, and he was the first in his family to go to college. His older sisters had become teachers, but at that time it didn t require a college education. So he was the first to go to college and Ervin was next. Ervin was the shining star. But the spring of his senior year, he was struck by lighting and killed. So he never, of course, got to go, but I think it was probably important to her that all those boys and they all did, Randall and George both went to college after that. Then we re almost to the point to where he s gotten out of the second term as governor, a couple of years pass by, maybe not that long, that he starts working for OSU, in his 70s? 31 Wynne Finchum Wynne He had a lot of energy. (Laughter) Curiosity, still. He had a lot of curiosity and he taught. He really liked teaching, but at some point Parkinson s kicked in. We don t know for sure when he got Parkinson s. He was diagnosed around 92 or 93. My suspicion is, based on his gait, that he probably had it toward the last part of the last term as governor, just by watching him. Mother kept talking about how, Your dad is walking like Mr. Bellmon walked. Then after Daddy was diagnosed, she told me that she thinks that he also probably had Parkinson s just because of the similarities in the gait. But one of the results of Parkinson s is you lose it s not just the large muscles in your body, but you lose control of small muscles including the muscles around your mouth and the words don t always come out. He became very frustrated that he could still think the thoughts, but he never knew if his words were going to come out while he was teaching. And that s when he quit teaching. I think he would have taught a lot longer. People who took his classes loved his classes. He wasn t a necessarily vain person, but as he aged, he really didn t like having his picture taken and he thought he had a difficult time with the words coming out. None of us ever felt like he did. Of course, we didn t know what was going through his head either. (Laughs) I think he would have stayed on campus and taught a lot longer had that not been because he went back for basketball games for years. He didn t just teach on campus. He helped to raise money for research and the Smart Bridge Project and he actually did the things that they re now doing at the Henry Bellmon Research Center, but it was at the very beginning stages. If the engineering department and the ag department were working on something and he happened to know about each of their projects because he was helping raise money for them, and they had a similarity, he would try to get them together. At least that s my understanding. General Goodbary can probably tell you a lot more. He worked a lot more with him. The fact that this building is named for him is just perfect. Joe Weaver, a former staffer, I guess is the person whose idea it was. When Burns Hargis called to tell us about it, he said, It s just a perfect match. Until I actually saw it and heard more about it recently, I didn t realize what a perfect match it was. He always saw the big picture, he always looked forward. So a place where a lot of people can gather and discuss their wild ideas and he had wild ideas. He was an idea person from the get-go. I can remember when I was a kid, him melting down our .45 records and something to do with the key off the sardine can and these 32 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne record albums. And he was trying to figure out how to get all the toothpaste out of the tube of toothpaste. I mean, he could have been an inventor had he not been distracted by other things. There was the innate curiosity and the problem solving skills. All those things work in government, as well as in science. Do you think he would be happy to know that the building was named after him? Oh, that gets a mixed review (Laughter) When he was living, he would not let anything be named for him. George Nigh tried forever to get something at UCO University of Central Oklahoma named for him, and I think George finally just did it without his permission. The only time he ever let anything be named after him was when he was pretty much pushed to the wall by people that knew him well. (Laughs) And he said, Okay, you can do it if you put Henry and Shirley Bellmon. That s the only and it was a stretch of highway, a little small stretch of highway. He would not be happy that a building bore his name, but he would be happy that this building bears his name. (Laughs) He would be happy about what s happening in the building, and it s very consistent with who he was. So it is a very good match. The people who work there ten years from now may not know that. I hope they do. It s kind of a difficult story to keep in the forefront of everyone s mind. But it s an excellent match, it truly is. It really is. Having the bronze statue there might help. Burns said they were going to look at a full-sized statue for the front of the building, too. That s the interesting thing about legacies. How do you, a generation from now or how do we, for a generation back, really understand who those people were and how who they were has impacted our lives. I think that s a difficult story to keep telling. It s an important story and certainly your project and historians projects help to do that. There will be people along the way who will be curious about him and figure it out. I think so, too. There will be so that s good. So the naming then is a good thing, even though he probably wouldn t have allowed it to happen. I know he wouldn t allow it to happen if he was still alive. (Laughs) Well, it goes with his interest in I mean, his curiosity and research. You can t have one without the other, really. It s the beginning of research, yes. I think it s great 33 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne that the university has honored him in that way. They truly understood who he was. He would have preferred Shirley and Henry, too, on that building? Yes, he probably would have. (Laughs) She was a creative sort in a whole different way. Yes, he would have liked it better if it had had both names. Hers might have to be in home-ec with sewing or design or something. Yes, they ve changed that department now. Human Services or Human Science. Human Developmental Science, something. Yes, hers would be in another area. He just was humble, and to have a bunch of stuff named after him enough time has gone by that there probably isn t going to be a lot of stuff named after him at this point. I thought there would be schools named after him, but enough time has gone by that it may not happen. I think this is a good honor, even though he wouldn t have allowed it if he had been here. And it being at his alma mater, too, helps. It s an appropriate place. It s kind of right in the heart of campus, too. So that s good. Is there anything else you want to add before we sign off? Favorite memory, do you have one or is there just too many? There are just too, too many. Last conversation? Oh, last conversation Maybe last political conversation? Last political conversation was a little current. I probably shouldn t share that on tape. (Laughs) Last conversation He was here, I had lunch with him. He had been to Oklahoma City on a Thursday for a meeting with a bunch of people about the upcoming twentieth anniversary of the signing of 1017, which is next month, which is October of 2011. They were planning to do a big research project that talked about what 1017 had accomplished and how long it had lasted. I 34 wasn t at the meeting. He used Cherokee Strip Transport and got himself down there, I think it was at the Faculty Club in Oklahoma City by the OU Health Science Center. We learned after he died, someone at his funeral said, At the end of that meeting, he looked at all of us and said, Okay, you all know what you re supposed to do and what we re going to work on for the next year. And we ve got to figure out who is going to take this over because I won t be here forever. That was on Thursday. Cherokee Strip brought him back here. He spent the weekend with his brother George. He lives in an assisted living place that s much better equipped for his physical needs. He didn t like staying at my house. (Laughs) It wasn t easy for him so he stayed with George, and he came here for lunch on Friday. I don t remember our conversation, but it was fall, and we would sit in the breakfast room. He came here three times a week for cardiac rehab. He d always come for lunch, and we d sit and talk about my garden and the price of cattle and how the tutoring program was going and some politics. One of the things that we were working on and this was kind of, for me and my good friend, Debra Mitchell, this was kind of the ultimate culmination of his life. I d forgotten about this. In August before he died, my good friend Debra s son, who is also named Elliott, had found a he has gotten a master s from the University of Cape Town in South Africa having to do with service, diplomatic service. I don t know exactly what his master s is in. But he had found a nonprofit in Washington that he wanted to go to work for. He was applying and trying to get a foot in the door in that. Debra called me one day and said, Do you know anything about whatever it s called. And I said, No, but I ll ask Daddy. So I pull it up on the website and sure enough, half the people he was in the Senate with are on the board of directors. My father had a standard rule throughout his life that he would not write a recommendation for a job or to get into a military academy unless he actually knew the person. That was just it, which is unusual. (Laughs) He didn t actually know Elliott Mitchell, but he knew his parents, and he knew my relationship with Debra. I said, Would you be willing to write letters of recommendation for him? He said, Sure. So he had written a letter and we had mailed all those. We had finally gotten them done. I d typed them up and gotten them mailed. We re at lunch on Friday and Debra tells me that Elliott has gotten a phone call from them. Then he goes out to George s and spends Saturday. And I talked to him on Saturday and then John is going to pick him up for church on Sunday morning. I have to go early for the choir so John was going to go get him, and he was going to come to church and go to lunch. He called just before I left the house, and he said, I m not feeling too good, George is going to take me to the 35 emergency room. I said, Okay, I ll meet you there. Oh, no, I m fine. Go on to church and just come afterwards. So I go to church, and I m sitting in the choir loft, and we haven t even sung yet. I m thinking, This just doesn t feel right. So I left the choir loft, went to the hospital, and he was very uncomfortable. Not so much pain as just really discomfort. It took them all day to get him admitted to a room. Pat and Ann had been out of town. They came on Sunday night, and then on Monday night he pretty much crashed. He was doing fine, they had done a colonoscopy that day and had discovered that parts of his colon were blue, actually, and he had lost all blood flow to them. So, in essence, the Parkinson s has caused his colon to kind of stroke out. But they were able to give him some relief, and we were just kind of clicking along. Then Monday night, I had been there all that afternoon. I came home to eat and right after dinner Pat called and said, Daddy s crashed and you better come back. They brought him back in his room, and we were in his room. So this was probably my last conversation with him, to answer your question. They had the oxygen mask on him, and they re trying to get him to where they can take him to ICU. He keeps pulling the oxygen mask off, and they would put it back on, and he would pull it off. He kept saying, Let s quit. The nurse is saying, No, we ve got to get the oxygen on for you to wear down while we re taking you to the ICU. He does that about three times and finally, he pulls it off and says, No and Pat and I remember the wording differently, but what my memory of it is, he says, No, I mean living, which was very much like him. Everybody just kind of stopped at that point and then the nurse slaps the mask back on, and they get him down to ICU. He isn t really very conscious after that, and he died early the next morning. Elliott Mitchell had his interview with that organization on that morning, and he got the job, and he works for them to this day. So, for me, it was a really he always wanted to encourage young people to get into government service. None of his children made that choice with their lives. It was really appropriate that someone who was close to our family had made that choice, and he had helped him get there and that happened. I can remember calling people and calling Robert Henry when we got back here that morning. I got Robert Henry on the phone and I said, This is Gail Wynne, I m Henry Bellmon s daughter. He said, I don t want this phone call, do I? I said, No, you don t. It was as if I was calling children, his children, when I called Burns and when I called staff people. We had called Lee Paden from the hospital and he drove over and got here from Tulsa. Eloise s family had brought her from Kingfisher at the last minute. It was quiet and peaceful, but at the very end, he was still connecting I mean, Thursday he was 36 Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne Finchum Wynne talking about education and helping a young man get a job in service. So he lived it right to the very end, as Mother did. We were on vacation and (snaps) she was just gone. So they were lucky. They got to be who they were, who God intended them to be, right until the very end. It was good in many ways for them. Almost destined, I guess. Somebody was watching over them. Neither one of them would have been happy in a nursing home. I don t know that many people are, but my mother would have been especially unhappy. (Laughs) They lived it rich and full and completely until the end. So maybe that s their legacy. They lived by example and were happy. They were. They were extraordinarily happy. It wasn t always easy, but somehow it always worked out. I mean, when you re thirty-five years old and you mortgage everything you own to get elected the state s first Republican governor when you re out-registered in multitude (Laughs) Their faith was deep and quiet and abiding. I think that s part of that knowing innately, right from wrong, is a really deep faith. A belief that God is there and he will take care of you, and so go do what you need to do. You re covered. I think that s a good place to end, don t you? Okay. (Laughs) Thank you very much. You re welcome. ------- -------..