 Simpson and I am on the faculty of the Oklahoma State University Library. I am in Boley, Oklahoma, to interview Mrs. Theola Cudjoe Jones as part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program s Spotlighting Oklahoma oral history project. Our topic today is Boley, Oklahoma. Thank you so much for inviting us. Thank you. When and where were you born? I was born in Castle, Oklahoma, at that time, which today is IXL. Castle, Oklahoma in Okfuskee County. Would you describe for me your family, your siblings, extended family? My family history is very rich. That was one thing that my father was very concerned about and that was one thing he taught us: who we were and where we come from. I think today it brings stability in your life. Were you an only child or did you have several siblings? I had two sisters. I m the middle child. Today, both sisters are deceased. My older sister got her degree from Seminole Junior College, and she went on to Ada to finish up her four years. She went to work in Okemah as a social worker. She was the first social worker to ever work in Okemah, and she worked twenty-five plus years. She was a giving person. Theodora Magnus Cudjoe. The other one was Clara B. Cudjoe Breaux. She went to school in Langston. She got her degree there. She went to work for DHS Department of Human Services in Oklahoma City and she went on, as time passed by, to OU University of Oklahoma to get her doctorate. She worked there at 5905 Classen 5 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones Department of Human Services , you know, with misguided and abused children, which I always thought her job was dangerous. You just can t go in and take people s children. It was more than a job to both of them. My career, raising my children and being a wife. Would you share a little about your education starting with elementary school and the experiences you had here in Boley in school? I first started to school at Oak Ridge, which was about two miles from my home at that time. We walked to school. After the school was closed, we went to school in IXL, which today is a town, IXL, Oklahoma. From there I came to Boley High School. In 1960, I dropped out of Boley High School. I had a son, who is an elder today. I married my son s father, and I got my GED at Emerson School in Oklahoma City, down there on Sixth and Harvey. I was happily married to my husband for forty-two years before he deceased. My sisters, they both were professional. As time went by and I began to look, we mothers and homemakers, we don t get very much credit. It s not easy being a mother and a homemaker, and see, my husband was a fireman for twenty-five years, and plus he was in the Reserves and active duty for twenty-five years. So somebody had to raise the children. We raised three beautiful sons. Who have been your role models and what about them do you admire? My father, because of the struggles he went through and how he valued education and how he valued his people. For him, giving us the history of our life today, so that we know who we are. He even took us to Wewoka because we live, most of the Cudjoes, from Wewoka to Seminole. He would take us there to meet our people and to visit with them and just to know who we were. There s people there and all of them grew up to be professional people. My father, I always said that he was a spoiled child because at eighteen years old, he inherited 160 acres. He went on to college in Topeka. My grandmother would tell me that he had the best of horses, he had the best of cars, and he had my grandmother and my momma and three daughters, and he was just spoiled rotten. He never had to work because the allotment from his mother s property, he inherited it. At that time, when they distributed land out, all of the people that came in on the Trail of Tears, they tried to pay back. One thing about it, the reason why I think my father was so knowledgeable is because he was able to go to school. Back there, there were some colleges here, but to be able to go to Topeka, Kansas, and go to an all-Native American school, and it was a boarding school. Can you imagine how it was? He was born in 1905. Can you imagine how far Topeka, Kansas would look from here and how he travelled there? 6 Simpson Jones And you know what I admire about him so is that he kept his mother s property. As a child I would see my father struggle, because he was a farmer. No matter what happened, he maintained and he kept her land, and it s been in the family since 1902. This is the stability that he gave us, and he said, As long as you have land, you have money. The oil will cease, but the land will be there. He always said, God s not making any more ground. We just grew up free spirits, and to my father and my mother, I don t think we ever made any mistakes. By me getting married at fifteen and having a son, I mean, my father was happy. Can you understand that? To have a son. Most people they would put their children out, but there was nothing there but love. He s my hero. I guess I have a lot of heroes. There are more than one in the cartoons. So you can have a couple sets, if you like. How did your family come to live in Boley? What brought them here? They came over on the Trail of Tears, and they had no choice. At that time, Boley was a very, very rich and prosperous town. At that time, racism had been with us all our life, it will always be there. They didn t want to come here. They were forced. But, by them coming here, and Abigail Barnett McCormick coming, starting the town off with 160 acres, that was allotted to her as a Creek Native American, the town flourished. Boley was like Oklahoma City. The Native Americans had money, they had land. It was very prosperous. You just think about Boley, two banks, a cotton gin, trains, dry goods stores like Ms. Toole s. Oh, she sold beautiful hats. And Ben Kees for the Stacy Adams hats for men , you couldn t find them any place else but Ben Kees. All the history, colleges. Just like me, I was gone forty years, just been eleven years since I moved back here, I wouldn t give it up for anything. I enjoy being here and to see how things go and to see how things can die if you don t keep them cultivated. Education is the most important thing. I think that s the reason why we stayed here, because we were allotted property. We were poor but we were comfortable, because we raised everything. I don t know what it is to have a hungry day. I don t know what it is to be dirty or raggedy or be without parents. Because I was raised, in those days, in the home, and the son takes care of the mother and vice versa. So I had two mommas, and a whole neighborhood of mommas because if one didn t get you another one would . There were no telephones, but I could do something bad and she would know it by the time we d get home from school. My father never whipped us. My mother was quite a discipline person. It was just so-so. I wouldn t trade that in for nothing. 7 Finchum Jones Finchum Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Your family, your father and mother, both came through the Trail of Tears No, my mother was here. We have done a little research on her as we were doing our family history. My mother, by her already being here, was considered as a state person. My mother s parents all originated from Texas and Louisiana. There at the Grambling College in Louisiana there are quite a few Duns, D-U-N, and the Duns and the Taylors were hooked together. This is the only history I know about my mother. I guess what made me not do very much history on her (I wasn t too concerned until we did the family tree) is that my father s history was so rich, and he never let us forget it. My mother was a very honorable person, and it was her children and her husband. Very good lady. Of what tribe was your father a member? He was Seminole and Creek because his father was Seminole and his mother was Creek. As you know, they say there are Seminoles and Creeks, but when the war started, the Creeks went back because the Creeks were settled down around Georgia in one place or another. Well, when the war broke out with Andrew Johnson this is when they went back and they joined up with the Seminole Tribe, but for the government, I think, when we got here they were split. But there are not supposed to be but one tribe, because they all inter-married and they all fought in the same war to keep from coming here. You know Andrew Jackson, oh God bless his soul, he was such an evil man. They fought against him, and the Creeks and the Seminoles joined together. When they came here and they got to Arkansas, this is when they were distributed. Still a tribe lived there in South Carolina, they wasn t very friendly. I went down there to their nation, and they are the Geeches. They wanted to be a part of the Seminoles and the Creeks and I told them that just couldn t be. This is a center. The Creeks just kind of branched off and became another tribe. Do you know of any other languages that your grandparents spoke? My father, he could speak Seminole and Creek. I can t speak any of it and I have two Native American grandchildren . My son has not only brought trophies home, they brought good grades and they brought trophies. I call my two Native American grandchildren trophies, because one is half Navajo and the other is, I can t think of the name of them, she s from Alaska. But they are beautiful grandchildren. I had to be real with them. They were caught up in two worlds and they had to be able to love and understand both worlds. I have a rainbow of family. How did your family make its living? 8 Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Jones My father farmed. We grew everything on the farm, except you d go to the store for your salt and basics. We raised vegetables, and my mother would can and put them in the cellar, and my father would plant cotton and peanuts. We would take the cotton to the cotton gins in Okemah. During the summertime, I guess, they made preparations for the winter. So there wasn t very much expense, if you had your own home, you re not doing any sharecropping or anything. So they would prepare. I don t understand how it was done, but they would kill the hogs and they would smoke them and this meat could stay in the smokehouse until summer. It didn t spoil. What we raised, in the fall we would put back and it would carry us all through the year until the next growing season. It was easy living. Our dresses were homemade . At that time different flour and beans and other things they come in flour sacks and they was a print. My mother couldn t sew, but another cousin sewed. This is how they made our clothes. We only had about two pairs of shoes, but you look back on it and it was such clean living. It was where everybody liked everybody. It was just comfortable. No worries, I d say. Did you raise your family in Boley? No. Where else have you lived and why did you come back? I only lived in Oklahoma City. I have traveled quite a bit. I ve been to a few foreign countries. This was a dream that my husband and I always had, that we wanted to come back to Boley. We didn t think our children would like it because they were raised as nice little city boys, and they had the low riders and their groups. We were able to move back here. He retired in 99, we moved back in 98. Our plans were, which I have now, we was going to open up a full-time garage. I was going to run the antique shop. He just had big dreams, and his dream was to build a fire department in Boley and put in sub-fire departments. Unfortunately, we were here from 98, and in 2001 he had an accident that left him paralyzed from the neck down. I took care of him for fourteen months and after he passed, I played with the antiques and I played with the restaurant. It s just not important anymore because that was our dream. Once he had to go in 2002, I never was very successful with it because I didn t have the dream, I didn t have the passion anymore. So my sons play. If he had lived, but you know, God makes no mistakes. If he had lived, I think we probably would have fulfilled a dream. After he had to go, I tried to instill the dream into my children, If you have to go out and work, go out and work, but this would be your primary home. If you take care of the land, you can live off of it. Today, my children, once 9 Finchum Jones Finchum Jones I m gone, they will inherit about three hundred acres of property. We have property here in Boley, we have property in the community in Sand Creek, and we have property in IXL, Oklahoma. My boys, they are cowboys. They love the country. The 160, you said, was still in the family. Still in the family. It was equally shared. It was fifty acres a piece, and my father knew us real well. He put one sister on this side, Clara, and he put one sister on this side Theola, me. The oldest sister come up the middle. Why he did this? He knew us. He said, If you ever sell the property, you can only sell it to a family member. My sister decided that she did not want hers so she sold twenty-five acres to Clara and twenty-five acres to me. So I have seventy-five acres there and the 160, which my husband and I purchased. Where I live today is where my husband s parents used to live. And girl, what s so killing about it, where I live is where Rudolph s grandmother lived. Where my son lives, next door to me, it was where Rudolph, my husband, grew up and was born and raised there. It s just like history has repeated itself. My four-year- old grandson and my sixteen-year-old grandson, you know what you call a lane? He walks the grandson up to my house, my children travel down that lane, I see my grandchildren traveling down the same lane and it s just like history has repeated itself. The property in IXL, it s there. As I said, after my husband passed, it wasn t really my dream, so the boys don t do anything with it, but one day they will because they understand the history of it. Is the house still there? A portion of the house is still there. The house that originally was there was built in My father was born in 1905. I shouldn t tell you this because a woman should never tell her age. The same house that my father was born in in 1905, I was born in the same house in 1945. Girl, it was a house. I don t know. There was only like, one bedroom. My sisters and I, we slept in the bedroom with our parents. My grandmother slept in the living room. We had a dining room, and we had a kitchen. If it snowed, you might wake up and find snow on you. You can look down through the cracks and you might see the kitty cats or whatever playing there, up under there. We had the refrigerator where you had to go to Okemah to buy the ice on the weekends. We had no facilities. My parents only got facilities in 1960. I don t know how we stayed warm in there. My mother made quilts, and we had the big wooden stove, and none of us were sick. I just don t understand it. Why didn t we catch pneumonia or something? But we made it and today, sometimes I think we were looked down on because 10 Finchum Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Jones Simpson we were poor. But in so many words, we weren t poor. We had the richest thing. We had parents that loved us. We had a home that the doors were never locked until after 1960. Up until 1960, I never went home and there wasn t someone there. And I come home one day after my grandmother passed and it was just heartbreaking for my parents to go away and leave the house and the door was locked. I just couldn t understand it. But we made it. In 1960 the reason it changed was because your grandmother passed? Was that the reason? Yes. We built a home that Well, a portion of it is standing there. We really should do something about it. My daddy, he was so excited. We had like three bedrooms, front room, dining room, kitchen, bath, and a den. My father, you could imagine how old we were in 1960, was so excited about having running water in the house and a bathroom. Oh, everyone would come. He would tell them to come and see it. I don t think the house cost that much. My father evidently raised enough vegetables or cotton or peanuts or whatever to build the house. I don t even know how or where the money came from. And this again, I look back at the abstract and I can see in the abstract, it tells me a lot about it, where there were oil leases and gas leases. One thing or another that he got money off of, which our 160 sits right in the middle and there is property all around us that is Native American. There have been oil wells all around us, but right in that spot has never been an oil well. I believe some day there will be oil. In your allotment, did you get mineral rights? Yes. You do have mineral rights. You see, some people have sold their mineral rights. My home is I think it s about maybe fifty acres of mineral rights. The property in IXL that I call my estate, we have all rights. Daddy leased them, but he never sold them. The other property where you have fifty acres of mineral rights, is there another group or entity that owns the other mineral rights? Yes, the petroleum company out of Colorado Springs, they own some of the mineral rights. Okay, so it is an outside company. 11 Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Jones Yes, because where I live today, there used to be oil wells. My husband s people (I probably shouldn t say this) had nice homes, they had oil wells, gas wells, and they had all the facilities because they were kind of wealthy. When my husband and I got married, they did not want us to get married because they thought I was very poor. My father was a very outspoken person when it came down to his children. He told them, My daughters will have land when your oil is gone. Today, we have land, but there is no oil or no gas. So he was right about it. What was your neighborhood like and who were your neighbors growing up? I only had three neighbors, two neighbors. The reason why I had two neighbors, one set, the Mitchells used to be like sharecroppers, and my daddy really liked people. So that he could have company, he sold the Mitchells an acre of land, so they lived right down the road from us. And on the other side of us, you might know her, she was a Knox. The Knoxs, K-N-O-X, lived there. It was a church, which my grandfather gave, the Goodwill Baptist Church, where I go to church today, an acre of land for a dollar and love. He was a good man, too, because he gave them the top soil and the bottom soil, and this was so that my father could have company and we would have someone to play with, because he was an only child. He had first cousins and distant cousins, but those were our neighbors. They were like family. What is your fondest memory of Boley? (Laughs) Oh, I d say the 60s and the 70s. Because we would leave Oklahoma City to come to Boley to party. Across the street, there Ms. Bernice McCormick s, we d party. The town was alive. It was just alive. I think my generation, the baby-boomers, probably put more back into the town than the other generations since then, and that is why the town is like it is today. There was grocery stores, hamburger places, eating places and oh, my husband could dance. Right over there on the corner, up the street there, was the Mason Lodge. That was the First and Last Chance. We would go there. There was no tile floors, they were concrete and we would just dance our shoes out. I think that is my fondest memories, and then in the 60s when they started the rodeo, Mr. Marvin Alexander, the Rough Riders. He started the Boley Rodeo. My God, that was the most exciting thing that happened. Back there, people were really people. There was no gangs, and it wasn t lawless. Everybody knew everybody, and it was just kind of lenient, and it was so beautiful because you could see the town prosper. We let it happen. We let the outsiders and I don t mean like you. I don t feel like you is outside, because I feel like you understand it. You might not have 12 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones lived it, but your parents lived it, and you know your history pretty well. But we let people come in and take away from us and give nothing back, and that s what happened to our town. Until we stand up as a people, Ernest Holloway worked with us, and helped us and gave us vision. But as the President told my people in Ghana when he was there, you have to help yourself. This is the way it is about Boley. We have to help ourselves. We have to want to have a dream. I mean, a dream has been fulfilled, there is no excuse. Well, I didn t go to school because the white man was this and there was racism. God has given us a chance, and with all due respect, he has given us a chance to walk with our Native American brothers and our white brothers and have the same education they have. There is no excuse now, but we use excuses. We have some good leadership, and we have a wonderful mayor and judge and they have done real well and I plan on working with them. Until we want to help ourselves and until we become a people and we put a real God in our life... Our town will, what you call the big word, flourish. It will grow. Yeah, it will grow. Do you have an earliest memory of Boley? Yes. The reason why I have an early remembrance of Boley is because of my parents. I had an aunt live to be ninety-five and another aunt was eighty-seven when she passed. As I say, I guess I liked old people. I like to be around people that I can learn something from, something positive. My mother would tell us stories about the hamburger place, where you could come to Boley and you could buy a hamburger and a Sun Quench soda for twenty-five cents. Mrs. Truelove, the best hamburger place in the world. People would come from every place and buy hamburgers. My father would go on to tell me how he would ride his horse about. IXL should be about eight to ten miles from here, my father would ride his horse to Boley. My mother would tell me about the hotels they had. As I said, he was so excited when what s his name from down South come up and showed him how to plant peanuts. Oh, George Washington Carver. Yes. That was in my father s time. He admired him. He had great respect for education. Can you imagine a filling station, two banks? You just visualize horses and people and I mean, people on one accord. Ladies were ladies and gentlemen were gentlemen. You can t find that today. I feel like looking through my father s eyes and my aunt s, I have been able to visualize Boley from 1905, because of what he told me. What I didn t see, it was like they told me. With me liking history, I was always around older people, because I could learn something. When you re around older people, at least I did, it was like you were looking 13 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones through their eyesight. There s a lot of Cudjoes, but on my mother s side, I am like the last generation of the baby boomers. By being a caregiver, you just inherit children. I have my sister s children and I have inherited six sons in California. I would be there. I was a caregiver to the family, I guess. If the parents would die, I d inherit the kids. So I don t know how many grandkids and inherited children I have, but for Mother s Day I got seventeen Mother s Day cards. So I have quite a few children. I would say that. How would you describe Boley today and what has brought the changes over the years that you perceive? I still love Boley, because I can still see the beauty. I don t see the rundown buildings and a building that s not repainted, because it shouldn t be that way. I feel like that should be a city ordinance, there should be rules and regulations that should not be broken. That way, everything would be good because everybody needs to take care of their own property, because they are responsible people. To me, Boley is like it is because of us. People only do what you let them do. Just like the rodeo, we have to have leadership and do our respect to my government, the white man in Okemah, and then my friends. This is where my children go to school. This is where my grandchildren will be a part of. This is the only black town, really, really, left. There are other black towns, but it s not as prosperous as Boley. It doesn t have the history. There are people that are excited to get in here for I hate to say this, like the Mennonites. They re a white group of people out of Germany. They come from Germany to Mexico to Oklahoma. They are very prosperous. We have so much rich history here. People sell their property, and the white man comes in. He isn t taking it. We re giving it to him. So if we don t get together and work and build our town, we owe this to our fore-parents. They left us something, what are we going to leave our children? We don t even want to leave them the history. There are children here today that they don t even know where they come from, their parents or nothing. We are this way because we let it happen. It will be rebuilt. It could happen in my generation if we teach our children where we come from. Who makes up the Boley community now? The same people, I d say. Boley Public Schools, there was in our decent little community a black marriage deal. There were schools and these were like feeder schools to Boley. They redistricted. The other schools seen where Boley schools were failing their children, and they seen where they could come in there and make a profit. To a certain extent, I m not mad at Paden and Prague and Okemah, because a child has to be 14 Simpson Jones educated. The worst thing in the world to do to a child is to let him be mis-educated. I don t care what color, the teacher, or what school you go to, they have to be educated. You ve got to be able to get out and generate with your people. No matter what the color the people are, we all are created equal. Dr. King had a dream, Obama fulfilled it. We ve got a God that is, like I call him, my father. He s got plenty of things, plenty of blessings, all I want to do is ask. So all we ve got to do is get out here and work and teach our children how to take care of things and respect things. For the baby boomers, we re getting old, we re getting slow. Be leaders, back the children, give them advice, get out there and help them. Just like my son, God bless his soul, he is, as many black people right here in Boley, he s the only black person on the fire department. All we have is Mennonites, and God bless their soul for coming, but you see how on the edge we are? If we sit back and we let them close up our fire station, they closed up our post office, that s our fault, but if we sit back and we let the other Mennonites or whatever group it is, somebody got to fight the fire and fire has no color. What will you have? If you don t have a fire department Insurance is sky high. I live two miles out of Boley, and I m in Okemah district. I pay like four thousand dollars a year for insurance. That s sad. I don t live in a fabulous house. I call my house a bunk house because I don t really care about keeping house anymore. Boley s too rich to die. The Rough Riders invented the rodeo. Before we lost control of our town and let the white man take it over, there used to be good things going on in Boley. There was no gangs. So now the police they try and make a profit off of the people. As you notice coming in here from all directions you eventually go over some little rise running across the street. They monitor who is coming in, because they know everybody. Anyone coming in now to Boley to have a little drink or something, they are going to pull you over. So people do not come anymore because of that. Then for them to come in for vending, I think we have low prices. Like right now the lots range from one hundred dollars and you ve got to pay right at one hundred dollars for an occupation license for three days, and you drive people away. As my father said, To have neighbors and you know the people in Oklahoma City, Clearview, they re our neighbors. You have to be good to your neighbors. That s the way I feel about it. I feel everything that happened in Boley is our fault. What are the relationships like with the outside towns, and what were they like maybe forty years ago compared to now? I would feel like the outside communities work together with helping 15 Simpson Jones Boley, and one thing or another, because if you look at our brochure for the rodeo, you can see how many ads there are . Our fire department is a volunteer fire department and all of Okfuskee, they are all connected to the same fire department. That s a good thing because when you re out there fighting fire, you ve got to have somebody you know at your back because fire and water is dangerous. I respect them because there is no control. So Boley must grow. Wouldn t you think so? Yes. Who are the town s leaders? The Lees, which runs Smokaroma. In my day, the Lees. I know Mrs. Toole, she ran the hat shop. Mr. Martin used to have a grocery store and as I told you, Ben Kees, he had a dry goods store. Mr. Truelove had the hamburger place, and the lady that runs the filling station, she s been here for a generation. I think that filling station has been here, oh God, I m sixty-six, so it s been here ever since I can remember. So I feel as if the same people that are in control now are the ancestors of the other people. It was just like, you know, and the innocent people here, they died with the history. I guess that s why I m here talking to you today because there are some areas of our town, Iwatta, we really don t have a blueprint of it. Just like the school gym. After the school closed, my son, the chief You ve got to raise money. With the school being closed, we didn t have our annual homecoming, and in my day it was something very important and today it is, too. So he has taken over the gym and works with Ms. Hicks, the judge, and the mayor. We have events there and I hope as we move forward he can have a little bit more time and bring the children in. My grandson, they ve got horses, and the other children don t have that. I just feel like with him trying to run the gym, I will help him. In time, it s going to bring the children back together and they will be as a group and they are going to care and they are going to take care of I think, it s not the children s fault because they want to, they just don t know how. We have to teach them, and we have to be patient. We always have the bad kids, the Bloods, the Crips, the gangs, and those are actually somebody s children. With me living in Oklahoma City and with my children, I had kind of reared two sets of children. I don t care what you say about the gangs, they will respect you if you respect them. I don t consider them as being gang members. I consider them as being lost children who had no family at home, and this is the way they reached out for some kind of love because, you know, my sons weren t the best of children. I knew they had a group. They were all respectable. The groups that they have now, they give them the different names, they just want love. There is so much abuse in the home. There are no father figures. The mothers have got to go to work to help support the children. 16 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones The children are lost. They re lonely, and they reach out to the best thing they can get. Just like the little boy, the little Parker son in Oklahoma City that was killed at the drugstore. He had family members live here in Boley. That shouldn t have happened. He should not have been in there. You see how the older people influence them? That s on a small scale. This is what we do with our other children, and instead of putting good things in them, we put bad things in them. You put anything that God is in, the devil is in, too. You ve got to choose sides. You have to have some structure to know which side to turn to. It s all about love. How did the leaders kind of determine the direction of the town? I would say they came here for a purpose because Boley was rich and prosperous, and they had good leadership. Who are the leaders today? Well, we have a mayor, we have a judge, we have a fire chief, we have a head of police, and there is this group of leaders that really control the town. You see, just like I live in the county, I have property here, but I have no voice here. That s not good. This is where we have got to come together. You don t want to be in nothing if you don t have a voice. I have too big a mouth. You can t sit by and see someone doing wrong and you don t say anything about it. So I would say leadership, and I m not talking about my mayor or the judge. I think they do a really good job. They re on the payroll. I think the fire department and I think they are really, really doing a good job, but it s kind of time for us to sit back. Can t make very many steps. Teach the children. You see, people don t realize, I do. Your children are going to be your caregivers one day. If you don t teach them how to be good to other people, they aren t going to be good to you. If you don t be good to your children, they re not going to be good to you. I tell my children, I demand respect and I demand that they treat me right. I don t mind going into no rest home, but I ve been good to you. My father left me something, your father left you something and I m going to control it and make sure it s there for you when it s time for me to go. If you don t do the same thing, what I do for you, you do this for your children. A lot of people don t feel that way. A lot of people don t have children. A lot of people don t want to be real. If I m hurt, I m hurt. A lot of people can cover up hurt, but I feel this way, if God know, the hell with anybody else. Who is going to help you but him? And in the midnight hours, as you say in church, who can you call on but him? So I feel like our faith has been shortened. I feel like we have lost faith in 17 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Jones ourselves, and that isn t a good thing. What were the major churches in Boley, and how important was church to Boley life? Very important. I think the CME or the AME church are the first churches because the CME I think is the one that had the college here. The churches in Boley and around, they were really together because there used to be a good minister s allowance. This is where all the ministers in the community, I think it was about fifteen churches in metropolitan Boley. And when I say metropolitan Boley, I mean the outer areas. Everybody can come together at the three o clock service when there was lunch served and they can fill the church up, but on Sunday mornings, my church is just about six people go there. That s not a good thing, but it is a good thing. I just don t understand why we just can t come together. Our churches are just so divided, but yet you can come together at three o clock. Why can t you come together all the time? Why do you got to have so many churches? Why can t you have a black/white now of each faith. Why can t you just set up one and be as one? But nobody else is going to see it that way, and I believe it s all about the money and the prestige. What were the organizations that were really influential in the town? Well you had your Industrial Club, a group of ladies, as my granddaughter called it today, a manners class. They taught ladies how to be ladies. I mean, when we went to high school, we could not go to school without socks or stockings. Our dresses, I came up in a generation when can cans and miniskirts came out, well you couldn t wear that to school. And that value is not here today. I think that s a lot that s happened to us. That was the Ladies Industrial Club and it was mostly minister s wives, school teachers and people in high society, I would say. And then, as you know, you have the masons and Amos Temple, he was black, and he burned down the temple here in Boley in the fifties, I think. So the leadership has been taken away. Boley has been robbed. Maybe I shouldn t feel that way, but I feel like we have taken away, but we haven t brought anything back. You can t take, take and not give something. Did you have any experience with the Cooperative Extension agents or any of the other organizations? No, because I didn t live here. My sister, she did, she was quite a lady. Her husband was a policeman and a fireman. His name was Earnest Magnus. She was on the zoning board of directors at the school. She went to all of the board meetings and kept the school abreast of what 18 Simpson Jones was going on. She would go out there and find out what was going on in other schools, and she would try to bring this back to her town. There are some very, very, very educated people out of Boley, Oklahoma. And as I said, Boley and the surrounding communities had the prettiest girls. I believe that because my husband was still my sweetheart and, you know, that s it. Everything was so different. It was just about caring. You had to be so-so to be in the Industrials Ladies Club, and the Ministers Wives club. That was nice. They was somebody. All the ministers would come together on Wednesday, and they would go to different schools and it was like, they would have church and the children were connected. You don t have that today. Our ministers, and I understand, they have to work, things are more expensive, but they don t have time. I think. And as I said, I ve only been back here eleven years and a lot of people think I think negative, but I don t think I think negative. I think I m positive. It s just about building and doing. Just like it isn t something that you can t do. Everybody, you know, if you re in a wheelchair, you can do a paintbrush. When you do it, take care of them. There is grant money out there. There is money out there for everything. If you write the right grant, just like us now, we have no medical here. You know the Native Americans, the Creeks, run Okemah Hospital. They run the ambulance. I feel as if there should be some kind of a clinic set up here. If we were Native Americans just like Okemah Hospital, what the Creeks run, and the children that goes to school, I take myself and my grandson down there to the doctors, to the hospital because we are Seminoles, and I have my card and the grandson has his card. I might go down there. I have allergies, so I had to go and take treatments. I might go down there today and a doctor that is doctoring on me, he may be out of Colorado Springs. They have come back, the way they run that hospital. They have come back. They have a nice little airport. They fly in and out of that. They have good doctors, well educated. But a lot of people, if you are not part of the Five Civilized Tribes, you can t go there. So their doctors aren t local? They fly people in for the day? Yes, or two or three days. Every tribe, I don t know how many tribes there are in Oklahoma, well not only Oklahoma, but all tribes, they come in and out of Okemah to work there at the hospital. The ambulance drivers and things, they live there, but your doctors, they can be from anywhere. They have private physicians there, for the other people, but I go there just for little things, but my doctor is still in Oklahoma City because after twenty-nine years of having the same doctor, it s really hard to change. But for emergency, you cannot beat A lot of people don t understand how good it is for that hospital. They don t keep a lot 19 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones of patients, but they can stabilize you. From here to Mercy Hospital on a good day or a good night, it s only a forty-five minute helicopter ride. Plus we can join the helicopter service, we only pay seventy-five dollars a year. So I mean, why can t we have that in Boley? They can set a helicopter down anywhere, but we have no one concerned about health and education. The town is divided. Most people, what is the status quo? It s two sides. If those two sides will ever come together, because they have good ideas and it would work, but they just don t want to come together. There s been a lot of use of the Well Springs Community Service, Inc. ? Yes. But the architect of Boley I don t think it could have been built any other way. If you look at Boley and if you look at all these little towns around it like Henryetta, Holdenville, and I get Weleetka and Wetumka mixed up, but I don t know how to get to either one, they are on the same style. The way that the buildings were built, as you know, most of them were built out of rock and brick. They were built to stand. Like the brick buildings and the rock buildings, most of them have four sides. All you ve got to do is go in there and put your little roof on it. When I was in Germany, the buildings were real The barn and the house were hooked on together and the neighbors house was hooked together. It was built kind of like Boley. I think it was Munich, Germany. This is why I look at Boley and it s so unique. When you travel down South, you just find beauty of it. It might look like ruins to other people, but I can see the beauty in it. I don t think the structure should be changed. People are going in and probably doing the same thing, building the metal buildings and one thing or another and there is nothing left. We have tornadoes here real good, and I ve just been blessed. The tornado comes all the way through and I put my axes in the ground to reflect the storms or to cut the storms in half, that s the way I was taught. God has been really good to me. Storms come right to Paden. They come right here at the jail. The most rewarding thing, I thought I should have stayed there last year, but right before the rodeo it comes through and it took the structure of the police station here and put a cross in this tree. They cut the tree down. I said that was a sign from God. I said he wants this town to be rebuilt. Would you look at the uniqueness of it? It s like a cowboy town. I don t think we got sidewalks in Boley until 60. That was a great thing. Can you imagine walking down the streets if we didn t have sidewalks? Would you walk us through the town and describe to us the different banks and buildings as you would walk through? Yes. I think the bank has more history to me than any other part of 20 Simpson Jones Boley. The reason I feel that way is because of the Pretty Boy Floyd gang when they came to rob Boley was the only bank in the area that Pretty Boy Floyd and Birdwell, and my father knew Pretty Boy Floyd and Birdwell real well, because Birdwell was from down here in Earlsboro. Pretty Boy Floyd was a very handsome white boy. He hung out with the Native Americans because you see, when the Native Americans come here, and Wewoka, where Native Americans and the whites settled, there was a little place out from there called Little River. This is where most of the Native Americans settled in, that was Seminole freedmen, and they helped that area together. I mean, no white man penetrated and Pretty Boy Floyd was just like Robin Hood. He would go out and rob the banks, and he would bring the money back and the food back, and he would help the people of Little River. The history books say Pretty Boy Floyd come in to Boley. My father told me Pretty Boy Floyd, he never came into Boley. He rode Highway 62 and told them, Birdwell and Glass, Pete Glass, If you can walk in that bank and you can get the money and get it to 62, I will get you out of town. They couldn t, because my dad said every time you walk into Boley Bank, Langston McCormick was the big sheriff. There was a little room, he would step in that room. Birdwell was killed there in that bank, and Glass was killed when he was trying to get in the getaway car. When Pretty Boy Floyd saw the ambulance and police and things coming, he took off back to Little River. He told them, I ll be at the funeral. My dad said that they had police and sheriffs. My daddy said that Pretty Boy Floyd walked in there dressed as a lady, all black and a veil over her face. My daddy and his people knew them, but the sheriffs, or one thing or another, didn t know him. Like they said, Pretty Boy Floyd died, my daddy said Pretty Boy Floyd moved to Missouri. He had a son and his son wrote a book on him. But he didn t get the full history from Boley. I think this is how Boley really made the history was Pretty Boy Floyd and the gang robbing the bank, because it couldn t be done. You think if a town can have a bank and you can t rob it and you can rob all the others, it had to be something real significant about it. They had to be together. The Paxil house, the bed and breakfast are and the museum, it has history, but to have a living gangster, that s history. I don t know for sure, I ve never looked, but one of the bullet holes is still in the bank. They have all this beautiful marble. The bank is just a beautiful place. There s your tellers It is just like it were, I say, in the early 1900s when they built it. Why do you think Pretty Boy Floyd knew he couldn t rob Boley s Bank? He knew that the black people here stood together, and I think that s it. He could rob all the other banks, but he didn t really want to rob the 21 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones bank because he knew, but he couldn t tell Birdwell and Pete Glass, so he said, I won t go, but if you can get to 62, I ll get you out of town. What were the other buildings and businesses along the street? That old hotel is still standing there. You know that I d have to show you, it s still standing there. It s an old two-storey building about a block from here on the west side. It s still standing there. It was a hotel. Across from there was a grocery store, and my father said there used to be two cotton gin mills in Boley. I don t know where they were. It s another place out here over by where Mr. Lee used to live. It used to be a CC camp out there. Mr. Lee told me there were some historical markers, but I never went to see them. You have your funeral home, which was not there. It was on up the street right up here up from Ben Kees. It s a building from that corner on the west side, Ben Kees is another structure down there. A little, they call it a grocery store now, but between there, there was Ben Kees, there was the mortuary, and next there was another little business there and this was Mr. Tommy that ran a grocery store right there on the west side. As you come on up the street on the west side, Truelove hamburger place, which had good hamburgers. From there, the Senior Citizens and Community Center sits right there on the corner, which used to be a Ford garage. There used to be a garage and then they renovated. Across the street there on the east side, you had the telephone company. You come down there today where the Mason Lodge is right there. That used to be a teenager s club, First and Last Chance. On down from there on the east side was Aunt Hattie, she was a beautician. Right next door to Aunt Hattie, I think there may have been a building on each side. Right there next to Aunt Hattie s place there was a beauty shop. On down from the beauty shop on the east side on the corner it was Moore s Groceries. This was still coming on down east, there was, I don t remember the name of them, but there was three clubs in that area. Then you would get to your post office, which the post office building was owned by the Lee s. This is where you come to your filling station and the funeral home, it was the Partridges. And the owner, the big rich son inherited the funeral home, he used to work for them. The Partridges, they grew up in the health field and he bought their rights for the funeral home. And like the funeral home and the jail that was destroyed in the tornado, Mr. McCormick, he built them. Could you tell us some memories of county fairs and local sporting events? Yes. The county fairs we ll go into first. The county fair and home 22 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones Finchum Jones economics were all tied in there and this. We had FHA and one thing or the other. It was where the girls learned how to be ladies, where we learned how to sew. I can t sew. We learned how to cook, set tables, and as I said, manners class, how to go and eat with the proper silverware and one thing or the other. The sports, I used to play basketball when we were in IXL going to school, we didn t even have a gym. We had a goal and we played out there on the dirt. But the tournaments were held in Boley. This is where all the other schools would come to compete, and we would have to model our dresses or aprons or head scarves or whatever. The basketball, it was just outstanding. I don t remember My husband remembered the football. I don t remember the football team, but the basketball game, that was the highlight of the year. People that were here before and they graduated, they always came back. The guys were so handsome. They were just gentlemen. I think that is the biggest thing that went on was the homecoming, other than the rodeo. We don t have that many events now. We could do a lot better. But the basketball, I think, would be the highlight because the girls would play, and it was really something to play in the gym. At that time it wasn t really a gym, it was all concrete. We would play and that was back there, back then they played half court. They didn t start playing full court until, I don t know, I got out of school or something. But it was just amazing and the way that sports I mean, it was good clean fun. It isn t like it is today. I think everything is really overpriced and has less value. Are there any famous people who came out of the Boley basketball team? I would say, I don t think there are any one that came out of Boley school that went professional. I can t think of anybody, but you think back when there was not a lot of scouts and recruiters, but the material was there, I think. What other kinds of local gatherings and events were there? Oh, you have the church gatherings. Pastor s homecoming, like my church is 106 years old, and that s about it. Things were more orientated around school and church, but it was still important that we had little, they called them juice joints. Corn whiskey was very popular. I must say that I had a few drinks every time and it was real good. While we re talking about that, Memorial Day seems to be a pretty big deal. Did you want to speak to that a little bit? Oh, yes. That is the only thing we have now. It has been scaled down 23 Finchum Jones Simpson Jones Simpson because now, today is Friday, the streets would be lined up with vendors on both sides. There was money, money put into the town and the rodeo, I think, is what really kept Boley going and this is where they got their money from. As of now, there s not many real cowboys, so someone will come in and rent the rodeo and pay the town not enough. And it s like the man come in now and he paid only like five hundred dollars for a three-day rodeo. Well, back in the 60s, if it was ran by the town. You think of three days of rodeo and what is it, ten dollars apiece? That money, you would have enough money left to pay your rodeo men for coming in, but they didn t come in and control it, you controlled it. Your people were on the gates and they brought big revenues in. But you think, you were leasing something for five hundred dollars. This isn t good. For five hundred dollars and you re going to have three nights, you think of the money that you re losing, because nobody has time. This is where I say I feel like we ve been exploited. He comes in and he takes away, but what is he giving back? Nothing. He will do this again next year until you start bringing in your own things. You can rent anything now, but you control it, and I think that is what happened. Boley has lost control and until we get control back, it s going to happen. Memorial Day is not just about the rodeo, though, both of you were talking about cemetery visits and family coming back for that. Yes. Cemeteries and the rodeo, I think the rodeo is probably the biggest thing that goes on now and the only thing going on other than Silver Tours will come through, but I think the rodeo brings in more revenues than anything. How often does Silver Tours bring a group through? Oh, and I m supposed to be the guide, too. I don t think last year, I don t know for sure, I think we had about four or five tours last year, but we don t really have I think once you do this and once they get some history in there, I think the more you have to offer, the more people are going to come. So, I mean, we have a city-wide garage sale, all up the streets you can come in and have garage sales. They do that. That s a good thing. But you still don t have very much revenue going to your town. Like I said, we need a hotel. I just believe if we had a hotel, people would come and stay other than the rodeo. This is terrible, but it s the truth. I went up to the cemetery on Saturday, and I can t believe you can t find a cold beer in Boley after eight o clock on a Saturday. What do we have to show the people about what we ve got to offer? So we ve got to do something. The Pretty Boy Floyd ride in June, is that a big part of the town? Is that 24 Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Jones a big town tradition now? Yes, and they have the bikers come through IXL and we have a motorcycle group, the Pretty Boy Floyd group, they come here. But you still don t have very much to offer them. You would be surprised at one book they wrote on Boley, O.K. Corral. Have you read that book? I m going to send it to you. Thank you. I m not going to give it to you, I m going to send it to you and let you do what you have to do. And I think that s about it. But you see, I have a dream of not only being vendors, but being property owners and having business. Plus like, this is a bad thing. People say it s a bad thing. I feel like you should have a smoke shop, I feel like you should have a liquor store here, you should have a grocery store, you should have some kind of a first aid center set up or something and I feel like, you should bring in the circus. The children is where you get money, because children will make their parents give them events. We don t have a swimming pool, and that s why the children don t have anything to do. What were some of the community events growing up that you don t have today? 4-H Clubs, FHA I m talking about in Boley, now, they ve got that in their other schools I think that s about it. Your 4-H Club and your FHA because they were You d go to Langston and have expositions and you d have your show cows and your pigs and one thing or another, but they don t do that. The children in Boley live like the children in town. They are not real country, which I don t like dirt. I don t do sandals. I don t like dirt. They just don t have anything to entertain the children, anything to get their attention. So they get in mischief and you want to be mad at the kids? You should be mad at yourself because if you give them something to do and you keep them busy, they won t have time to get in trouble . They are going to get into some devilment. You know, a boy s got to be a boy. It wouldn t be as bad as it is now and our children, if they close up Homeland, they couldn t survive because they in the country, but yet they don t know how to do gardens. They don t know how to can. They don t know how to ride horses, and we re in the country. Why don t you teach it? That s the only reason why I want to let the grandson do the barrel race because he rides the mutton, the sheep. They let him ride the sheep, but that s not my wishes, but you know, I m old. My children did all dangerous accidents, so be a boy. Put his helmet on, if he falls off and breaks an arm, he ll be alright. As long as the head is protected. That s 25 Simpson Jones the worst thing, the children don t know how to swim. What are you going to do if you fall off in the pond? You can t swim and Mom can t swim because we haven t taught them. Just like I think we ought to have a swimming pool. I think the town should be orientated around the children. Instead of being orientated around the children, it s orientated around the grown people. The children take a back seat. Let them ride up front so they can see what s going on. That s my idea. Now we have a real nice playground at the rodeo ground, but nobody goes. What did the focal point of the town used to be? The focus of the town was the town, religion, school. Those three important things. We don t have that value. Now don t get me wrong, I m not angry about them closing Boley School. If you don t have the proper leadership there, it is better to go somewhere else to school because those are the people you have got to live with. Just like my grandson, the four-year old, goes to school in Okemah. They didn t let him play T-ball this year. They didn t sign him up. So when I got the news, I was a bit upset. The children that he s going to school with now, those are the children he has to compete with and deal with. Those are going to have to be his friends. So why are you going to let him go to school down there for nine months and miss He don t have any connections and he doesn t have any connections with the friends in Okemah because he hasn t participated in I say the four-year old grandson. I used to tell the mayor, right outside, I don t know how many miles it is, the Creeks have opened up a college, put sixty million dollars in it. That s a lot of money. By me being a freedman, my grandson, he can go to school there. It is going to be, as I told the mayor, where he can be able to go to school and come home from school and she d give him leadership of how to be a good mayor, how to run a town, teach him, educate him. That s the people that are going to come. My grandmother was one generation, my father was the second generation, I am the third generation, my children are the fourth generation, my grandchildren are the fifth generation. So if the town has been able to exist since 1907, what makes you think it can t exist longer? But you know what, it s good leadership. My daddy, he was something else. You should ve known him. He d say , If you can t run your house, you can t run a church. Leadership starts at home and you spread it abroad. If you can t lead yourself and control, how are you going to tell somebody else what to do? You don t give people orders. You get out there and work with them. You show them. I feel like Boley is just like your home. I m not a very good housekeeper anymore. I kind of polish up things when the kids are coming home. I 26 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones feel like it s something to come home. You ve got to have something to come home for. You ve got to love being at home. We should ve been out there, we should ve fixed up buildings, gathered donations, and you can write grants for anything. I think the town should have had some kind of vending set up for them every day, no matter what it was, to make the money. To put it back in there. We have to function on money. It s our society. This is what we know. If you want to have something, you can t have it if you don t put your time and your money in. Just like the children, if you want your children to be something, you ve got to put your time, your money and you ve got to see that that child is educated. It s like I got my GED and I picked up a few classes at Oscar Rose. How can my children be better and more knowledgeable than I am? As I said, how are they going to take care of me? How are they going to manage what has been handed down to them if they don t know how? Most children, they don t come back to Boley because they don t think there is anything left here. The senior citizens and I say my sons and grandsons, we re the generation to rebuild. And everybody has a little money, even if you have just ten or fifteen dollars. How do people make a living in Boley today compared to how they did several years ago? It is much better today because today they have the correction center. There are places in Okemah Everyone says Okemah s bad, this and that, but Okemah is not bad. It s a good place. Because them is your brothers. You can go to work at the bank. You can go to work at Homeland, your courthouses. I worked with the election board. Everything is open to you there. You can go to work for the county, which my son worked for the county up here in Paden. We have many transportations to drive to Tinker, but at one time, after the town started slowing down in the 60s, because this is why we moved. There was no place to work. You had to go away to get jobs. But when you go away, you should bring something back to your town. You should bring something back. Oh, yes. Its more opportunities. The doors are open, the fire department This is bad. The reason why we don t have a very good fire department is because so many people have felonies. You can t be a fireman with a felony. I didn t know that. Where the corrections center is now, it used to be the training school for the boys. I still feel like they should have training school to train the boys, you know. No child is bad, I don t think. But there are more opportunities. What were the interactions with the other towns like? Well, it wasn t very good in my day. Racism was everywhere. I mean, you had to go to the back to eat food. The Crystal Theater there in Okemah, which I think the town donated twenty thousand dollars to 27 rebuild it, we could not sit with the whites. We had to sit up in the balcony, because racism was everywhere. But we have come abreast. We re equal. I mean, you go to school with your white brothers and your Native American brothers, the same education you get and it s about education. You can t excel if you can t have an education. If you can t read, how are you going to get to Okemah? You re going to need some direction. That s what I think. Racism is still here, and I think it will always be with us and not only with our Native American brothers, with our white brothers, there is racism amongst us. And this is what hurts us. I was very bitter at one time with the Native Americans and the whites because I felt like they robbed us from something. But after Dr. King, the civil rights movement, I was fortunate to be a part of it. You can be anybody. Obama, I mean, this is what should inspire black children. You can t imagine a black president. I m having a dream, like the football field in Okemah, the Cotton Bowl. The first time I ever was in it, I never dreamed that we would go and see my grandson play football. It was hard for me to watch the game for crying because we ve come so far. I remember the times when we wasn t allowed. Our black children wasn t allowed to associate with the white children, but today, you go out there and you play team sports. Your Native American brother, your white brother, they ve got your back. Have you ever noticed how every nationality can get together in sports? Otherwise you re divided. To see my grandson play football at the Cotton Bowl in Okemah, it was a miracle. I never believed it could happen. So the children get along and you know who keeps racism going? The parents. You can t do that because you ve got to get along with them just like at Homeland. If we wanted a Homeland in Boley, a grocery store, or all those other good things, I d have it. You can do anything you want to do, and you ve got to have something to bring back. But I feel like we have taken from the children. We have grants and we have mishandled the money. Where the money was supposed to go, it hasn t been there. Look at our fire department. We have the best trucks. We even have trained EMTs. I mean, I was in a car accident, and I had to be transported. Firemen were on the scene. They were well-trained. So if you can maintain your fire station and a half million dollar jail that we are building, why can t you keep your school and put you some grocery stores in here and put you some dry goods stores in here? But everything is about bootlegging. We bootleg beauty shops out of our home, we bootleg clothes out of our home, we bootleg Avon out of our home, why can t you set up a business? There are loans out there. This is why they have the black farmers program going on. Where we were denied loans Well they sued them, while the black farmers are paying people like fifty thousand dollars, and I m on the list and I really hope I 28 Simpson Jones get fifty-thousand dollars, but what do they do with the money when they got it? What do they build? They pocket it. Why didn t you take that money and you invest it and then set up? You say, Okemah this, Okemah that, because of good leadership and money. You ve got the same thing. People are coming out. Our town, Boley, we are like in a circle. Where I live and where my other property is out there, black people don t care anything about property anymore. To me it s all about the land, because you can do anything. And if you don t rebuild the town in a positive Why can t you have a drive-in? We ve got all these modern projectors. Put up anything and have something for the children. But it s about self and me and mine. Until you stop being selfish, you will never prosper. Just like, we think we went through our struggle as being black, what do you think about our Native American brothers? But they stood up and they fought for what they wanted, and the first thing they built was schools to educate their people. Okemah High School, Seminole High School, and a portion of Shawnee High School are owned by Native Americans. If they can do it, why can t we do it? Because we don t want it. Kids don t feel like they have nothing to come home to. My kids, oh God, you can t get rid of them and their friends People don t want to be a cowboy anymore. I think, there s nothing wrong with cowboys. I always thought cowboys was kind of handsome. What was your religion growing up and how did your family participate in church? I grew up as a Baptist. I grew up with the church about half a block from the house that sits on our property. My grandfather was a deacon. My grandmother was a deacon. The pastor of the church, when I was baptized, he was my daddy s cousin. He lived in Wewoka, Aaron Jackson, and he would come every Saturday. They d have conference on Saturday for him to preach. He always stayed with us. As I say, I was always different. Why he always got to come and stay with us? So I feel like I was raised up in a very religious home. My mother, she wasn t a deaconess, but she played an important part in the church, any time there was any cooking or cleaning to do. My father was a little bad. He would drink, and one thing or another, just like a man would do born in 1905. I got married in 60 and at that time, 64, my father stopped drinking and he went on to sing in the choir. We would walk to church. At that time, there was no air conditioning, there was no electric lights, there was no bathrooms in the church, but it was something then I feel like was so real. On Sunday morning, the whole family would be in church, and if Daddy didn t go, the children was there. If Momma didn t go, usually Grandmother was with you. We had like BYPU on Sunday 29 Simpson Jones evening, we had training and on Wednesday night, we had prayer meetings. There was no money to pay the preacher. You would be giving him vegetables and chickens, something to help them. Reverend Jackson had a nice size family. He went on and he had three living preacher s sons, I think. It was good, and I can remember that. We would have our new shoes and the patent leather, you would grease them down and by the time you get to church, walking, the dirt was all up on them. It was just horrible. My church ring up, oh, I think that s what kept giving me stability. After we moved to Oklahoma City, we was members at Unity Church for like forty years. My husband was a deacon. I was a deaconess. The boys, they always participated in what was going on at church. I m trying to raise my children and give them some of the basics like my father and my mother gave me. The basic start is home, church, and school. I know this is what has saved me. The Lord, he still be working with me because I don t be always right all the time. But I know this is what has saved me, and this is what has saved my children. I m not bragging, it s just facts and it s just about God. I have three sons. None of them have a record. None of them have been in jail. I have one son that is an elder and they live out there in Richmond, Georgia, and the other sons are pretty upright. So I feel by me being reared the way I was, my husband was reared in a Christian home, that s just what gives us stability. If you don t have hope, you don t have nothing. What traditions or customs did you practice as a kid, and do you still have those today? Christmas. I can remember back to Christmas. There was no Christmas tree. My father would go out there and cut down a little tree. We would take this tree and you would wrap it with material, white material, and you would take construction paper and you would make little balls out of it you would put on it. You would cook popcorn, and you would string the popcorn with a needle, and that would be your decoration. What was so cute, sometimes you would get up and the mice would have eat the popcorn off, so there was just strings. No matter what, we always had a gift for Christmas. It might not have been a whole lot, but we always had a gift. That was a special day. Mother s day was always special to us. Easter was always special to us because we always had Easter eggs. We had eggs because we had chickens, but all this Easter egg dye, we used food coloring. My grandmother would hide the Easter eggs, and we would have Easter egg hunts. My daddy s birthday was the sixteenth of July and that was big. That was when my mother s two sisters would come from California and a sister would come from Missouri, and the other sister lived with her. 30 Simpson Jones My mom and my aunts, they would cook and have my father a birthday, and everybody in Okfuskee County was invited. It was a very joyful time. Thanksgiving was important. We come home for Thanksgiving. There was no holidays that we were away from home. I just think Easter and Mother s Day were the special days, because we always come and always went to the church with our mother. I always had my hat on and was real dressed up, and Mom would introduce us to everybody, and the other mothers children would be there, too. I had a real good experience on the holidays. We celebrated them. Fourth of July, we would go to the baseball games, this little old place up here off of Forty-eighth going to Bristow. Gypsy, it s a little community west of there. We went there for Fourth of July, but we celebrated all the holidays. What were the special foods that you would have those holidays? And what was a typical Sunday dinner? The typical Sunday dinner was fried chicken and the preacher always come to our house. Most children, they could not eat with the pastor. They had to go to another area, wait until he gets through eating, but my father did not have that. If my daughters can t sit here, why feed the preacher? The preacher was his cousin. We was his daughters. So we all sat together at the table, and we were very disciplined. I mean, you didn t talk. There was no conversation going on at the table, you ate. You would eat properly, and we had to sit straight. The Sunday dinner would consist of fried chicken, whatever vegetables we would raise on the farm. My mother always had a dessert, from possum grape pie to grape pies to blackberry pies to peach pies that she d have canned and would use that. Thanksgiving was traditional, turkey and all the trimmings. Easter was ham and all the trimmings. Like on my father s birthday, it was just everything he would like. He would kill a pig, and we had plenty of vegetables, and they would barbecue him. We just always had plenty of food. But all of the holidays were very special to me because we always come home. I never spent a traditional anything at my home in Oklahoma City until after my mother passed. There s my big sis, she lived up the street there. It was just like she stepped in Mom s place. So we always come to her home for Mother s Day. I wasn t a cook. I thought my husband kind of spoiled me. I was married young, and I didn t have to do all these other good things. So he d cook, he d clean up, and we just worked together. But the most important thing was coming home and even with my children, when we get to Paden, my husband would have to stop. There was a little rock store, I think that little store s still there. We would have to stop and my children would 31 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones have to buy some candies and bring it to my sister, because one sister lived there and the other sister lived right there. They would have to stop at that little rock store and get candy to bring to their little cousins. Coming home, it was just wonderful. Are there any stories about your grandparents that have been passed down to you? Yes. Would you tell us one? On both sides of my parents, there was tragedy. My father s people went in the history books. My great-great grandfather came from Ghana, Africa to Jamaica. In the fourteenth century, there were five Cudjoes come, four brothers and a sister, Granny Nanny. She was very good with a gun. They went to war with the British around the fourteenth century. They were such good fighters and such good influential people, the British gave them thirteen hundred acres of land for peace. Granny Nanny and two other brothers are buried there. There are two brothers that come to Florida and in the history books, which the Native Americans wrote and other people have wrote it. At the time, my family was very good warriors. My grandfather s past They could not read or write. You could spell Cudjoe with C or you can spell it with K. The famous movie star on TV, Boris Kodjoe , he s so handsome, he s related to us. My people went and bought them this, but they had good leadership. My great-great-grandfather, which was John Cudjoe, he and Osceola, which is like my great-great-grandfather, number three grandfather, he was a lieutenant for Osceola, and you know Osceola was half Native American, half black. This is why, when Osceola went on the war path, this is why. He was married to a black lady, and the whites stole his wife and skinned her. This is what brought them to war. One of the Cudjoes, spelled C-U-D-J-O-E, the other one is spelled C-U-D-J-O. They were brothers. They knew they were brothers, but to keep from being captured they spelled their name differently . You know how you make your people suffer? They ll never come together as brothers. Just as I went to Jamaica to be with my daddy s people and see the land, this is when I come to the conclusion it was two. At that time, people used names all the way down. Maybe I might have a John Cudjoe in my generation and my children have a John Cudjoe in theirs. My great-great-grandfather, he come on and he was allotted 160 acres of land down here in Sallisaw, he and his mother, which was Maggie Cudjoe. That s where their land was, where the race track is. My 32 grandfather told me the white man, he wanted to put a fence between his land and his mother s land and John Cudjoe told him if he did, he would kill him. My grandfather killed him and he rode his horse from Sallisaw to out from Wewoka. He was trying to get to Little River because he knew that if he got to Little River, his people would be there. Outside of Wewoka, there was a Native American scout that tracked him down and they killed him. They brought him back to Wewoka, they drug him down the street and there used to be a hanging tree right there at the courthouse. A piece of that hanging tree sits in the museum today on Twenty-third. They hung him and my father and the pastor, Reverend Jackson, they had to go and get him and to today, I don t know where he was buried. My father never knew. That was tragic on my father s side. My mother s side as I said, they were state people. My mother s father was killed where my church is today. It used to be a Mason Hall sit there. They had like suppers, you know it was a gathering. They would have pies and have pie sales and eat and probably drink a little corn whiskey, too. My uncle, he was a little out of control. He liked women. My grandfather, he was a married man with seven children. My mother was thirteen years old and my uncle was going with a certain lady there and the husband had hired someone to kill him. He killed my uncle and at the time he shot him, he didn t mean to kill my grandfather, but he thought my grandfather would bother him. When he come from upstairs, my grandfather threw his hand up like this and the bullet went through his hand and killed him. So my mother was thirteen years old and the brother, the baby boy, was six months old. My grandfather, he lived a very short life. He was killed right there at the church. He had went to town to get Annie some Cracker Jacks. She was eight. When they went home and brought my mother back, my mother and her mother and her sisters and brothers, my aunt tells me that she crawled up on grandpa and he still had the Cracker Jacks in his pocket. They let them stay there the night. The next morning, the cemetery, Ebenezer Cemetery, that I clean, this is where Grandfather was buried. My uncle was married to a Native American. There was a cemetery down there by Okemah Lake and this is where she took him. I think it had to be in the 90s when they extended the lake, and they got in touch with me to remove his remains, because they was extending the lake. So I agreed with it and they brought the remains. I wasn t there when they unearthed him, but the cemetery I take care of now, they brought his remains there and buried him with his brother. I feel like both parents had a very tragic life. My mother was thirteen and she had six siblings. My grandmother, I didn t know this, but my grandmother died like at thirty-two from like high blood pressure. My mother was the oldest, so she took over and she raised the other six 33 siblings. A good point about it, my father Oh, I think both parents were handsome. My father was in love with my mother, and he would always tell her that he was going to marry her. But she had to raise her brothers and sisters. My mother and my daddy was married twice. My mother was his third wife. We were the only three children born, and it was just like a love story. He wanted to marry her and as he ended up marrying her, they wasn t never bitter about it. You sit back and you think of how my mother s parents were and the responsibility you have. You look at the hurt in my father and his people. And I think sometimes maybe that is the reason why I feel positive about things. That is the reason why I like building. You ve been torn down enough, and if my parents can go through that tragedy We have a foundation to stand on. We have got to make it better. Because history can repeat itself. And it s wonderful to know the history, and yet it hurts because a lot of people don t know where they come from. But you can go back and trace. I was able to travel back on the Trail of Tears, and I don t know how they made it. Can you imagine living in Florida with tropical weather and you ve got to come to Oklahoma in the snow and the sleet and the rain? And this, they still forgot. You know this, and you know this. They don t mention the blacks. My grandfather, John Cudjoe, he was a scout. He come on here and they wasn t really happy, so they went to Mexico, which has a monument built there. Mexico, the Buffalo Soldiers, they were freedmen. But you don t talk about them much. And the ones that play Buffalo Soldiers today, they don t really know the history behind it. And to make it good and to heal the land, it had to be something positive and the church still stands there. So that s a good thing. So you think about what my fore-parents went through and you think about what we went through and you think about what our children went through, we haven t been through anything. We don t know nothing about hunger. We were What do you call it? A silver plate, I had things that were in my day but my children, they don t know. They was brought up with microwaves and color TVs, which we didn t get a TV until 60. I remember my cousins lived like two miles from us, they had a TV about like this (gestures) and we d go over there every Sunday, even cut through the pasture after church, because we went to different churches, and go up there and watch the Loretta Young Story. It was just wonderful, but when you think back to what happened to our fore fathers, I feel as if I have been blessed, and I feel like I m supposed to give something back because they paid a price for us to be here today. Like I told Ms. Hicks, our school is gone, but we ve got history. That s what our history do. We still have buildings. Just bring our children 34 back. Restoring them a home, it s different in a house and a home. This is your home. You let no one come in and take over your home. That s the way I feel. Home, family, church, school. You don t have it, you re lost. Like what happened to my parents, I think bad things happen to make you better. And I think if you knew your history, because it s like, the oldest son, he went into the military just like the boys, they finish high school and go out in the real world, for them to know their people. Oh, they were very unhappy with me because I sent them to school in Lawrence, Kansas at that time. My sister hated me. Because there was really no conveniences. They lived in army barracks, that s where the dorms were, which when they started was a two year college and now it has grown to be, before they left, it has grown to be a four year college. All the barracks are gone and there wasn t even no air conditioning. She hated me because it was like about, she said about 150 degrees in the dorms. I told her, so what? What is 150 degrees in the barracks? Look at my people, how they made it. And by them going to school there in Lawrence, Kansas, with the Native Americans, it made them strong. It made them be interested in their history, where they come from, because Native Americans know their history. If you don t know your history, you are looked down on. My sons, they are the ones that found a peace treaty. When they went to Lawrence, Kansas, they found a peace treaty. This is what I hold against the Seminole Nation today because you can only be, one grandfather Seminole, grandmother Creek. You could only be in either tribe. Couldn t be in both. My grandmother s father said that the Creeks paid them off by giving them 160 acres of land. My father said the Seminoles have not paid. And the Seminoles have not. We went to Washington, DC and to the coalition out of Atlanta, Georgia there. We went to Washington, DC and we went to the Capitol there. We filed a lawsuit against the Seminole Nation, but the Seminole Nation is so powerful and their children, they have real good lawyers. You can t beat them, you have to join them. You have to get out there, like I feel like every black child that s a freedman, I think they ought to go to a Native American school at least two years. Know your people. If you don t, it s just awful. By my children going to school with a Native American, I think that it gives them self value. They would bring the Native American home with them, and it would be quite an issue because Native Americans travel in groups. Two of them may come home from school, well this one has five good friends and that one s got five good friends. So they may bring ten or twelve Native Americans home. We had a nice home, we lived there on 104th in Oklahoma City. I woke up one morning and it was just Native Americans in blankets all around. And they would come to my home. Out there in Nowata and Ottawa and Tahlequah, my children 35 Simpson Jones were able to go home with their Native American brothers and sisters, and were treated equally. So how can I be prejudiced against any nationality? I have white. I have Native American children in my life. I have nothing but a rainbow. I can t be prejudiced. How could I hate my own grandkids? By them knowing their history, I think this is what has kept them safe today. How did you choose this school in Lawrence, Kansas? Because my children went to private school from three years old up until they were in the seventh grade. They went to Millwood. They knew nothing about going to a predominately black school. I will let them, they went. I did not like the system, so I worked at Bishop McGuiness Catholic School right there on Fiftieth and Western. I worked there. I was a cafeteria manager and I subbed in home economics. They were able to go to school there free. I took them out of Millwood and I put them in Bishop McGuiness. They stood strong against me. Not disrespectful, but what they believed in. I let them go back to Millwood, and I quit work, and I told them that for them not going to the school that I wanted them to go to, they were going to pay and I was going to be on them. And going back to my father, he s the one who told me, he went to boarding school in Topeka, Kansas, to make them pay. This is why I sent them to school in Lawrence, Kansas. When we went back to Millwood, let s just say I didn t like it. I didn t know very much about it, but I didn t like the system. So to make sure they got what they needed, I joined the PTA meeting club. I stood up. My children, they was brought to go to private school and wear khakis and shirts and no gangs. If you can t wear it to church, you can t wear it to school. There was no gang wearing. My cousin and I, we were the ones, and to this day, they have a dress code. My cousin and I, we invented the dress code. Everything that Millwood wasn t what I wanted, I fought against it. There was an algebra teacher there, Mr. Mackawee. Too old. My children were having a hard time in algebra, so I went to Francis Tuttle Vo-Tech to learn how to do algebra. I told them I was getting my GED. They didn t keep real good records, so they didn t know. So I went and I was taught algebra. Once, I was a terrible person. I went to school at Millwood and I got on the blackboard, and I showed Mr. Mackawee how he was not doing the modern algebra. He was holding them back. I won that battle. I went on to the cafeteria. The food wasn t right. I changed it. Everything that I didn t like about Millwood, I went to work to change it. I don t believe in ditching school. My children never went to school alone. Until they were sixteen, I took them to school. So when they got their driver s licenses, I d had a wreck in the car. My husband kept it. 36 They played basketball, I said, That s going to be your car one day. At fourteen years old, they went to work at Taco Bell. They only worked two hours a day, and I used more gas than the money they made but I was still on my mission to punish them and make them pay, because I wanted them to go to Bishop McGuiness, because it was everything. It opened the doors. They stood up against me. Football games, I had to make sure that the coach was doing right because at that time, they had taken prayer out of school. So I said, God was here before Billy Wright. If you can t pray, you can t salute that flag. They hated me. Oh, they hated me. All the kids was up there pledging allegiance to the flag and they d just drop their heads because I was there. So I worked with them there, and they got so that they would have prayer in the locker room. I was in Newcastle one time and we were playing football, and my boys were linebackers. They was twins and they was the Cudjoe twins and they was good at what they did. He got hurt. And God is good. When he first got hurt, he had no feeling and the ambulance attendant that picked him up He was in Newcastle, he wanted to bring him to Norman Hospital. I said Oh, no. We have to go to Mercy. He said, Well we don t run that far. I said, Well we re going to run that far tonight. So we did, and God was good to me because I was out of control. From that day on, when he was able to walk out of the hospital with a chipped vertebra, I had no problems with them praying. They would pray on the football ground. Nobody, Mrs I can t think of her name now, but Mr. Rosenberg, he was their principal and he was from Boley. He didn t like me because I wasn t an educated person, but what I didn t know, I would go back to school and I would learn it to benefit them. So they graduated from Millwood with honors. I never went to Lawrence, Kansas. At that time, my cousin had cancer in West Covina and I was the caregiver. So my husband bought them a new Mazda truck. We loaded the truck up with a microwave, TVs. The Native Americans, they didn t have all this. They were going to school up there on Sunday, and I had to leave to go to California on Saturday. So I sent them to my cousin and had him take them down to school. You had to maintain a grandfather s clause, have you heard of that? It goes back to 1860 or something, so we worked on that clause with the Native Americans, too. So they went to school there, and I stayed in California two weeks. I come home, I went to school to see them, never been to the school. We did their paperwork, never been there. Didn t know anything about it. I went there and it was a little bit out of control, but it made them what they are today. They fought with their Native American brothers, they drink with their Native American brothers, whatever boys would do. They played sports 37 Simpson Jones with them. Today, the same children that they went to school with are highway patrols and this one out of Nowata comes here every year. The police is terrible and the police always want to stay at my house. And everybody don t be too right there, sometimes, but you ve got to respect the police and the preacher, and it s been good. If I had to do it all over again, including the tragedy and the hurt in my life, I don t think I would do it any other way. Because there was a cousin of theirs that was good. Mandriel Dean. I can t remember what year, but I know it was after my husband passed. He was real good in sports and my boys were real good with him. It was a group of them. I had to break the group up. They were going to Pine Bluff, Arkansas. I said, Oh no, they can t go. They had scholarships, they gave the twins scholarships to Pine Bluff, to Cameron and down here at Park University. Those were nice schools. So they went up there. I think today because he was killed, he was a leader of the Bloods. My sons was affiliated. I don t care what they say. But they was in one set or another. He was killed, murdered, because he didn t know how to work. He was a very good athlete, but he didn t know how to work. He would build on his athletic ability and not on his academics. I believe today, if I hadn t have sent them to Lawrence, Kansas and turned their life around, I believe that especially the twin that is in corrections, I believe he would have been killed, too. I don t care what they say, he was his lieutenant. But they were sophisticated gangsters. Maybe I shouldn t feel that way, but by turning them around and good role models, I think they are what they are today. Through it all, they have been boys, real boys and the oldest son, he went on to box with the Golden Gloves. He went all the way. I think by turning their lives around, because that s what a parent is supposed to do, I think that s what saved their lives. Because they was associated, because they was with one set or the other set, and I don t regret nothing that has happened in my life. I think the things that have happened in my life have made me stronger and this is why I know this town has to be built and I know it can be. Hope, I could just see it flourished. Is that the right word for it? Flourishing, yes. I had a question about some of your family heirlooms or keepsakes. Do you have any, since your family has been here for so long? Do you have any special mementos? Yes. I have property. I have my grandmother s trunk, which was made out of wood. I have an heirloom of my grandmother s Bible and my aunt, the furniture that I have today, it was inherited from her. She bought it the same year that I was born, out of Chicago, can you imagine that? So yes. I even have John Cudjoe s picture, and I guess the greatest thing is the history. The mementos and all that is good, but one day that 38 Simpson Jones Simpson will rot, the children would throw it away, but history, it s here to stay. I have a nephew that goes to school at Oscar Rose, and he will be going to OU with the other nephew come fall. I keep everything for him because he said one day when I m gone, he s going to write a book on my life. Because just like, the Africans believe they wasn t educated to keep the records, but I can t think of the person and what they called him. Every generation has someone there to tell the other generation of the history, to keep it going on. I am that person. My sisters, they were Let s just say they were very professional people. They didn t deal with the Native Americans. My sister s two children, they went to college there, too. But my other sister s children went to, what is the new name of our Central State out there? Oh, University of Central Oklahoma. Yes. They went there and then the baby girl, my sister married a Catholic, and she finished high school at Bishop McGuiness and then she went to St. Mary s and she went to OU. So I just feel like the family all turned out good, and there s still the history. I think that is the greatest thing that I can leave my children when it s time for me to go, is that history. I felt like my father made a sacrifice to keep the land, I have no right to sell it. Like my property where I live, they inherit all of it and they can do what they want to do with it, but the property out there that was inherited, I had it fixed, you never can sell it. It ll have to be passed down from heir to heir. I don t care if it s the fifty-sixth cousin. They can t sell it. Because they have no right. They didn t earn it. It s like the property where I live, my husband and I bought that. That land out there, the one we have now, it was blood, sweat, and tears to get that. My father had a very rough time of maintaining it because all the whites and the Native Americans want it because we are the only black people in that area. He kept it. I don t know how he kept it because we had no money. Just farming. I think by being good to people and by being your brother s keeper, is really the reason why we were able to keep it, and the reason why I think they can t sell it is because this is one of the ways they can be shocked back and remember the history. What do I mean by that? Out there, they earned it. It s treasure how they earned it. My mother, they never owned any property. She had known legacies to lean back on and antique treasures, we have nothing from that side of the family but a piece of the history. But from my dad s side, we have it all. So I feel like that s what balances us. I don t know whether I m right or wrong, but that s just my beliefs. What world events had the most impact on you growing up? Did any of them affect your family personally? 39 Jones Simpson Jones I think the Civil Rights Movement. The Civil Rights Movement was so nervous because I was married then. My husband was stationed in Fort Campbell, Kentucky, and then Fort Benning, Georgia. Myself and my oldest son, I lived with my parents and I would go and visit with him, and you would have to sit on the back of the bus. I could never explain to him why you couldn t drink out of that water fountain, and I never could explain to him why you couldn t go to that bathroom. He always said, When I grow up, Momma, you re not going to have to sit on the back of the bus. He said, I m going to grow up to be a good boy and I m going to drive the bus. I followed the movement. When they had the sit-in demonstrations in Oklahoma City, Clara Luper and all, I participated in them. I went to the Katz drugstore, and I sat in on them. I wanted equal rights for my children, my son, because at that time he was fourteen years old, and the twins. At the time he could see it, but I could not let him grow up with hurt and hate. We traveled to Dr. King s church and the marches that we had. We were always an active member in the NAACP as time began to change in 64. I think the biggest impact on my life is when President Kennedy was killed and Dr. Martin Luther King. I mean, that was like a family member. All sets of the children, I have taken them to Ebenezer Baptist Church and to the Dr. King monument and all that. I think I made them, you remember all through the 60s you were black and you were proud and the panthers, the Black Panthers, and all this. I don t know, I just taught them to be proud of themselves and no matter what, people are people. It wasn t about a color. It s about being your brother s keeper. That s your partner, that s your partner. How did the town of Boley react to the assassinations of Martin Luther King and John F. Kennedy? To a certain extent, I don t really know because I only came home on weekends, but I don t think it had a positive impact on Boley. On Martin Luther King Day , I need to do something about that, we marched from the Senior Citizen building down to the school and we d have breakfast and we d have dinner. I said, The Civil Rights Movement is over, we have equal rights. We don t need no more marches. We need to have a parade. We need to celebrate. We need to know that we re here, but marching, we don t have to march no more. I don t understand that, and that s why they don t understand me. But let s have a celebration. Because I feel like Kennedy, both brothers, I have respect for them, and Dr. King, I feel like they died for us. Just like Jesus went to the cross, he didn t have to go, but he went for us. Just like Dr. King and the Kennedy brothers, they did it for us because they was in collaboration together, and I feel like as us being a black town, I feel like we should go all the way out for a Dr. King celebration. 40 Simpson Jones Simpson Jones Simpson What was taught about Boley s history, and black history in general, in the Boley schools? Like, when did you learn about the Tulsa Race Riot? When I got grown. 1921. It was in 1921, I think. When I got grown and I started playing with the history, this is when I found out about it. And I went on to pick up everything at the Historical Society there in Oklahoma City, used to be right down there on Lincoln. I would go to the Historical Society, Mr. Cudjoe. I would just learn how to research and then they had all this on the microfiche. I would sit there and I would watch it and I would go through it until I was blind. I just started taking notes, and I was able to meet some of the people that lived there. You see, the United States plays a big part of our life. The government, I could be killed for this, they re responsible for a lot of things. That should not have happened, but it happened. It s not forgotten now, just like they went back and rebuilt Greenwood. Why can t it happen here? And I think it will. What was the impact of integration on Boley? You know what? Boley still thinks black. It ain t about that. I guess the reason why I feel that is because of my family. They were so into being of pure blood stream that there was incest in my family. They knew no better. Boley. You ve got to think out of Boley. I don t think that they put the real impact upon the children. That s my idea, as I said, my kids didn t go to school here. Anything that they write, to me, I feel like you ought to change it. But you had no voice. You ve got to have a voice. I feel like anywhere my money goes, and I can t voice my opinion, my money goes to the kids in school (I pay taxes in Okemah) you re going to hear me and you re going to treat my children right. You need to know black history, but you ve got to know how to respect it. I don t think that s it. Every nationality cares about themselves, black, white, Spanish, anybody. You ve got to look out from being in Boley. You ve got to travel, you ve got to go to the libraries, and you ve got to read. The greatest thing in the world is reading. People don t understand, when you read, you travel. You know about other people. You strive to be better. Boley is a retirement town, it could be really beautiful. But like most children, like I ve got to get to Okemah and they re going to probably hang me down there. There s not enough black histories down there. They have a museum there and there s no black in the museum. A little place up there by Boley. I went down there See, that ain t right. Tell the truth. Maybe I m wrong, but that s the way I feel. What is it about Boley that keeps people here or keeps them returning? 41 Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Jones Simpson Jones The culture. The culture. The living is very easy. It s very peaceful. The people here are very good. They ve got good hearts. It s all about being knowledgeable and coming together and they can do it. What do you think is the most important thing that people should know about Boley? The history. The history. And to know the history, it ll give you respect. The people when they come here and they open business, most of the people lived in their business. I think the history and there have been educated people have come out of Boley High School, Ernest Holloway. It s like this young man that you was going to interview today, Mr. Hunt, very knowledgeable. He came out of Langston and went on to Minnesota and he s a very big man in agricultural, one thing or another. You know, you can t be illiterate and go on to Langston and like they teach the children about because my grandson is going to go to Langston, the oldest one. He doesn t want to, but he s going. Let them know that Boley is good. Langston is not all black anymore. Hasn t been for forty years. Why not go there? You go there for two years, like my kids, you go to Haskell for two years and if you want to go on somewhere else the next two years, wherever you want to go. We will make provisions for you. They liked it so well, they did three years. So they needed a few more credits, so they had to go back to school. The other might have gone on back to school to be a parole officer, counselor, whatever The fire chief here needs to go back and excel. Let me tell you this here, you have to go to school. You have to keep up with the modern day things. If you don t, you re going to be left behind. So to lead people, like I said, the correction officer and the chief, you ve got to have good leadership. Good leadership is not born, good leadership is taught. To lead, you ve got to be strong. You ve got to take the good and the bad. If you can t do it, you don t need to be in leadership. That s bad, I don t lead nothing. How would you like to be remembered? I ve never thought about that. My sister, she was talking about my obituary, the only thing they would write was that I was Rudolph s wife and I was married x plus years and I had three children. But you know, I would like to be thought of as a person that wanted to fix the wrong. I want to be thought of as a builder and not a tear downer. Most of all I want to let them know my history. I would like some day for someone to really, like my nephew, to write a book about our family. The greatest thing in my life is family and God and education. It s nothing wrong 42 about that. I want to be remembered as a peace maker. Stand up for what you believe in and what you don t like, stand up and change it. All laws are written. Anything that is written can be erased. Really, I never really thought about how I wanted to be remembered. I told them I don t want a long funeral, because you live your funeral. That s just about it. Just wanting to do right and change things and help somebody. The most important thing is to educate black people and not only book sense, common sense, and know your history. Be proud of yourself. We were poor. You look at us today. We ve come a long ways. My children are well educated. My husband was a nice provider. I live very comfortable on his pension, so just remember me as a changer. Not as a warrior, just as my sister said, I fight against everything, but somebody And as my dad used to say, If you don t stand up for something you ll fall for anything. I m not a follower. If I can t drive the car, I don t want to ride in it. That s the way I am and that s the way my children are. Why not? Why not drive the car? Just like I said, the president? Who knows, maybe my great-grandson might be the president, you don t know. Things have changed and they keep changing, but you ve got to keep up with them. So that s why you ve got to stay in school. My children, they went to summer school every year, although they hated it, they had no choice. I was their mother and that is the only thing that my husband ever asked me to do was raise, as far as going to work or doing this, I didn t have to do that. He said, Raise our children. I think he and I did a very good job on them. The most important thing in my life is family. With my sisters gone, I feel like I stand as a monarch in my family, because when it comes down to making a decision, everyone wants to come to me to make a decision. When you make decisions, it s a very impact on life. I actually believe we re going to be held responsible for that. You re going to be held responsible for what you do to people. Just remember me as being Theola Cudjoe. The next thing, I want to go to Ghana and when I go to Ghana, I will have been and went all of the trails, and it will be time for me to go. I don t know why God keeps me here, but it s a purpose. We were in a car wreck on Thanksgiving Day right two blocks from the house. We wasn t supposed to walk away from it. We totaled the car. One was pinned in and through the grace, I was able to get out and try and get help. So I m here for a purpose. My purpose is not to fit in. It s to try and fix things. So that s all. It s not really important, but I told my children, I don t want no long funeral. Forty-five minutes is long enough. When you go over forty-five minutes, you re lying. I don t want no remarks. You re just going to lie. You didn t even like that person, and you ll be sitting back, Oh, this person is just Don t lie. Because I ve lived it. That s 43 Simpson Jones the way I want to be remembered. I always want to be remembered for being from Boley. I know where I come from. So that s all I want. Well, thank you very much for meeting with us today. We ve enjoyed our visit with you, Mrs. Cudjoe Jones. Thank you for asking me. Thank you for coming here to Boley. Thank you for being interested in our history. I feel as if today and for you ladies to take your time, I feel like you have a purpose and I feel like good things. No one has ever come and wanted to do an interview or talk with us about Boley. Not in my remembrance, and to just pick up old common people like me People will come and interview the judge and the mayor, but an old person like me, nobody would have time. So I m proud to be who I am, and I m proud to see someone that is interested in my history and where I come from. I believe you ladies will do just great, just wonderful. So this has been a very good day because it s not every day that people are interested or want to listen to what you have to say. It was just like Oprah. It was all live. There was no script to go by. We just got out here and we ran with it, but you have a purpose, and this is a good thing. I really hope others will come and take the time to do this. Thank you. ------- -------..