 Brest: This is Iris Brest with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is January 26, 2017. I’m here with Dr. Condoleezza Rice, currently Denning Professor in Global Business and the Economy at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, the Thomas and Barbara Stephenson Senior Fellow on Public Policy at the Hoover Institution, a professor of political science, and a past provost of the university--and the past Secretary of State of the United States, among other roles and titles she holds and has held. We’re conducting this interview at Dr. Rice’s office in the Herbert Hoover Memorial Building on campus as part of the Stanford Faculty and Stanford Pioneering Women Oral History Project. I’d like to begin by asking you to tell us something about your early life, reminding listeners that a far fuller account can be found in your lovely memoir: Extraordinary, Ordinary People. Rice: [00:01:07] I was born in Birmingham, Alabama, and I’m an only child. My parents were educators. From the very beginning, education was core to us as 13 a family and to me as a person. I had all kinds of opportunities despite the fact that I grew up in segregated Birmingham, Alabama. I’ve always said that my parents believed I couldn’t have a hamburger at the Woolworth’s lunch counter but I could be president of the United States if I wanted to be, and they had me convinced of that. We moved to Denver when I was twelve. I went to high school at St. Mary’s Academy, a college prep school, and then enrolled at the University of Denver as a music major, a piano major, which I pursued for two years until the end of my sophomore year in college when I realized that I was pretty good but not great and I should find something else to do. Fortunately, I wandered into a class in international politics, taught by a man named Josef Korbel who was Madeleine Albright’s father. He was a Soviet specialist and I had found what I wanted to do. I did my undergraduate degree in political science and economics. Went to Notre Dame, did my master’s degree. Went back to Denver and eventually came back into a PhD program quite by chance. I had thought I would get a job but decided that since there were no really good jobs in Denver, I would go back to graduate school instead. I did my PhD at the Graduate School of International Studies, now called the Korbel School after my longtime mentor. I did it there and finished in 1981. My Stanford career actually started before I finished my PhD because the Ford Foundation was looking to train young Soviet specialists in international security policy. You could go to one of five places. You could go to UCLA Rand, but I’d been in Southern California the 14 summer before--didn’t like it. You could go to MIT. My best friend from Denver also had the same fellowship, and she was dating an MIT professor. We decided she should go to MIT. Columbia was another possibility, but my father was afraid of New York for his daughter. It was not a really good time in New York in those days and Columbia was in a rough neighborhood. It came down to Stanford and Harvard. Harvard didn’t answer my letter. [00:03:45] They claim now that they did but in fact it was Stanford, in a very welcoming fashion. Chip Blacker [Coit D. Blacker] who was the assistant director at the Control Center, John Lewis who was the co-director of the center, and Alexander George, who I had met in Moscow when I was studying language there and he was there for a meeting. They were my advocates and I got the fellowship, and I came to Stanford and finished my dissertation while I was at the Arms Control Center. About halfway through that year, I got a call from the Political Science Department. They wanted me to give a job talk. I said, “Well, what’s the job?” They said, “The job is in international economic policy.” I said, “I don’t do international economic policy.” They said, “Well, give the job talk anyway.” So I did. They came back and they said, “We loved your talk, but we need somebody in international economics.” I said, “Well, I told you I don’t do international economics.” Brest: What was your talk? 15 Rice: [00:04:49] My talk was on my dissertation, which is the only thing you can actually do when you’re a graduate student. It was on civil-military relations in the Soviet Bloc and it was a particular case study of the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia. I was a student of how militaries operated in political contexts. Couple weeks later, I got a call from Political Science again saying, “Well, would you be interested in a term appointment--three years?” I thought well, maybe. I had always thought I was going to go back and probably work in the defense industry or something. I really didn’t have any great desire to be an academic. About three weeks later, before I could accept that job, they said, “Well, we’re prepared to put you on a tenure track.” Then I had a conversation with Heinz Eulau, who was the chair of the department at the time. Heinz said, “Now we can put you on a tenure track but you do understand that at time of tenure, there are no special deals because you’ve come into this unusually.” I had no idea what was going on. Finally I realized what was going on, but I didn’t really fully understand it until I became provost. Stanford had identified a young, black, female Soviet specialist. They already had three Soviet specialists in the department so they didn’t need a new one. But, in the effort to diversify the faculty they had put together an affirmative action appointment and that’s how I came to Stanford. I’ve always told people that one reason that I’m a big defender of affirmative action in hiring is that if you look outside your normal channels-Stanford didn’t generally find its faculty from the University of Denver but I 16 was here, they knew me--you can diversify the faculty. It happened that it worked out well for me and it worked out well for Stanford. Brest: We were lucky. How was it at the Political Science Department at the time? Rice: [00:06:55] There were only two women in the Political Science Department when I started--Judy Goldstein [Judith L. Goldstein] and me--and we were both first year assistant professors. Nan Keohane had been a senior professor but she had left to go back east with Bob [Robert Keohane, husband to Nan] to Duke. It was very funny--Heinz Eulau was a really wonderful man, but he would start the faculty meetings by saying, “All right gentlemen.” About six months in, Judy said, “Heinz, Heinz, what about Condi and me?” I remember thinking just don’t ruffle feathers. Just let it be Judy. Let it be. But she spoke up and so after that, he didn’t call us gentlemen anymore. The first year teaching is just hard because the truth of the matter is you really are chosen principally for your research capacity and really all you’ve been doing is research. Maybe if you’re lucky, you’ve been a TA in somebody’s class. Brest: Had you? Rice: [00:08:04] Dr. Korbel got sick about a year into my graduate program and so I actually had taught his course. I’d had a little bit more teaching experience than most people. I took over his course when he was ill. But no, that was the only teaching experience I had. Learning to teach, and I was 26 and my students were 21 and 22--it was pretty scary those first years teaching. I was also trying to finish. I had finished my dissertation and submitted it to 17 presses and Princeton University Press had accepted it, but I was trying to finish the book and learn how to teach and learn how to be a faculty member. Those first years are always kind of hard. Brest: Did you have mentors here? Rice: [00:08:54] I had wonderful mentors. I think Alexander George was an important mentor to me. John Lewis was a very important mentor for me. And in his own way, Heinz Eulau was. When I was asked by Stanford, “What are you going to teach?” I was going to teach Civil Military Relations. That’s what my dissertation was about. I thought, well, I could probably teach Soviet policy in what we used to call the Third World because I knew a little bit about that and I had no earthly idea what else I could teach. Heinz said to me, “Can you teach Political Elites?,” which is a particular part of study for political scientists--how elites are formed, what pools do they come from, how do people move from, for instance, in the United States, usually from being senator or congressperson or governor into higher ranks. That’s what the field is about. When he said “Can you teach Political Elites?,” I had no idea what he was talking about. I said, “Sure, I can teach Political Elites,” [laughter] figuring I would then go to the library. In those days, we went to the library to try to figure out what it was about. In an act of tremendous kindness, he said, “Why don’t we co-teach it?” So I co-taught Political Elites with Heinz Eulau. I had wonderful mentors. Brest: Were you still affiliated with the arms control group? 18 Rice: [00:10:28] I remained at the arms control [group]. It became the Center for International Security in Arms Control--had been the Arms Control and Disarmament Program. For the first three years, I was actually its associate director, in addition to my Political Science appointment. After my three year renewal, I dropped the administrative role. I was there all the time. I was a fellow. That was really, in many ways, my home too, which is why John Lewis was such an important mentor. Brest: I hadn’t realized that you had an administrative role. Rice: [00:11:04] Yes, yes. Chip moved up to associate director. I became assistant director. When Chip went to Washington for a year to the Council on Foreign Relations Fellowship (he worked for Gary Hart), I stood in for him as associate director. Brest: That’s interesting because in all of the talk about your becoming provost without any administrative-Rice: [00:11:34] Right. People never realized that I did that. I had to manage budget and had to help with appointments and all that sort of thing. It was actually good training ground. Brest: Coming back to your childhood in Birmingham, what was the expectation in your community about women, career, marriage? Rice: [00:12:00] It is really interesting because I’ve never understood when people say there were expectations that women wouldn’t have careers. Every woman in my community worked, they were all teachers, because in black, middle class families, both parents worked. Now, to be fair, it was somewhat easier because the teachers were on the same schedule as the kids. I remember that 19 my father would drop me off at school and my mother would carpool with two other teachers in the community to her job, which was a little bit outside of Birmingham in Ensley. So our role models were two-career couples. Our mothers all worked. There was only one woman in the community who didn’t work, and people used to say that was because she didn’t have a college degree so she couldn’t work. I’ll tell you an interesting story about my dad in that regard. My parents met when they were teaching at Fairfield Industrial High School. My dad was the athletic director and my mother taught English. One of her students was Willie Mays so she had this very famous student. My mother had been there first. Birmingham had nepotism rules. When my parents married, they couldn’t teach in the same school. It was my father who left. Many years later, now being aware that maybe this was a little odd, I asked my father, “Why did you leave?” And he said, “Well, because your mother was there first.” I think in the professional, black community, these role identification issues were not there. Brest: I believe that your aunts all-Rice: [00:13:55] All of my aunts taught school except one who was a professor. My Aunt Teresa Love [Angela Theresa Rice Love], my father’s sister, was a PhD in Victorian literature from the University of Wisconsin. She wrote books on Dickens. She had had trouble getting a job early on because there were prejudices against women going into university work. Her first job was at Southern University, the historically black college in Louisiana. Then she got 20 a job at Norfolk State. Eventually she ended up at the University of Southern Illinois teaching Victorian literature. Brest: This is characteristic of your entire circle? Rice: [00:14:47] It was totally characteristic of my entire community, which was a little black enclave, you know, segregated communities in Birmingham of middle class, called Titusville. Like I said, everybody taught school. I think there was one nurse in the community, but basically everybody taught school. Brest: All of the children were expecting to go to college? Rice: [00:15:11] Everybody expected to go to college. My dad had a youth fellowship at his church. He was a high school guidance counselor and he was a minister as well, a Presbyterian minister. He’d taken over the church his father had founded after his father died. He had this youth fellowship for kids in the community. They came from all over, not just his church. In fact, he used to say he had an advantage because he was Presbyterian--they could have dances and the Baptists couldn’t have dances. [laughter] I looked up to the kids because these were high school kids. Amelia Rutledge, who would become Alabama’s first National Merit Scholar, was in that group. My friend, Mary Bush, who I still see, who became the first black woman governor of the IMF [International Monetary Fund] in the Reagan Administration. Freeman Hrabowski who my father used to call “his little math genius,” who’s now the president of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. We just had lots and lots of these kids who were role models to us all. There was never any question of would you go to college. It was where would you go to college. 21 We would drive--after my parents started going to Denver to do their graduate work because University of Alabama was still segregated so you couldn’t go to the University of Alabama. Denver had a program in Student Personnel Administration, which is what my father wanted to do. We would pack up the family car as soon as school was over and drive to Denver. My parents would drive us--we once drove a hundred miles out of the way to see Ohio State--because we toured college campuses like most people toured national parks. There was always an expectation that you would go to college. All my mother’s brothers and sisters did. My father’s one sister, of course, became a PhD. Brest: And your cousins all-Rice: [00:17:21] My cousins are all college educated as well. As a matter of fact, all of them are advance-degreed. Brest: I was going to ask you about the sense you had of your options in life, and they range from president maybe on down but not eater at Woolworth. Rice: [00:17:42] No, no. When the Civil Rights legislation was passed, I remember two days after the so-called Public Accommodations Act passed, my father said, “Let’s go out to dinner.” We went to dinner at this restaurant in a hotel. People kind of looked up and then they kind of realized, okay I think it’s legal now, and they went back to eating. It was okay. But a little later, several months later, there was like a drive-through hamburger place and we drove through and it was nighttime. We got the hamburger and I said to my father because it was dark, I said, “This hamburger tastes funny.” It was just onions. So, attitudes weren’t changing quite as quickly. 22 Brest: As the law. You were always raised as Presbyterian? Rice: [00:18:39] I was. My grandfather on my father’s side wanted to get a college degree, wanted to get book-learning--he was a sharecropper’s son in Eutaw, Alabama. He asked how he could get a college degree, where did they train colored men, he said. They said Stillman College was thirty miles away. He saved up his cotton and he went off to Stillman. He finished his first year and then they said, how are you going to pay for your second year? And he didn’t have any more cotton. They said, “Well you’ll have to leave.” He said, “So how those boys going to college?” They said, “Well they have what’s called a scholarship. And if you wanted to be a Presbyterian minister, you could have a scholarship, too.” He said, “That’s exactly what I had in mind.” He ended up getting his college degree and going to seminary. My father eventually went to seminary too. I tell people I’m not even the first PhD in my family, and I’m third-generation college educated because my grandfather made that choice. Brest: Tell me about the role of religion in your life? Rice: [00:19:49] Very deep adherence to religion. In fact, in that community in Birmingham, it was faith, family, and education--the three kind of went together. A lot centered around the church, in part because my father was the minister. He had his deacons meetings on Wednesday and my mother was the choir master so we had choir practice on Thursday. Saturday, we usually spent time down at the church doing the bulletins and everything; and then 23 you had youth fellowship on Sunday after church. So the church was kind of the center. My father also used the church for social responsibilities. He would bring tutors from the school to teach French, and tutor in algebra and chemistry on Tuesday nights. He would, because there wasn’t much of a place to socialize in segregated Birmingham. So the church became kind of a place that people could do that. He would bring a dentist every couple weeks to do dental care because behind his church--our community was, you know, not well-to-do, but it was professional class, but behind his church there was a government project called Loveman’s Village, what would now be known as Section 8 Housing. My father would have those kids come to the tutoring. He would have them come to the dentistry, even though most of them didn’t belong to his church. Caused a little bit of a ruckus with his elders who thought that his social ministry was out of control. Because there was a little bit of social stratification, and the idea that these kids would come over and he’d have Christmas parties and do gift baskets for the families--his congregation didn’t like it that much. To show you how women sometimes played a different role, he then organized his Presbyterian women because they supported his mission. And people like Mrs. Florence Rice, who was his cousin, and Mrs. Evelyn Glover--they supported his mission and they would raise money for his mission. He even tried to get them made into elders but women weren’t allowed to be elders just yet. Brest: Did you ever consider a religious vocation? 24 Rice: [00:22:35] Not really. I was always deeply religious. I still go to church on Sunday. I’m still very active in my church. There have been times when I thought, boy, it would be great to do a degree in theology, but it’s always been for the fun of it, not as a vocation. So no, I’ve never really considered going into the ministry. Brest: What was the salience of race in your childhood? Rice: [00:23:09] I’ve said that race was everything, so it sort of was nothing. Birmingham was so segregated that you didn’t socialize with white people, you didn’t go to school with white people and so all of the mores and values and expectations were within the black community. And I’m sometimes puzzled when people say--I’ve heard kids say--“that’s acting white,” sometimes, [for] speaking well. For us, that was acting black because those were the only people with us. Teachers had extremely high expectations and were pretty tough on low performance. In that sense, the segregated community was able to develop its own expectations, its own mores, and its own values, and it was a kind of closed loop. You would encounter racism when you went outside of that loop. For instance, I remember going to visit Santa Claus when I was five. Santa Claus was taking all the little white kids and putting them on his knee, and all the little black kids and holding them out to the side. My father said to my mother, “Angelina, if he does that to Condoleezza, I’m going to take all that stuff off him and expose him to be the cracker that he is.” [laughter] You’re five. It’s like, oh goodness, Santa Claus and Daddy are about to fight. I don’t know, Santa Claus must have read my father’s body language, and my 25 dad was 6’3” and former football player. And when I got there he said, “Little girl,” put me on his knee, “What would you like for Christmas?” You know, you encountered it that way. You knew you had to get all the way to Washington, DC before you could stay in a hotel. You knew that my parents never let me ride a bus--and, by the way, my mother’s parents never let her ride a bus--because they didn’t want them to have to sit in the back of the bus. My Aunt Gee says that when they would be out and they had to go to the bathroom, my grandfather would say, “Just wait until you get home” because he didn’t want them to encounter colored only restrooms. You knew those things were there but it really wasn’t until 1963 when Birmingham became so violent, with the police dogs in Kelly Ingram Park and then the bombing of the 16 th Street Baptist Church. One of my kindergarten classmates, Denise McNair, was killed in that bombing. Bombings in neighborhoods--the men would organize themselves, take their guns and go to the head of the community and scare off white riders at night. It’s one reason that I have a somewhat unusual view. [00:26:09] The reason that I have an unusual view of the Second Amendment--because had there been gun registration, Bull Connor would have rounded them all up. I always said, you know, the Constitution says the right to bear arms in a wellregulated militia and I think my father and his friends put together a militia to protect the community. That was when race became more salient and the bombings became more salient. 26 Then the Civil Rights Act passed and we moved to Tuscaloosa. My dad became dean of students at Stillman. For the first time, I remember going to a football game at the University of Alabama, and going over to see Bobby Kennedy speak at the University of Alabama. And Chet Huntley and David Brinkley spoke at the University of Alabama. I was young enough that maybe it seemed more seamless to go from segregated to not segregated any longer. Brest: You were eight, nine? Rice: [00:27:20] I was eight when the Civil Rights Act passed. And I’ll tell you one other story and then we’ll pack it up. The only time we actually encountered housing discrimination was in Denver. We moved to Denver and the first couple of years we lived in this housing that was there for new faculty. It was a long strip of housing for new faculty. You were only allowed to stay there two years and then you had to find other housing. My parents still owned property in Birmingham and so they were going to rent in Denver. We went to look for property and my father’s colleague told him about this one house that seemed perfect. We went there and the woman was acting kind of strange. My mother said something like the piano would go beautifully right there. She said, “Oh you have a piano?” She said, “Well, I can’t rent to you if you have a piano.” She said, “The noise would be a problem for the community.” My mother and my father looked at each other and my father said, “Anybody in this community have a stereo?” 27 She said, “Well I suppose so.” He said, “So that could be loud too.” He said, “You know what I’m going to do? I’m going to go up and down this street.” He said, “If I find one piano, I am taking you to court because I think you don’t want to rent to us because we’re black.” At that point, she said, “Oh no, no, no. I was just worried about the piano but I’m sure you don’t play it at strange times of the night.” My father said, “We don’t want this house.” It’s the only time that I remember encountering housing discrimination in Denver and that would have been about 1971. [End of Part 1 of 3, interview with Condoleezza Rice - January 26, 2017] 28 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT PIONEERING WOMEN ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: CONDOLEEZZA RICE INTERVIEWER: IRIS BREST DATE OF INTERVIEW: FEBRUARY 16, 2017 PART: 2 OF 3 Brest: This is Iris Brest with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is February 16th and I’m here with Dr. Condoleezza Rice, and we’re resuming the interview that we began last month. I’d like to talk about your provostship chiefly but I have a couple of little, short questions. Maybe short and a little bit irrelevant. Did you ever know Angela Davis? Rice: [00:00:32] Angela Davis grew up in Birmingham also, but she was quite a bit older than I was. My parents knew her and knew her family, but I didn’t personally know her. Brest: Because her parents were also teachers. Rice: [00:00:43] Her parents were also teachers and it was a really small community and everybody’s parents knew everybody’s parents. She would have been probably ten years--as much as ten years older, so I didn’t really know her personally. Brest: Such different paths. 29 Rice: [00:00:58] Very different paths. Brest: You all wound up at universities. Rice: [00:01:01] That’s right, all ended up in universities. Education was just such a powerful value in that community. It was never any question of are you going to college. It’s where are you going to college. She grew up in that same environment. Funny. I did meet her sister many years later here at Stanford. She was visiting. She also was an academic and a professor. I had lunch with her sister and we talked about that little community. Brest: Another thing. Connie Rice [civil rights attorney] is your cousin. Rice: [00:01:37] Connie Rice is my cousin on my father’s side. Brest: She’s the daughter of your father’s first cousin? Rice: [00:01:47] That’s correct. Brest: But she was born in Washington. Is there another branch of the family that we didn’t mention that was in the North? Rice: [00:01:53] What happened is that on my mother’s side, my grandfather’s brothers and sisters were all in New Jersey. They moved to New Jersey but he stayed in the South because he had run away from home when they all went to New Jersey. He ran away from home because of this incident with a woman--that this man dated his sister and tried to beat up his sister. My grandfather tried to beat up this white man and so he decided he’d better get out of there. He ended up being raised by a white family because my grandfather was very fair, probably half white--raised by a family in Birmingham. 30 His family went to New Jersey and he didn’t reconnect with his family until he was in the hospital when he was a young miner. He was probably in his thirties. He was talking to a nurse who knew his family and that reconnected him to his family in New Jersey. The Rice family--there were three brothers. My grandfather remained in the South but his brother moved also north. So Connie was raised in the North. Brest: Other question I wanted to interpose. One thing I’ve always admired is the extreme diversity of your friends, and especially with respect to political affiliation. Just tell me about that a little, can you? Rice: [00:03:40] It’s never mattered to me what people’s political views were. First of all, because my own political views are probably more eclectic than people might realize. I’m conservative in some matters, not conservative in others. One of my closest friends, I always jokingly say, is to the left of Lenin, my friend Randy, Randy Bean; we would never end up in the same political space. I don’t think there’s a political issue on which we agree but I’ve never found it an impediment to being really, really great friends. I don’t think I’ve ever thought of my friends as being conservative or liberal. They’re just my friends. Brest: Did you ever influence a friend’s political opinions or did a friend ever influence yours--I mean, change them at all? Rice: [00:04:31] That’s interesting. I don’t think so. It’s not that I’m fixed in my political opinions by any means, but my friends and I--except for my friends who do political science as a profession--we don’t talk that much about politics. We tend to talk about sports, and music, and family. Many of my 31 friends are religious so we talk about faith. The other thing to realize is I’m a political scientist so, in many ways, politics is my profession, not my avocation. Most of the people I talk to about politics are people who are also in the profession. I tend to talk a lot about politics to my good friend Chip Blacker because we’re both in the profession. Brest: And, again, not of single mind. Rice: [00:03:45] No, not of single mind, although Chip and I laugh that I’m probably a moderate conservative and he’s probably a conservative democrat, so we’re probably some place closer to each other than we might be to the extremes. Brest: Let’s talk about your provostship. I don’t mean this to sound rude, but do you know why Gerhard chose you? Rice: [00:05:52] The story goes all the way back to the Presidential Search Committee. I had just come back from government and Don, Don Kennedy, had decided to step down. Jim Gaither [then president of the Board of Trustees] called me and said, “We’re putting together a Presidential Search Committee and we would like you to serve as one of the faculty members,” along with Steve Chu [Professor of Physics and Molecular & Cellular Physiology] and a couple of other people who served. I said, “Yes, I’d be willing to serve.” As we went through all of the meetings--and Saul Rosenberg [Professor of Medicine--Oncology] was another member and there were several faculty members who became really good friends because it was such an intense process together, once we had identified a few 32 candidates, we would actually go to visit them to keep it quiet as to who we were talking about. I was on the little team that went to visit with Gerhard in Chicago. We were sitting there in his apartment, and he said, “So tell me about your experience in government and how you think about decision making.” It was a question like that. I said, “Well, look, what I really studied was militaries and military institutions and I can tell you with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the answer to every question is a third of a tank, a third of a ship, and a third of an aircraft because it’s completely distributed decision making and that’s the way universities operate too. They never start over and say, well maybe we shouldn’t be doing that. They just keep carving up the pie.” He told me later that it was that statement that he started thinking, hmm; maybe this person would be a good provost. But I was completely floored when he asked me. As a matter of fact, I was in my office over at the Center for International Security and my secretary came in and said that President Casper wanted to see me. Now he’d been here a year and they were now conducting the search for provost and Jerry Lieberman [Gerald J. Lieberman] was acting as provost. I said, “Sure.” Chip Blacker was down the hall from me, and I said, “Gee, Gerhard Casper wants to have lunch with me. They must be getting close to who they want to think about as provost and he must want to ask my opinion since I know him so well.” That’s what I thought. I showed up in his office. After some small talk, he said, “I’d like you to become provost of the university.” I said, “You’re kidding, right?” 33 [laughter] Not the most gracious way to handle that. Because I’d never been a department chair, let alone a dean or provost. He said, “I’ve decided that it’s time for a generational shift.” He said, “I think you should do this.” I said, “Let me think about it.” He said, “Okay.” [00:09:13] I was walking back across the campus and it’s very resonant for me, because the first time I was on campus was when I’d been invited to be a fellow here and I was out checking things out and I was walking from the Faculty Club over to Galvez House where the Center was. I remember walking through those archways along History Corner and thinking, wow, I could spend a year at Stanford. Wouldn’t that be special? When I left Gerhard’s office, I was walking along that same colonnade and it occurred to me I could be the provost of Stanford. [laughter] It was this sort of moment when you almost flash back to what that was like to be a 25-yearold coming here and now you might end up doing this. So I walked back to Galvez House and I told Chip. I said, “Chip, President Casper wants me to become the provost.” Chip said, “You’re kidding.” [laughter] So anyway, that’s how it happened. I think it was because, as you remember, the university was going through very difficult times. It had the indirect cost recovery crisis. We’d already had a year of budget cutting that Jim Rosse [provost from 1984 to 1992] had led and led very well with all the committees and the like. We still had a lot of work to do. We were running a 34 two percent persistent gap between income and expense. We had 157 million dollars of unfunded earthquake damage on the campus. The Quad corners were down. Lot of deferred maintenance because of problems that we were having economically or financially. I think Gerhard thought that it was time for a different look and that’s, I think, why he decided to make a change. Brest: The budget was a very big item? Rice: [00:11:15] It was the biggest item. Brest: You told me last time we spoke that you had had some experience with the CISAC [Center for International Security and Cooperation] budget but this is orders of magnitude-Rice: [00:11:24] Yes, orders of magnitude. CISAC budget was a couple million dollars. [laughter] So it was orders of magnitude. Well, I started by just thinking about what a budget really is. A budget is simply a statement of priorities. That’s what a budget is. You have to have the budget reflect priorities. I thought that the way to do this was to recognize that there were certain things that we simply had to do. We had to rebuild the campus. We couldn’t leave the four Quad corners down anymore. We had to get to a place where we were no longer in hiring freeze on faculty. Working with Gerhard and others, I thought about a kind of set of guiding principles that you would use to make budget decisions. The most important was, if it doesn’t contribute to research or teaching in some way, it’s expendable. That’s how I thought about it. Brest: Did you consider increasing the payout? 35 Rice: [00:12:40] I went to the trustees to increase the payout by one quarter percent to finance the rebuilding of the campus but I did not think, and still don’t think, that you should increase payout to cover budget deficits except in extreme circumstances. I mean, 2008 was an extreme circumstance and I can understand that. But my deal actually with the trustees--and it was Brad Freeman, who was, at the time, chairman of the Finance Committee, who really helped me and worked this through the committee--the deal was, I would deliver a budget in the black in my first year. No more two percent gap between expenses and revenue, and they would allow a quarter percent payout increase to finance the rebuilding of the campus. I think my first budget was in the black by something like 179 dollars. [laughter] But it was in the black. Brest: Gerhard had been provost at Chicago, but I don’t know if the provost there is the chief financial officer or if Stanford is unusual. Rice: [00:13:56] No, the Stanford provost, I mean, for an historical project it is really worth understanding how really central the provost’s role is at Stanford and how powerful it is. I’m told the lore among provosts is that it goes back to when Fred Terman was asked to be provost. He said, “Why should I be provost? I’m dean of Engineering.” They said, “We want you to do for the university what you’ve done for Engineering.” He said, “I’ll only do it if I have three things: all faculty appointments, the budget, and all space.” 36 From that, then, the provost has become the chief operating officer of the university. At most universities, the provost doesn’t have budget. At most universities, the deans don’t report to the provost. So I think it’s really quite an unusual model at Stanford. Brest: How did you and Gerhard work and how was your decision making-Rice: [00:15:03] We knew that we had to be on the same page all the time. I probably walked down to Gerhard’s office five, six times a day, in addition to the formal meetings that we set up, just to bounce things off of him and to tell him where I was going. But he really was willing to delegate to me the kind of day-to-day budget decisions--decisions about how we were going to use the space that was available on the campus. He loves the academy so he read the faculty files, but he knew that as dean of the faculty, that’s really in the center of the provost’s responsibilities. I think it freed him to do some bigger things. I liked making the trains run on time. He could then do things like the Presidential Scholars Program which changed the way that Stanford thought about merit aid to attract people. He could work on things like alumni participation rates which were incredibly low at Stanford. He could think big about the physical campus. We are going through a tremendous building boom right now, but Gerhard Casper is really the father of a lot of the remaking of this campus, including the creation of an Engineering Quad. I think it allowed him to work on big issues, although we worked on this a lot together like the reform of undergraduate education and the creation of freshman seminars and sophomore seminars--to really strategically lead and direct the university so that he wasn’t worrying every 37 day about cost overruns in the museum project, which I was perfectly willing to do, not to mention not to have to worry too much about athletics, which also then I took athletics [laughter]. Brest: Yes, that was not his major interest. What were the reactions around campus here? Rice: [00:17:24] Gerhard said that, and I think he got it right, he said, “People aren’t going to be worried that you’re young.” He said, “They’re going to be worried that you’re Republican.” [laughter] For some people, I think that was an issue but it quickly was not an issue because it was obvious that my political views had very little--nothing--to do with how I was going to try to manage the university. Early on, I’m sure that there were people who were disappointed that they weren’t provost. I tried to be sensitive to those people and people who might have thought that they were next in line. I think the reaction at first wasn’t as dramatic as the reaction later on, because when I went to the Faculty Senate and said, “I don’t do committees,” I’m not sure people really thought I meant it. [laughter] Brest: What do you exactly mean by “don’t do committees”? Rice: [00:18:24] We had had a really elaborate process to deal with the initial impact of the lowering of the indirect cost recovery. I mean, there were committees for everything, you know, to look at every blade of grass practically, with faculty and students and staff on every committee and then a big thing reporting in to some central budget group. And that’s fine because I think it brought a lot of people into the process, but we were past the point, I thought, where we were going to be able to make decisions that way 38 because we were no longer dealing with anything that could even remotely be called low hanging fruit. That was all gone. I actually did have a committee. We called it the Ungroup because we didn’t want it to be known as a group. We had a couple faculty members who served on that for me. Gail Mahood [Professor of Geological Sciences], for instance, served on that committee and then Mariann Byerwalter [CFO and Vice President for Business Affairs], before that, Peter [Peter Van Etten, predecessor to Mariann Byerwalter], who were the CFOs, and then Jeff Cox [Vice Provost for Institutional Planning] who did institutional planning, and then Tim Warner [Vice Provost for Budget and Auxiliaries Management], who really became my absolutely critical person for helping to manage the university. He’s just an extraordinary manager. When there was troubleshooting to be done, the remaking of Housing and Dining Services or whatever, he was really the point person for that. But what I meant by “I don’t do committees” is somebody’s got to make decisions and not every decision can be up for consensus. Brest: It does seem that all the same there were an awful lot of committees. Rice: [00:20:02] There were committees, but the Budget Committee was small and made the decisions. Any time you have a Committee on Committees, you know you have a lot of committees. Brest: Yes, but things seemed to have [inaudible]-Rice: [00:20:22] Yes, people still created committees. There’s nothing wrong with that, but I just meant in terms of the kind of central management of a university. 39 Brest: Tell me, looking back, what were some of the highlights and lowlights. Rice: [00:20:41] I was really pretty brash. I was 38 and I was in a hurry to get things done. My dad had been a university administrator. I would consult him with some problem and he would say, “You know, you can slow down a little bit.” Because I had to learn how to manage in a couple ways. First of all, I had to learn how to delegate. If something wasn’t done immediately, it was my tendency to want to go do it. You learn pretty soon that good people aren’t going to work for you if you do that. And I learned how to facilitate others getting their jobs done. I can be very sharp tongued and I learned to control that a bit. I remember in one budget meeting, a particular senior associate dean made his presentation and I said, “I’m sorry, I didn’t understand.” He said, “Well, you just don’t understand this budget.” I said, “Well, let’s be very clear. I speak three languages. That wasn’t in any of them. Would you like to start over?” At the end of the meeting a senior faculty member--friend of mine-said, “That was effective.” He said, “But probably not very smart. You just embarrassed him in front of his boss and you’re really his boss.” It occurred to me, you know, it’s something I would never do to a student in a classroom, right, because you freeze everybody else. But if you do it to people over whom you have authority, you’ll also freeze them. I had to learn things like that. I was pretty tough on the students at the beginning. You might remember that we had the hunger strike because I had had to let go of Cecilia Burciaga [Associate Dean and Development Officer for Student Resources] who I had a lot of respect for. But we had budget problems, I 40 didn’t have money for everything. I went to the Faculty Senate and there were four or so Latino students [who] held a hunger strike and they were out on the Quad. I went to Faculty Senate and somebody said, “Doesn’t it make you feel terrible that our children are sleeping on the Quad and not eating?” I said, “I’m eating and sleeping just fine, thank you very much. Not going to change anything.” I was young. But I learned over time that they’re students. My father once said, “You know, they’re not the Soviet Union.” [laughter] That first year I was pretty brash and pretty hard on people and determined to get things done very quickly. And we did. We got a lot done very quickly. What I wanted to be able to say to people is, we’ve got to do this really hard work and then we’re going to be able to flourish again and we’re not going to have any more faculty freezes and we’re not going to be freezing salaries. In a couple of years, we were able to deliver that and get the place back on its feet. Brest: Did you have a sense that the faculty and students appreciated that change and were pleased with you for having helped bring it about? Rice: [00:24:00] Yes, by the end, not only was the faculty feeling pretty good about where we were but no-I’d worked hard on things like trying to bring minority faculty. I said to the black faculty, give me names. We’ll find the resources. Give me names. I spent a lot of time trying to make sure that we were developing a coterie of minority graduate students because I worried a lot about pipeline issues. I remember telling a group of students once, “You know, I can’t create 41 assistant professors out of whole cloth so if none of you are going to go to graduate school and get a PhD, I can’t do anything about it.” I think some of those things were appreciated. The very last editorial that the students did was very appreciative that way. It was nice that they’d come full circle. Brest: What were the other issues? The student protests--were there others besides that with Burciaga? Rice: [00:25:08] Yes. Well there were student protests around the ethnic centers because I zero based everybody.1 I told them if I’m going to zero base the Physics Department, I’m going to zero base the ethnic centers, and you know, we got through it. I asked the ethnic centers to be more integrated into the academic life of the university, you know, providing opportunities for students to have tutoring if they needed it or to get to know graduate students who could help mentor them and the like. I think they actually eventually took that on, [took] that direction very well. I think now the ethnic centers are much more involved in the academic life, not just the social life, of the university. We had a lot of issues around how to think about undergraduate education, particularly the humanities requirement, which every few years seems to be up for debate in the university. We had a two-year committee-only in the university would you have a two-year committee, but we did--to create a sort of different introduction to the humanities. Brest: What was it? Western Civ at the time? Note from Condoleezza Rice: This meant that we took a completely new look at expenses and revenue with no reference to what the prior year’s budget had been. 1 42 Rice: [00:26:39] It had gone from Western Civ to Cultures, Values, and something [Editor: Cultures, Ideas, & Values (CIV)]. This now was Introduction to the Humanities [IHUM]. That was a constant issue. I think it makes no sense to have an International Introduction to Humanities that doesn’t have diversity of experience and thought. But it also is awfully important to recognize that some events in history have to be understood if you’re going to understand what happened subsequently. What happened with peasants in some part of the world actually didn’t have the effects on human history; it’s what happened with the kings and queens of Europe. That’s not a normative statement. That’s a fact. We had to get to the place that we could understand things like that. Brest: If it were now, would there be things you’d do otherwise? Rice: [00:28:00] You mean if I were provost now? Brest: Yes, or not even if you were provost now. What do you think should be happening now in light of the current situation? Rice: [00:28:10] I’ll tell you a couple things that concern me about the university now, not Stanford, all the universities. I remember when Gerhard and I talked about maybe the three-year degree, and you would have thought we had sent a nuclear weapon off on the Quad because people were saying, “No, it takes four years and they need to--.” With the advent of online learning and the ability of technology to be the delivery vehicle for learning, it’s not clear to me that everybody’s going to continue to pay for four years, at the prices that we all charge, just to feel that they’ve had a social experience. It may not be right for everybody. And so I 43 think we have to start to look at differentiated packages of education. Maybe somebody wants to spend two years doing online work in the big classes and basic classes and then take advantage of what we do for the two years which only we can do--small classes and labs and things like that. I think we’re whistling past the graveyard on what the effect is going to be of online learning on universities. There are great things like Coursera and so forth, but I’m not sure that, on the basics of what it’s going to do to how we deliver a college education, that we are ready for it, because I study institutions as a political scientist and why they don’t react to big, environmental stimuli out there that are saying things have to change. You could see that universities could deal themselves out of the central role in education over an extended period of time. I think we have to think hard about that. I worry some about what people are calling the smoke-like problem, you know, the safe spaces and micro aggression and I am very clear with my students about this. I tell them, “Probably the reason I don’t recognize micro aggression is I grew up in Birmingham, Alabama. That was a macro aggression.” And I think we infantilize our students. They have to be willing and able to confront ideas that they don’t like, delivered by people that they don’t like, in ways that offend them, because the last time that I looked, there actually isn’t a constitutional guarantee that you will not be offended. I’m quite concerned about that. I’m concerned that I’ve had students come to me and say, “I don’t feel that I can say what I think because there is an orthodoxy in the university and if I say anything outside that orthodoxy, 44 maybe I’m religious, maybe I’m conservative, maybe…then I’m ostracized. So I just keep my thoughts to myself.” Brest: Really? Rice: [00:31:39] Yes. That’s really awful. And it happens in the classroom apparently. If it happens in a dorm or in a social setting, then everybody can handle themselves. But when it happens in a classroom, that’s the height of an unequal relationship and it shouldn’t be allowed. Brest: Do you have also theories about how to prevent it? Rice: [00:32:13] You know, faculty govern themselves. I would hope that if the issue is raised, that faculty will begin to think about what they say in the classroom and how they say it and whether what they’re saying is excluding some portion of their students from the discourse and not to become so selfcentered that they’re determined to have their orthodoxies dominate their classroom. Brest: Do you think that that’s what the source is--the faculty rather than the student? Rice: [00:32:49] I think the source is some faculty. Yes. Brest: Going back to when you assumed the provostship, who was the provost? Rice: [00:32:58] Jerry Lieberman was acting. He was ill as you remember and I was supposed to take over in September, and I did in July because Jerry wasn’t able to continue. He was a tremendous counselor to me. He helped me immensely. He’d done it before and he was great. Brest: I loved him. Rice: [00:33:19] Yes, me too. 45 Brest: What we skipped over is your first public service tour. Rice: [00:33:30] Yes, yes, yes. Brest: Come back to that. Rice: [00:33:33] When I went to work for George H. W. Bush? Brest: Yes. Rice: [00:33:36] I had met Brent Scowcroft when he came out here to give a talk. I was thought to be one of the better young Soviet specialists in the country and I asked him a question. He came up to me afterwards and he said, “I’d like to keep in touch.” And he started taking me to something called the Aspen Strategy Group where a lot of the foreign policy elites sort of gather in the summer. And then when he was asked to be National Security Advisor by George H. W. Bush, he called me and he said, “This fellow Gorbachev, he’s doing some really amazing things and interesting things. The President needs somebody to help him sort it out. Would you come be the White House Soviet Specialist?” I was offered two other jobs with the administration but I thought, well, it’s the White House and I know Brent. Just to show you how different things were then: when I said, “Yes, Brent, I’d love to do that,” I went and I met Bob Gates who was the deputy and a couple other people. I said, “Yes, I’d love to do this.” He said, “Great.” Then he said, “Are you a Republican?” I said, “Yes,” but he didn’t even know. That just shows how different things were not that long ago. He was just trying to find a bright, young Soviet specialist and he didn’t really care about the politics. I showed up in January of 1989 and within weeks, it was obvious that the world that we knew was 46 coming unstuck. It had started in Poland with Solidarity making a deal with the government and soon Communist regimes were just kind of falling all over Eastern Europe. For me, probably the highlight was that by the summer of 1989, everybody thought maybe Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia would get out of the Soviet Bloc because it was clear Gorbachev wasn’t prepared to use force to keep them in, but would the Soviet Union really allow Germany to unify? As it was clear that East Germany could no longer sustain itself. I remember a cartoon in the newspaper and it said “the unification of Germany.” It had West Germany, East Germany; it had all the people in West Germany and one little person staying in East Germany because people were just fleeing East Germany. We thought we better put some kind of process around it. Jim Baker and others created something called the TwoPlus-Four meaning the two Germanys plus the four powers--France, the United States, Soviet Union, and Great Britain who had been the occupying powers--to return Germany to sovereignty. Brent called me over to his office and he said, “I want you to be the White House representative on the delegation, the political directors’ delegation that will actually write the document.” I said, “Brent, I’m a Soviet Specialist--I’m your Soviet Specialist.” He said, “For us, German unification is a Soviet problem.” He said, “President Bush already knows that he wants Germany unified. He’s not at all fearful. It’s not an issue for us. But how we bring the 47 Soviets along, that’s going to be the big issue, so that we don’t have an explosion in the middle of Europe.” That, for me, was the most exciting thing that I did in government-was to be on that political directors’ delegation to write the document on the unification of Germany. Brest: Were you tempted to stay in government? Rice: [00:37:20] No. We get the unification done and it’s pretty clear now that the Soviet Union itself is in trouble because the Baltic States are practically declaring independence and it was April, March--earlier. I went to Brent and I said, “Brent, we’ve liberated Eastern Europe, unified Germany, the Soviet Union’s about to fall apart, and I don’t have the energy for it. It’s time for me to go home.” I felt that I couldn’t, as an academic, you know, two years was about right at that stage in my career. I left in April and came back and the Soviet Union collapsed in August, well actually December, but, I mean, the coup against Gorbachev was in August so I was not there for any of that, but I felt I’d done what I needed to do and I’m an academic at heart. When I left the last time, people kept saying, “Well, what are you going to do?” I’m going to go back to Stanford. It never occurred to me to do anything else. Brest: Did it ever occur to you to go to another university? Rice: [00:38:31] Only once. I learned something important that helped me as provost with this. I came to Stanford. I was on a one-year fellowship. About halfway through my fellowship, the Political Science Department said, you know, give a job talk. I said, “Fine.” They said, “Our job is in international economics.” I said, “I don’t do international economics.” I think I told you 48 this story, right? I am offered the job. I realize they’re trying to diversify the faculty and that’s all fine and I get tenure. Now every university in the country comes after you because now you’re certifiably good. In particular, Harvard and MIT and a few others courted me. I really liked MIT. I like the department there and everything but, in the final analysis, I didn’t like Boston that much. I had decided I would stay at Stanford; but that was probably the closest that I came to leaving--was to go to MIT. That would have been 1988 I guess--1987 or 1988. I’ve always thought I was fortunate and blessed to kind of find a university that fits me like a glove in so many ways, from what I do academically to the colleagues, to the valley, which is such an exciting place to be around, all the way to the sports, you know, to the intercollegiate athletics. It’s perfect. Brest: I never really thought about the place being perfect but-Rice: [00:40:28] It’s a perfect fit, yes. Brest: I’m skipping again, but what’s your relationship with the Hoover at this point? Rice: [00:40:43] I am a Hoover Senior Fellow. And Hoover Senior Fellows, there are two kinds. There are people who are fulltime Hoover Senior Fellows, so they’re recruited just to Hoover. Then there are joint appointments. I’ve been a joint appointment my entire time. When I left as provost, I was jointly appointed to Hoover. I had an appointment at Hoover and then I went to government. When you’re provost, you can’t be a part of a department so, in effect, my billet was being held in the university. 49 When I came back, I felt that I really wanted to go to a professional school. Because of some of the things I’d worked on and was interested in, I thought the Business School was a good place. But it’s an interesting story from the academic point of view because you don’t just pick up and move to another school. I was in H&S [School of Humanities and Sciences]. You don’t just pick up and move to another school. They go through a whole process of, you know, faculty looking at what you do and voting and all of that. I remember telling Garth [Garth Saloner, John H. Scully Professor of Leadership, Management and International Business and at that time Dean of the Graduate School of Business], “Look, I want this to be like you would do it for anyone else.” And so they did, and I was then appointed to the Business School as my faculty appointment and my half-time appointment at Hoover. Brest: So leaving H&S? Rice: [00:42:04] Yes. Brest: Do you now teach only at the Business School? Rice: [00:42:09] No, I teach a course for Political Science as well. Brest: You didn’t entirely leave. Rice: [00:42:14] Yes, I teach advanced undergraduates in a course for Political Science, but I don’t have an appointment there. I have a courtesy appointment. Brest: Thanks so much. Rice: [00:42:34] It’s wonderful. [End of Part 2 of 3, Interview with Condoleezza Rice - February 16, 2017] 50 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT PIONEERING WOMEN ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: CONDOLEEZZA RICE INTERVIEWER: IRIS BREST DATE OF INTERVIEW: APRIL 12, 2017 PART: 3 OF 3 Brest: This is Iris Brest with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is April 12, 2017. I’m here again with Dr. Condoleezza Rice for the third segment of this interview. We were talking about your provostship last time and I had meant to ask you about music, both personally and professionally. Rice: [00:00:33] Well, music has figured so strongly in my life since the time I was three years old. My mother was a music teacher, a musician; my grandmother was a music teacher, and my great grandmother also taught music. So it went a long way back in my family. And, as I’ve said, I tried to major in music, left it. And so by the time I came to Stanford, I had not really played the piano in years seriously. I would play kind of Christmas carols at Christmas and mess around on the piano. I didn’t even have a piano here with me, initially. But when I came back from government the second time, I brought the piano here to Stanford. And so the Brest family figures very prominently both in my personal music development and in the university. 51 So when I became provost, I was meeting with a certain dean of the Law School and he said, “You play the piano, right?” And I said, “Yes.” And he said that he had this little string quartet and they wanted to try some of the piano literature and would I play with them. And I said, “Oh Paul, I haven’t played serious music in years.” And he said, “No, no, you should come.” So, at that time, it was Karen Lindblom and Paul [Paul Brest, husband of interviewer Iris Brest], and Walter Hewlett. And so we played some Mozart and the like and then he brought a second violinist in and we started to play some quintets and I was starting to really love it. And that summer, we went to the Muir String Quartet’s festival, which, at that time, was in Snowbird, Utah. I played some with them and I played some with the quartet and I was starting to really love it. And I decided I was going to come back and take piano lessons. So I went to George Barth who was the head of the Piano Department, and I said I wanted to take piano lessons. And George has said that he thought it was some kind of Trojan horse, that I was actually there to kind of scope out what was really going on [laughter] with the Music Department. I’ll return to that in a minute. But he said, “You were really serious.” And the kind of impetus for being really serious was I had agreed to play with the Muir at the home of Paul and Iris Brest in November, as a matter of fact, on November 14th of 1994. And so I was learning the Brahms Piano Quintet and it’s a monster of a piece, and I was working on it with George and we worked very hard. And, sure enough, 52 November 14th, I performed that piece with the Muir. But one of the really funny moments was that it started out with unison passage with the piano, violin, and cello. And we got about three notes in and there was this horrible dissonance and I thought how could we be off, we just started? They were playing Happy Birthday and didn’t tell me. So that was one of those great moments. But that’s how I got back into playing and I’ve been taking lessons ever since and concertizing ever since. [00:03:50] And so Paul is really responsible for getting me back to my music. But upon becoming provost, I also realized that the Stanford Music Department had really kind of deteriorated. It was basically just giving a few lessons. It didn’t really have a program per se. John Etchemendy was the senior associate dean for the humanities. And we were not very strong really in any of the arts. I said to John, “I want you to put the Music faculty in a room and don’t let them come out until they have a plan for the Music Department.” And John did exactly that. He led a review of the Music Department. We had certain strengths. Computer music was very strong. And Walter Hewlett had spearheaded a lot of that, CCRMA it was called [Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics]. Then we had some good composers but of the more modern variety who also related to the kind of computer music side of it. We had some very good professors who were teachers of piano and strings and so forth, but we didn’t even have a category for people who were performers to be on the professoriate. So it was clear that we were not, you know, we weren’t Juilliard, we weren’t a conservatory; we probably weren’t 53 going to ever compete with the USC or the Big Ten schools like Michigan and Indiana that were the big factories for turning out performers. But we needed to find a niche where we could really be great. We decided that we had some good musicologists, we had great computer music, and if we could create a performance program that was not for people who necessarily wanted to be concert musicians but the great, new biology student who, like me, was a very good amateur, or the computer science major who had studied piano from the age of three. And so we set about doing that and in order to anchor that, we decided we needed a really first class quartet to anchor it because they could anchor chamber music. They could anchor performances and the like. We had a good quartet, but we didn’t have a world class quartet. And so the university supported auditions and we had, I think, probably eighty quartets from around the world that applied to come here. Paul Brest led that effort. Paul and I sat through the auditions of the last five. And that is how the St. Lawrence Quartet came to Stanford. And they were at that time a very young quartet from Canada--kind of up and coming but nobody really knew who they were, and now they are one of the best quartets in the world. It turned out to be great. Then also I went to the Faculty Senate to create a category of Professor-Performance and we were able to create the category so that we would anchor each of the major piano and voice and strings and the like. And so we did that. The Music Department has flourished. And so one of my greatest joys is that we were able to turn around the Music Department at Stanford. 54 Brest: The St. Lawrence has done nothing but got better all the time. Rice: [00:07:40] Yes, they got better and better, and they love students and they work with students and they’re perfect for a university, just perfect. Brest: Apart from that major search, during your provostship, there were dean searches. Rice: [00:07:59] So I oversaw several dean searches: search for the dean of the Medical School after David Korn stepped down and we hired Eugene Bauer [Eugene A. Bauer]; search for the dean of the Law School because Paul retired and we brought Kathleen Sullivan [Kathleen M. Sullivan]; search for the dean of Earth Sciences took place during my time; search for the dean of the Business School because Mike Spence [A. Michael Spence] stepped down and Bob Joss [Robert L. Joss] was brought on; Education. So we had a number of deans turn over while I was here. Mostly they were long serving deans who retired or had decided to move on to other things. Brest: Oh, Earth Science. Rice: [00:08:54] Earth Science is [Lynn Orr]. Right, right. Brest: How about Athletics? Rice: [00:09:03] Well, so Gerhard Casper had been an undergraduate in Hamburg. He had been a Yale law professor. He had been provost of Chicago, which abandoned football in 1945, I think. He was not exactly cut out to oversee intercollegiate athletics of the seriousness of the Stanford program. [laughter] And at Stanford, since the provost is really the chief operating officer and oversees budget and facilities and all that, it was a kind of natural thing for Athletics to report to the provost for those matters. And I said to Gerhard, 55 “I’ll be happy to oversee Athletics on a day-to-day basis, although obviously you have to be involved because it’s the presidents that are held accountable.” And he was perfectly happy to have me do it. So Ted Leland was the athletic director. I loved the program, and I still do, because Stanford has an unusual mix of athletics and academics. The overlap of people who can play in the PAC-12 and get into Stanford is not very great. And so Stanford has to recruit nationally. Stanford keeps its standards high for student athletes. You won’t find any majors in recreation among the student athletes at Stanford, and they belong here. I always thought that it was absolutely great that there was a place like Stanford where if you were good in the classroom and good in athletics, you could find the place to be. And that’s who they are. And I think it’s the best athletics program in the country. It also plays thirty-six sports and has very strong women’s sports so Title IX, you know, at Stanford, is not considered anathema. It’s considered a real strength and the women’s teams are very, very strong here and have been for a really, really long time. I see a lot of universities trying to rush to build women’s teams to be in compliance with Title IX but Stanford has always had excellent women’s teams, going back a long, long way. Brest: What do you think about football, especially now that we’ve got a president who’s a neuroscientist? Rice: [00:11:27] Yes, yes. Well, football’s got its challenges, because something is going on with the sport and brain injury. I think the process of learning exactly what it is and how to deal with it, how to protect it--it’s a violent 56 sport so you’re only going to be able to protect so much. But they’re making a lot of progress in thinking about how to minimize head-to-head contact. But they’re making progress in minimizing the amount of days that you can actually work in pads as opposed to just walking through. They’re making a lot of progress in understanding concussions. It used to be when somebody got hit in the head in football, you know, they’d put one finger in front of their eye and go like this and if they were able to follow the finger even moderately, they were right back in. Now there are concussion protocols that you have to go through. Nobody goes right back in after a suspected concussion any longer. So I think they’re making progress. The truth of the matter is concussions happen in a lot of sports. I had two myself as a figure skater because I hit my head on the ice and ice isn’t soft. So the reason I say that they’ve got more work to do is that one of the problems with diagnosing or knowing what the relationship is to CTE, the head trauma disease, is that the sample is completely of people who had CTE. So you have a sample that has selection bias in it. So you can’t cut open the brain of somebody who’s-Brest: Is still using it. Rice: [00:13:09] --still functioning. I know some of the best neuroscientists in the world are working on it. I have a very good friend--actually [pianist and composer] Michele Levin’s husband, Tom, is on a panel for the NFL on head trauma and he’s one of the very best neurosurgeons in the country. I think they’re doing what they can, but I worry about it for football because I 57 don’t want football to become like boxing where the only people who do it are people who have no other options. Brest: I didn’t know that about boxing. Rice: [00:13:42] Yes, yes. Brest: I have something written here that I don’t remember what it means: “Partners in Academic Excellence.” Rice: [00:13:52] Yes. So Partners in Academic Excellence was a program that Gerhard and I started. And I’ll explain the origins of it and then how it evolved. The provost does the Phi Beta Kappa ceremony each year. And so as provost I was doing the Phi Beta Kappa ceremony, and I noticed that there were almost no African-American kids. I think that year there was maybe one, maybe two. And I thought, “What’s going on here? Because obviously they are hyper qualified when they come here and something’s going on.” I’ve always suspected that there is a tendency--what President Bush called “the soft bigotry of low expectations”--not to challenge minority students quite as hard because you don’t want to be called racist, or you want to make excuses for them, or whatever. And so we started something called Partners in Academic Excellence where freshmen would be paired with--so five freshmen--with a black graduate student and a black faculty member. A black faculty member would maybe have twenty kids. The graduate student would have five. And the graduate students would read their papers in the Humanities core and give them suggestions. And the black graduate students were saying, “This isn’t an A paper. You’ve been given an A. This isn’t an A paper.” And then, they 58 would get to the next level, sophomore or junior year, and all of a sudden they weren’t really well prepared because we weren’t preparing them early on. And so I think this bias is real. And somebody asked me was I trying to recreate my segregated schools because I had really good teachers in our segregated schools, and since race wasn’t an issue, people could be very demanding. And I said, well maybe. But of course, we soon realized that we would be in violation of law if we made it only for black students, and so we started to create other affiliations or other affiliated groups. We started doing it for Hispanic students. We did it for athletes--again, sometimes people will underestimate their capacity because they are athletes. And so it was really almost a little bit of an experiment, to see if we were really serving these kids well with the high expectations that we ought to have. Brest: What happened? Rice: [00:16:32] Well it became a very popular program and then we started getting all kinds of different Partners in Academic Excellence. And eventually when we went to more of a college system for freshmen, it wasn’t needed as much. Remember early on our freshmen were sort of disbursed into all kinds of dorms and there weren’t really special programs for freshmen. Once they were more in a freshman college environment, it wasn’t as much of a problem. Brest: During the early days when the graduate students would diagnose this student is being-Rice: [00:17:08] Coddled. Brest: Yes. Was there anything to do about that? 59 Rice: [00:17:13] Well, you know, actually the faculty within sort of helped by talking to colleagues, not saying, “Professor A, you’re doing this or Professor B, you’re doing this,” but just socializing in among colleagues and bringing up in faculty circles and in their departments and saying, “Let’s be sure that we’re not falling prey to this.” I think it really started to make faculty more aware. I had had one experience with a colleague in one of the science departments. It was really early in the quarter and he said, “Oh, I’m doing so much teaching this quarter,” he said, “and I have all my sections.” He said, “But I’m doing the one for minority students. I’m doing it myself.” And I said, “Well, why is that?” And I thought, “You’re two weeks into the quarter, how could you possibly know their capacity?” Right? So I think it happens, and it’s the best of intentions. Comes from the right place in the heart but it really is not a good thing. I think by actually getting faculty to talk about it in a more open way, we were able to deal with it better. Brest: I think that’s similar to a thing that happened at the Law School before your time. Rice: [00:18:27] Really? Brest: A program that they dismantled when it proved to be falling into that same-Rice: [00:18:36] Yes, because you know, I’m a big supporter of affirmative action and I’ve defended affirmative action. And I, myself, wouldn’t probably have been at Stanford without the effort to diversify the faculty. Stanford didn’t need another Soviet specialist but they found this young, black, woman Soviet specialist who was here on a one-year fellowship and thought, oh she’s 60 pretty good, maybe we’ll get that half billet. 2 So I’m a big believer in affirmative action. But I think we have to be honest that the downside of it is that people very easily come to the conclusion that well they must have lowered the standards, when you see somebody of color or even if you see in some fields women. We have to fight that bias all the time. Brest: Back to the athletic part of it. You have so often been in male dominated contexts. Is it helpful to be so athletically literate? [laughter] Rice: [00:19:43] Yes, yes. It really is. Sometimes if you’re in a context with people who are not like you, you have to find ways to bridge. And so my first experience with--first real experience in the workplace with this--was that I was a fellow of the Council on Formulations and my fellowship was with the Joint Chiefs of Staff. And I worked [in the Nuclear and Chemical Division] for Strategic Nuclear Planning which was the guys who do the single integrated plan for the employment of nuclear weapons. And so it was pretty male dominated. It was affectionately called the NUCEM division. And here I was, I was female, I was black, and I was a civilian--three strikes. The first days, they said, “The rookie makes the coffee.” And I said fine. So I made the coffee. I made coffee so strong nobody could drink it, you know, so I wasn’t asked to do that again. But then there was a football pool, and I won it. And from then on, we had something to talk about. Every Monday morning we’d come in and talk about the football games and who was looking good and who wasn’t. It was a way to bridge. And I sometimes think that when you are the odd one--today the tendency is to think that they In those days, the university gave a department one half of a position (a billet) as an incentive to hire minority faculty members. 2 61 have to make you comfortable--I think it’s not a bad thing to help make them comfortable too. You can find ways to do that. Brest: I’d like to talk about your second round of public service so maybe we should do it a little bit chronological because I was about to ask about when you came back. When you were there, what was your relevant work experience for that? Rice: [00:21:46] For that job, yes. Well I’d actually been Special Assistant for Soviet Affairs in the George H. W. Bush National Security Council. It wasn’t that big a step to become National Security Advisor, because I had been on the NSC staff in a senior role and during the most extraordinary times, the end of the Cold War, and I’d managed the most important account. And I also had managed George W. Bush’s foreign policy during the campaign. So I knew him well. So that was fine. Having been National Security Advisor, it was not that big a leap actually to Secretary of State. My government experience sort of added up properly for those jobs. But probably the hardest part about it was that when I became National Security Advisor, it was a little bit like being provost. When I was provost, I remember that the Physics Department wanted to buy a $17 million telescope. I remember then, when they sent the three Nobel Laureates to sell me on the idea, thinking, okay, I’m obviously not going to debate the physics with them but I’m the one who has to make the decision. I had to learn to ask the right questions and I had to learn what arguments I trusted and which ones I didn’t in order to make the decision. When you’re National Security Advisor, you don’t have deep knowledge 62 about every area of the world but you have to learn how to ask the right questions, whose arguments you can trust, and ultimately you have to make a decision. That’s hard for an academic because we pride ourselves on knowing one thing in greater depth than anybody else. I once knew more about the Soviet General Staff than they knew about themselves. I know that because I met the former Chief of the Soviet General Staff and I said to him, “How many people work on the Soviet General Staff?” He said, “I don’t know, five thousand or so.” I said, “Yes, I think that’s about right.” I had stood in Moscow and counted the windows in the Defense Ministry and figured out well if it was that much square footage per how many people--so you have to have this hunger to know something in great depth to be a great academic. When you’re in a position of leadership like that, you aren’t going to possibly know everything in depth and so you have to get out of your comfort zone with it and learn how to trust your instincts, how to gather information, how to make decisions. That was, for me, the hardest part. Brest: What do you think of as the most difficult and what are you proudest of among your accomplishments? Rice: [00:24:36] 9/11 was the hardest. Yes, 9/11 was the hardest. Because if you’re in a position of authority on 9/11, every day after seemed like--you know, like September 12--and the thing about it is that I believe we did everything we knew to do. We didn’t have warnings. The intelligence was not there. But when you see three thousand people die on your watch, you feel responsible. By definition, you didn’t do enough. From that day on, it’s “never let it 63 happen again.” I’m really grateful that it didn’t. It wasn’t for lack of trying. There were all kinds of thought lines. There were all kinds of terrorist attempts. President Bush was determined that the American people needed to go back to a normal life. And so I think, in many ways, the American people never knew really how fraught those days were after 9/11 until we finally captured Khalid Sheikh Mohammed who was the operational planner for 9/11 and for North America. I’ve always said that was like having Rommel [Marshal Erwin Rommel] under lock and key, right? Before that, plot lines were just coming out of everywhere, you know, a radiological threat against Washington, DC, a smallpox threat--we had the anthrax attack which we thought was foreign turned out to be probably domestically sourced. Day after day after day. The intelligence community missed the cues on 9/11. And so the day after, the president’s threat report looked like a phonebook. You know, every crazy person who called in from Chicago saying he was going to blow up something was in the president’s threat report because they weren’t going to miss it again, so they just threw everything at him. It was very hard. Very hard. Brest: Then you came back. Rice: [00:26:46] Yes. Yes. Brest: What’s it like? Rice: [00:26:49] Oh, I should say, you know, Iraq was hard too because we did what we thought we had to do because we thought he had usable weapons of mass destruction as opposed to just the infrastructure. We didn’t get it right for a long time. We finally kind of got it right in 2007, 2008 with the surge 64 and Iraq was stable by the time we left in 2009. But there were some grim days in 2006 and 2007. You know, you’re losing American soldiers, bombings in Iraq. It’s tough to live through that because, again, you feel responsible. And so issues of war and peace are always the hardest. But I think the thing that I’m most proud of is that we stood for the belief that people can govern themselves, that democracy is not just for us, that even in the Middle East they’re capable of democracy, and I still believe that. Brest: Not a lot of new evidence to support it. Rice: [00:27:49] Well but you know, you are having places, even in Iraq--when Maliki was forced out, he didn’t take his army and go to the streets. He stepped down. Something’s happening. I think democracy takes a really long time. We forget how long it took in the United States. My father couldn’t register to vote in 1952, so it took a while. Brest: Not that we have reached any state of perfection. Rice: [00:28:26] No. As a matter of fact, that’s a very good point. Democracy’s never perfect. But what it is it’s the only system that has shock absorbers of people being able to change their circumstances peacefully. That’s what it has going for it, because if you’re in an authoritarian system you have no way to do it except for revolution. Brest: When you came back, you had talked about leaving H&S for a combination of Hoover and the GSB. What’s it like at Hoover compared to a school or a department? Rice: [00:29:08] Well, Hoover doesn’t have students. Of course, that’s the first big difference, although I have lots of students around here. And I’m really 65 happy that my end of the office always has students and we have student assistants, because there are not enough students around Hoover. We need to have more and we talk a lot about that. People are here to do research and we actually now are acting more as a kind of fellowship of people trying to chart the future course for Hoover--what should we be working on, who should we be recruiting. But departments and schools have regular ways of charting their future--by the people they’re hiring, by the tenure decisions they’re making, by the curriculum they’re offering. Hoover doesn’t have that. And I’m glad I’m also in the Business School because I would miss that part of the academic enterprise, even chairing committees. I’m willing to do it. Brest: Who do you interact with at Hoover? Who’s your cohort? Rice: [00:30:16] Well the people who study international issues and national security, people like Niall Ferguson and Steve Krasner and Larry Diamond, and Michael McFaul is also a Hoover Fellow. Amy Zegart is one of my closest collaborators and colleagues. And then I know a lot of the economists because several of them were in government with me: Eddie Lazear and John Taylor and Mike Boskin were all in government with me at one time or another. So they tend to be good colleagues. Dave Brady who was in Political Science with me. So it’s a great group and we have from time to time--you know, we get dinner and just talk about things. John Cogan is one of my golfing buddies as well as one of my colleagues. Brest: What do you think about the status of the Hoover, the relationship with the [university]? 66 Rice: [00:31:12] I think it’s good. It’s really good now. It wasn’t very good early on. You know, several years ago, it was really terrible. There had been a bit of a falling out about the Reagan Library not coming to the campus. I think there was a sense that Hoover was overly ideological and the relationship wasn’t very good. It got better, thanks--John Raisian should go down as the Hoover director who regularized relations between the university and Hoover. He really did, in terms of the hiring processes, the quality of fellows that he brought. And then Tom [Thomas Gilligan] has sort of picked up that mantle and moved forward with it. But I don’t think relations could be better than they are now. I mean, you have a high number of faculty who are joint--Hoover and from Business School, Political Science, Law. So that helps a lot I think. But I think the university recognizes the quality of people here and you have a lot of interaction. Hoover has a lot of interaction with FSI, the Freeman Spogli Institute. Lot of joint appointments there too. I think the relationship’s really good between Hoover and the university now. Brest: I actually was wondering what you thought about the formal structure. Rice: [00:32:45] It’s okay. It’s a little quirky, right? But it works. I think everybody understands that the Stanford Board of Trustees also oversees the Hoover [Institution as a unit of the University – for instance to make sure that Hoover policies are in line with those of the University]; but the [Hoover] overseers are really important in their support for Hoover and they really oversee, I would say, the more operational side with Tom and before that John. And, as I said, I think the one thing Hoover is lacking is students but 67 we’re talking about maybe getting some more interns in Hoover and being able to have them access Hoover more. I very often do student things over in the other Hoover building and, at first, they’ll kind of come over here like “Am I allowed in here?” I say, “Yes, yes, you are.” [laughter] Brest: Who are your other important colleagues besides these? Rice: [00:33:42] Well, I’ve been at Stanford a long time. I have friends and colleagues who are very close. Paul [Brest] is a long-time friend and colleague and we have so many interests in common. I have lots of colleagues, of course, in the Business School with whom I have worked, but I still have many colleagues in Political Science. Judy Goldstein and I came here together as first year assistant professors. We were the only women in the department. And Heinz Eulau was a wonderful man but very traditional, used to start the department meetings by saying, “Gentlemen.” Finally after about three or four months of this, Judy said, “Heinz, Heinz, what about Condi and me?” I wanted to say, “Judy, just don’t rock the boat, okay? We both need to get tenured. Just leave him alone.” [laughter] Judy and I have [been friends for a] long time but Steve Krasner’s probably one of my closest colleagues and friends. Brest: Somebody, can’t remember who, mentioned a lunch group that includes Lucy Shapiro? Rice: [00:34:47] Well, there used to be. We haven’t done it in years. Lucy’s a great friend and colleague. Sid Drell was the one who would convene it. I’m sorry, no. George Shultz was the one who would convene it and George, by the way, is my mentor/colleague/friend, probably the most important person to 68 me in a lot of ways. But it was George and Lucy and Sid Drell, and then later on we invited Gerhard, and me. We would have lunch when Chantilly was down in downtown Palo Alto. My favorite line was, George would say to the waiter, Gus, “Now Gus, I’m going to order the sea bass and you’re going to bring me the lamb chops, but because I’m such a polite person, I would never send them back.” [laughter] We haven’t done it in years and now, of course, we’ve lost Sid, which was very sad. Brest: When we were talking some time about your general approach to teaching, I meant to ask, are there some courses which are most memorable to you or the most important? Rice: [00:36:02] Well I think that I’ve evolved in my teaching too. We all do. I teach a lot by simulation and I always have. So the students take on roles and they try to solve the Syria crisis or Ukraine or whatever because then they really get into it and they’ll do a lot of research on their own and it’s always very engaging. But I really feel that I’ve gotten the pedagogy right for the course that I’m teaching now, which is Challenges and Dilemmas in U.S. Foreign Policy. They write a five-page paper every week. I read every paper. I give them a page of comments on it because they’ve done all the reading, which is sometimes as much as four or five hundred pages in a week. Brest: These are GSB students? Rice: [00:36:45] These are undergraduate students. Undergraduates and graduate students. There can be GSB students in it. And then because they’ve read the work and written the paper, the class discussion is so good, because everybody knows what they’re talking about. And I have so many students 69 who say, “People bring their A game to this class. They’ve really done all the reading.” I’m glad, but I wish it were the case everywhere. I had one very funny thing happen though. You know, I’ve been teaching it for six years. Six years. And I handwrite the notes. I had a couple students say they couldn’t understand my writing, and I thought well my writing’s very legible. They can’t read cursive. Brest: Oh my lord. Rice: [00:37:34] Yes. So I actually started typing out the notes. Brest: Oh that’s so interesting. Rice: [00:37:40] Isn’t it interesting? Brest: Yes. Rice: [00:37:41] They can’t read cursive. They’re not teaching it in a lot of schools. Brest: You had said that your only experience with housing discrimination was in Denver. Rice: [00:38:07] Denver, right. Brest: What about other discrimination? Rice: [00:38:14] No. Not myself so much but you run into it from time to time. I remember when my mom--I think I told you the story about buying the sweaters. Did I tell you that story? Brest: No. Rice: [00:38:27] My mother had a very sharp tongue. And it was also in Denver, interestingly. The thing about the South is discrimination was obvious and it was expected, and so you knew how to deal with it up front. You get to a place like Denver and there are only 90,000 blacks and you think what it 70 could be like. And so we were in the store and my mother asked to see some nicer sweaters that were natural materials as opposed to acrylic. The woman kept showing her the same sweaters, and my mother finally said, “No, I really want to see like cashmere or something.” I think she thought the woman didn’t understand. And the woman said, “Well, those are very expensive.” And my mother said, “Well, let’s get this straight. If you could afford anything in here, you wouldn’t be working here.” And so that’s kind of how my parents dealt with [it]--they never took it on themselves. My father said to me once, “It’s fine if somebody doesn’t want to sit next to you because you’re black, as long as they move.” So I’m not one who is particularly knocked off balance by it if I ever see it. I, first of all, try to give people the benefit of the doubt because sometimes they either don’t know, or they don’t intend, and we’re all really quick to be offended, really quick to be offended these days. When I went to Notre Dame, I had been told that Indiana--of course, the modern Ku Klux Klan was rebuilt in Indiana and that part of Indiana had a kind of bad name for racism. And I remember I met this guy when I first got to Notre Dame, he was helping me unload my car and he said, “Now go to the bookstore today and get the biggest Notre Dame sticker you can find and put it on the back of your car because they don’t mess with Notre Dame students.” So it was kind of in my mind. Couple days later I drove down into downtown South Bend to get a bedspread. I had a brand new car and it had a tendency to overheat. And so, sure enough, it’s overheating. It’s hot as Hades in South Bend because it’s August and the thing’s overheating. And I just pulled over 71 to the curb, and there was this gas station about a block away. So I walked back to the gas station and I said to the guy, “My car’s overheated, can you help me?” He said, “You’ll have to bring it here.” Well, I interpret it as, you know, right away my--because my hackles were up and I said, “Why?” I said, “Can’t you go and get it?” He said, “Well I really thought if we brought it over here, we could put it in the shade and it might cool off, you know.” [laughter] He thought-okay, you know, get that chip off your shoulder. Right. So sometimes I think giving people the benefit of the doubt is a good thing, and then if you run into actual prejudice then you have three choices. You can ignore it as my father said as long as they move, you can get around it, or you can confront it. And that’s how I grew up. Brest: As you say, you’ve been at Stanford now for a long time. Rice: [00:42:12] Thirty-five years. Brest: What strikes you as the most important changes over that time? Rice: [00:42:23] Yes. Well, the campus is amazing. I think Stanford’s DNA is just really good. The ability to live in the world of ideas and knowledge but also not to be afraid of the real world and translation, whether it’s translational medicine or the companies that we’ve helped, you know, that we’ve built with Stanford technology, to people who go in and out of public service. You’ve got three sitting former Secretaries of State and Defense right here and the Secretary of Energy. And it’s just--Stanford’s got good DNA for the modern world. It’s a modern university. That just keeps growing and getting 72 better. It’s a wonderful place. It’s distinctive because of its athletics and I think that’s just growing and getting better. I worry about the echo effect around certain views. I do think we’re becoming more closed off, and I know conservative students who tell me they don’t feel comfortable saying what they really think, that they feel ostracized, or they feel that they will be put down for saying things that they believe. I thought the stuff after Trump was elected was ridiculous. You know, people who were going into the vapors, right. I didn’t vote for him. I didn’t particularly want him to be president, but he’s President of the United States. So you lost an election, get over it, you know. I just thought that the kind of catering to that--it was just silly. But I’ve already told you, I have very different views about prejudice and how to handle it. And my parents were always of the view that if you allowed yourself to be cast as a victim, you’d lost control of your future. I think we are in danger of infantilizing our students and trying to tell them that the world should be perfect, and they’re going to walk out that door with their diploma and they’re going to find that the world isn’t perfect. That’s a trend I don’t like. But Stanford’s no worse than any university. It’s probably a little bit better than most. But universities, in general, have a problem in this regard. Brest: What were the most important moments or events for you personally at Stanford? Rice: [00:45:03] At Stanford. Being asked to come to Stanford. [laughter] I came here on a fellowship and I remember I was going to start the fellowship in 73 January of 1981. And I came in November of 1980 just to meet the people at the Arms Control and Disarmament Program because they were having a conference and they invited me out to come to the conference. And I stayed at the Faculty Club. And I walked along the colonnade from the Faculty Club over to Galvez House, you know, which is where the Alumni Center is now. And I remember thinking, “Wow, I’m going to get to spend a year at Stanford.” When I was asked to join the faculty, I remember thinking, “I can’t believe this is happening. I’m going to be a faculty member at Stanford.” I walked the same colonnade to go to talk to Heinz Eulau in Building 160, which was Political Science at the time. So fast forward and I went to see Gerhard when he asked me to be provost and I walked that same colonnade. It was like a flashback, you know, to this twenty-five-year-old who had suddenly found herself at Stanford and now she was going to be provost in the university. You couldn’t make it up. Right? [laughter] You just couldn’t make it up. I’ve just had so many great moments at Stanford. This place is so much a part of me and I’m so much a part of it. When I was getting ready to leave government this last time, I think it was December--so you’re not supposed to seek your next job while you’re in government but everybody kind of does. So I called Etchemendy and I said, “Etch, I can’t really formally have a conversation about this, but you know I’m coming back to Stanford. I know I’m coming back to Stanford. I’m not going to try to negotiate. Just tell 74 me what you think is fair but don’t tell me till January 20th.” [laughter] And so, you know, that’s how I feel about this place. Brest: Would you be willing to comment on the current political situation? Rice: [00:47:39] You know, I think it’s settling down actually. In my area, in national security, it’s a really good team. Rex Tillerson is going to be a great Secretary of State. Jim Mattis, who’s been here at Hoover, is going to be a really great Secretary of Defense. They have a great National Security Advisor in H. R. McMaster [Herbert Raymond McMaster]. The decisions the President’s taken, the national security--you know, it’s rocky times early but every, every White House is rocky at the beginning. And these are folks who’ve never been in government and so it’s not surprising that they didn’t quite know what they were doing when they got there. But they’re getting their footing. I don’t agree with the President about a lot of things, but on foreign policy, I’m finding myself pretty much in agreement with him these days. Brest: Let me go back and see what else I left out. I actually had wanted to ask how you and Randy [Randy Bean]-Rice: [00:48:58] --got to know each other? Brest: Yes. Rice: [00:49:00] So Randy was a Knight Fellow, the professional journalism fellows program [John S. Knight Journalism Fellowships at Stanford]. John Lewis over at Arms Control had wanted to do some work on public outreach about arms control issues and he asked the Knight Fellows people if there was any journalist who might be interested in doing like a year’s fellowship and doing it. Randy was one of the people they recommended because she’d been a 75 television producer. And so she had a one-year fellowship at the Arms Control Center my second year there--1982. And we started talking one day about the fact that both of our fathers were ministers--hers was Episcopal, mine Presbyterian--and that our fathers had taught us to love sports. It was getting time to get Stanford football tickets, and we didn’t have anybody to go with so we bought football tickets together, and that’s how we started being friends. And we became great friends after that around sports and other things. We always laugh because Randy’s to the left of Lenin politically. I mean, we couldn’t be more politically different, but it doesn’t matter. We’re really great friends. Brest: I think that I’ve gone through all of the things that I had notes about. So now it’s free associate. Tell me about anything I should have asked you about and didn’t. Rice: [00:50:40] No, I think you did a great job but the question you asked me about Stanford and [important moments for me]-This place is incredibly special and I’m glad you’re doing the oral histories because I think universities, in general, are wonderful because they’re intergenerational. You’ve got the bright young eighteen-year-old and you’ve got the sixty-year-old Nobel laureate and they’re in the same space, and wonderful things happen when they are. Anne Krueger, who was a professor of economics here, had been the chief economist at the World Bank and she’s now retired. Anne turned eighty and SIEPR, the Economics center [Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research], had a dinner for her and I went to it. 76 Not only were many of her students there but so were two of her professors--Ken Arrow, who died recently, and Ted Anderson, both great economists. And I thought, what other place do you have that kind of continuity? And I think universities are also gentle about aging. Too many of our institutions, particularly in America where it’s kind of always the next young thing, don’t value longevity of interest and commitment and, in that sense, loyalty. And here--all universities are that way but this one in particular--maybe it’s because we have the housing area, you know, and everybody lives in the area or whatever, but you just see people around. I realize now that I’m moving into the senior statesperson part, you know, when I used to be the baby here, and I see people who I looked up to and they’re still around and they’re still active and they still come to their offices and I just think it’s great. I wish society were more that way. Brest: When you came here, you had no intention to be an academic. Rice: [00:52:55] No. I thought that I would most likely go to work in defense industry or for Rand. I was offered a job at Rand and I thought I might do that. I’d been an intern at Rand and then I was offered a job so I was going to finish my PhD and go back to Rand or maybe to this other defense think tank called Science Applications. That was my thinking. I had been on college campuses practically all my life. My father became dean of students at Stillman when I was eleven, then worked his way up through the ranks at the University of Denver. So I’d been on college campuses, around them, but in many ways my image of what an academic was was my Aunt Theresa [Angela Theresa Rice 77 Love] who got her PhD at the University of Wisconsin in 1952 in Victorian literature and wrote books on Dickens. I remember visiting her when she was a professor, first at Southern, the historically black college, then at Norfolk State and then later at the University of Illinois, Edwardsville. And so when I was about seven or eight, we visited her in Louisiana and she was sitting in her study and she was reading A Tale of Two Cities. And I said, “Oh, Aunt Theresa. What is that book about?” And she described a little bit. And I said, “Well, have you read it? It sounds like you’ve read it before.” And she said, “I have read this book twenty-five times.” And I thought, “Wow, reading the same book twenty-five times. That’s really, really bad.” [laughter] That was kind of my image of what academics did. They read the same book twenty-five times. But she was a Dickens scholar so, of course, she read the book twenty-five times. So I didn’t have any great desire to be an academic. I wasn’t at all sure I would like teaching. I knew I liked research but I figured I would do that at a place like Rand. But within a very short period of time, when Stanford offered me the job, I thought well, [Stanford gives you a job], you should give it a try. Right? And within a very short period of time, I realized it was what I was meant to do even though my first class--. A little Stanford history-So I started teaching in January of 1982, even though I technically joined the faculty in September of 1981, because they gave me a quarter off first. They very often do that with faculty coming in. Heinz Eulau had asked me what was I going to teach. And when you’re coming out of graduate 78 school, you basically can teach your dissertation and not much else. So I said I’d teach Civil Military Relations. He said, “Fine. Well, and what else?” I said I would teach Soviet policy in what we used to call the “Third World.” I could do that. I had no idea I needed three. And so he said, “Can you teach Political Elites?” I said sure. I had no idea what he’s talking about but I said “sure.” He then said, “Well maybe we could teach it together.” So I cotaught it with him. It was a great act of mentorship by Heinz. So comes January of 1982 and they’ve forgotten to list my class in Civil Military Relations. So they quickly listed it. I got six students who signed up. And they also didn’t have a classroom for me. So I taught in Old Chem my first course [laughter] with the sliding blackboards and all that. That was my first teaching experience at Stanford. Brest: Did you like teaching to a really small group? Rice: [00:56:48] I did. It was great. They were almost as old as I was. They were all seniors and I was like twenty-six. A couple of those kids I actually stayed in touch with. They’re not kids anymore but yes, it was great. It was great, but it was just kind of funny that that was the way I started out. Brest: Now that I think about it, the course that you’re teaching now with the fivepage paper every week from every student, how many students? Rice: [00:57:19] Twenty-five. Brest: Oh. Rice: [00:57:20] Yes. [laughter] Twenty-five. I get about 120 or so applications and I would say about half of those are actually qualified in terms of having the 79 right background and so forth. And then they all write an essay. And so I choose twenty-five out of that group. Brest: You also teach a course at the Business School? Rice: [00:57:49] A Political Risk course with Amy Zegart. And then there’s a course that is not actually core but a lot of MBA students take it called Strategy Beyond Markets that Kate Casey teaches, and I teach with her in a couple of sessions of that course. And then this quarter I also have an Honors Colloquium with a group of students who are studying Grand Strategy. Brest: Oh my goodness. Rice: [00:58:16] I like to teach. I never quite understood people who didn’t want to teach at universities. It’s sort of a strange thing to be in a university and not want to teach. Brest: Thank you so much. Rice: [00:58:30] I’m so glad you did it. Thank you. Brest: Extreme pleasure. Rice: [00:58:35] Thanks for thinking of me...