 Tracy: This is Allison Tracy. It’s May 28, 2015. I’m here with Joanne Martin to conduct an interview for the Stanford Historical Society Oral History Program. This interview will be a part of our Pioneering Women Oral History Project. We are in a conference room in the Graduate School of Business. Joanne, to start out, can you tell me a little bit about where you were born and where you grew up? Martin: [00:00:24] I was born on the coast of Massachusetts. I was born in Salem. I grew up in the town next door, which was called Marblehead. Tracy: Tell me a little bit about your parents. Martin: [00:00:38] My father was a research scientist at Polaroid who did color film stuff, and later on some CIA stuff about opening doors with bio… you know, photos of fingertips and eyeballs. My mother was an art teacher in a high school. She quit that when she got married. Very traditional. Tracy: Do you have any siblings? Martin: [00:01:10] Yes. I have a sister four years younger, Linda Ashton Martin, and a brother two years younger. He was named after my father, Richard Drake Martin. 15 Tracy: I want to talk a little bit about your education. Was there anything, in terms of pre-college education, important to bring up, or notable about that time? Martin: [00:01:56] At that time, the Sputnik educational revolution was happening, and I was at a really good public school where they took thirty of us at age eleven, separated us from everybody, and let us move through, first, high school, and then college curricula, as fast as we could go. It was marvelous education. By the end there were about fifteen out of the thirty still in the program. We were doing college stuff for years. It was just a very good education. Tracy: Were you able to actually graduate high school any earlier than you normally would have? Martin: [00:02:38] No. The deal was, we would just graduate with a high school degree. All these AP courses … it was in the early days of that kind of thing so we were left to negotiate that with our colleges. Tracy: Interesting. Martin: [00:02:52] When I got to college I had decided I’d had enough of being a brain [laughter], and I was going to learn to make friends and have a good time. I never told them about any of the AP courses. I’m sure they helped me get in, but I just coasted on what I already knew. I’d occasionally read recommended readings, but I pretty much got through on what I’d already been taught in a lot of the courses, and just had fun. Tracy: You went to Smith College. Martin: [00:03:24] Yes. Tracy: Was there a particular reason you chose Smith? 16 Martin: [00:03:29] It didn’t have a math requirement. I had been given choices along the way. I passed all the math requirements at age eleven and twelve. Girls didn’t take math. When I walked into the AP courses in math, the boys in there pounded their feet and said, “Girls, get out,” and I just didn’t need that. I didn’t understand it and I didn’t particularly care, I was going to be an artist. [laughter] By the time I got to college age, I was aware that math was a weakness because I hadn’t had it. Everybody else had had lots of stuff, and I’m not sure what I learned in that early age could possibly be any good. I was nervous about it. The two schools that I liked the best were Wellesley and Smith, and Wellesley had a math requirement. That’s why I went to Smith. Tracy: That’s great. You studied studio art while you were at Smith. Martin: [00:04:33] Yes. That required Art History, too. Tracy: That’s good to know. You mentioned that your mother was an art teacher. Was she also sort of producing pieces artistically, or just teaching? Martin: [00:04:47] No. She only taught for a year or two before she quit. Tracy: That’s a good point. When you started studying art, did you find that you enjoyed it? Were there aspects you didn’t like? What was your reaction to it? Martin: [00:05:03] I painted all my pictures in the week before the end of the quarter, all the way through. [laughter] I didn’t take it too seriously, truth be told. Tracy: Then you also minored in psychology, which seems maybe a bit more…. Martin: [00:05:18] Relevant to what I ended up doing? Tracy: [laughter] Yes. 17 Martin: [00:05:20] Yes. I did. I liked it. I liked psychology. We didn’t have that in high school and so it was new to me. I actually did some of that reading. It was a good program. I had a little statistics and stuff. I learned that that wasn’t as scary as I thought it was. It was good. I loved Smith. I mean I just had a wonderful time. Tracy: My impression of Smith is that it seems like a very supportive, nurturing school for students. Martin: [00:05:57] Yes, I suppose it is. Tracy: It’s a women’s college. Martin: [00:06:06] Yes. Tracy: [laughter] Did you have a sense of whether your education was typical of other women’s colleges, or was there anything unique in your experience at Smith? Martin: [00:06:17] Smith was part of the Seven Sisters program. At that time, women couldn’t get into schools like Yale and Princeton and Amherst. At Harvard, they were allowed to attend some courses that weren’t at Radcliffe. They were at Harvard. But you had to sit in the back row, and you couldn’t raise your hand, and you couldn’t speak to the faculty member. The women’s colleges offered the best education. I think that was really clear. I thought Smith and Wellesley were the most powerful of the two in the sense that they were bigger and had more faculty, more resources. [00:06:57] I didn’t take advantage of what was there [laughter]. Even if I only did a quarter of what I could have done academically, I still got a good education, just cramming at the last minute for exams. I had a lot of respect 18 for those schools. They’re very different now. That so many other schools have gone coed, they’re not getting the people with the best academic records like they used to. Tracy: That’s a good point. Throughout college, did you have a sense of what you were going to do after college? Martin: [00:07:31] Zero. [laughter] I had absolutely no idea. In those days, most women were getting engaged. My boyfriend certainly thought that would be a wonderful idea. We drove down to Greenwich, Connecticut, with his ring on my finger, and I had my hand out the window, because that finger was really hurting. It was like my body was telling me, “Get that ring off.” We circled the entrance to Greenwich and I said, “We can’t go. I mean, we can meet your mother. We can have the lunch. But we can’t announce any kind of engagement because I’m just not comfortable with this.” [00:08:11] That was when I realized that I wanted to support myself, and I had to have a career. I knew that I was never going to be a great artist, so all the sacrifices involved in that didn’t seem worth it. I had to find a way to support myself. I went to an employment agency after the trip to Connecticut. We were living in Cambridge. I was living with a bunch of girlfriends from college. I went to Snelling & Snelling Management Employees and there were two lines. One was for secretaries and one was for managers. I got in the managers line and waited until I got to the front of the line. They said, “You’re the only woman in that line. Did you notice?” [00:09:02] I said, “Oh, no, I didn’t. Anyway, here’s my… blah, blah.” 19 They said, “Uh-uh. That’s your line (he points). You have to stand in the secretary’s line. We don’t let women in this line.” All of a sudden, all the sheltering of a women’s college where the brightest students were women, the student leaders were women, of course women could do anything ̶ now I realized that I’m only going to be allowed to be a secretary. It was a disaster. Plus there was low pay. That was the start of my getting sensible. Tracy: What do you mean by getting sensible? Martin: [00:09:39] Realizing if I wanted to support myself I was going to have to get some skills that people were willing to let women use and that I just hadn’t used my education in any useful way to prepare myself for a life where I was on my own, and independent, and supporting myself, and using my head. Tracy: In terms of Smith, it was very interesting, your expectations of what you could accomplish at Smith. Yet, I wonder if…. You had a sense that you could accomplish anything, and yet, you then ran into this moment where you felt like you had to start cultivating your skills to support yourself. Martin: [00:10:25] You mean that my expectations at Smith were unarticulated, unrealistic, and not grounded in any clear plan? Is that a fair statement? Tracy: [laughter] Yes. Martin: [00:10:36] Yes. OK. You got it. [laughter] Tracy: In starting to develop these skills, what did you identify as being important? Where did you end up working? Martin: [00:10:48] I knew I could write. I got a job at Sterling Institute, which was a collection of consulting companies. I went to McBer & Company, which was founded by psychologists at Harvard. They did training and technical 20 assistance to two kinds of clients. One was big corporations, and the other one was federal government agencies, mostly those interested in anti-poverty programs, like Peace Corps abroad, VISTA volunteers, which was mostly in domestic U.S., and then Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), which had community action agencies, real community organizing in some cases in every poor community in the U.S. ̶ urban, Appalachia. I liked the antipoverty side of things. [00:11:50] As government things go, they tend to be more open to women. I got a job that was half secretary to the CEO, and half proposal writer by which I think they expected me to write the boilerplate to describe the history of the company. It turned out that on anti-poverty stuff I could read the government’s request for proposals, guess what they wanted, talk to the people by phone to pry out of them exactly what they were looking for, and then I would write a proposal. Then the company, which is one of these small startups, had the history of anybody that got a proposal funded could manage that proposal. [00:12:36] Here it was, six months in, I’d funded two or three proposals, and I built in roles for myself that were low level but professional project manager roles. We went out in the field with the partners. I always picked a partner who was older, better at it than I was, and who was willing to teach. I kind of apprenticed myself through that system and climbed up the ladder fighting. You know, they’d have project managers meetings and they wouldn’t invite me because they’d assume I was a secretary. I had to do my 21 secretarial stuff for a couple of years anyway before I was completely into the professional rank. It was like I was constantly fighting for legitimacy. [00:13:27] But I kept getting promoted because I had this knack for bringing in money. That’s officially not even a senior manager job, it’s a director job, higher. Eventually I got to be director of the government half of this company. I’d noticed that my raises were still based on a base salary of a secretary. I went to the new CEO and I said, “I think my salary isn’t quite right.” I hadn’t done any research. He looked it up and he said, “It looks a little low. I’ll give you….” Some pittance of a raise. I said, “I found out that my predecessor earned X.” That was a guess. I didn’t know. It turned out my predecessor earned two times X….My salary was a third of his. I said, “This is not fair.” He said, “I will match the salary of any woman in Boston or Cambridge who works for a consulting company.” I went and did the research. There were only about five. Most of them were my friends, as it turned out. These women were all earning even less than I did. I went back to him and I said, “This isn’t fair.” He said, “Tough. That’s what the market pays for women.” [00:14:56] I said, “OK.” This is after five years of working. I killed myself to help this company succeed. I was working day and night, flying all over the country. One average month I figured I stayed home five days. I was so mad. I said, “I quit.” He said, “You can’t do that.” 22 I said, “Yes I can. If you’re going to pay me a third, then you’re going to get one-third of the loyalty. And believe me, you’ve already collected that.” I walked out. It was May. I thought, “What am I going to do?” He’d said that the reason I was getting less was my sex, my age. Tracy: You would have been… Martin: [00:15:51] Twenty-five. Tracy: I mean you were very young at that time. Martin: [00:15:56] I was a baby, but I was doing the work and I was bringing in the money. There was an administration change in the middle of it so that the new president, Nixon, had defunded the Peace Corps, OEO, VISTA. I had to get all new clients. I still matched the amount of money brought in that my predecessor had. I put in equal performance under much more difficult conditions. It’s no excuse for them not paying me considerably more except for this strange market argument that they could get away with it. So I went to Harvard. A doctorate takes five years. That’s a better degree than most of these men had. Almost all of them. There was only one who had a real PhD. Most of them had a master’s from Boston University or a degree lower than a Ph.D. (MBA). I figured, I’ll go to Harvard. I’ll get a PhD. That’ll take five years. At the end of five years sex discrimination will be over and I will be an old lady, thirty years old. [laughter] I went to Harvard and they said, “It’s too late to apply.” I said, “What can I do?” [00:17:25] They said, “First, take the GREs.” I took the GREs and I aced them. I did not deserve to ace them, right? I mean, I’d been a party girl in 23 college, but I just did really well, even on the math. I went back to Harvard and I said, “What can you do? Here are my scores.” They said, “We at Harvard require these other special courses, tests like Miller Analogies. You’ve never taken it.” Tracy: I’ve never heard of it. Martin: [00:18:01] Most people haven’t. They don’t use it anymore. It’s a very tricky set of logic problems disguised as analogies. It requires knowledge of history and bizarre things, like locomotives, they called them. I remember one item about a locomotive, and another one about the difference between the residue in the barrel of a wine barrel versus a beer barrel. I take the Miller Analogies Test, I get perfect. Bring back the test and they said, “Hmmm.” They’re always too impressed about tests. They said, “I’ll tell you what. We have this program called Special Student. [00:18:46] And for one year you can take any course you want in any doctoral program as long as the faculty will let you. So you want to get a PhD in psychology, go over and talk to the psych people.” They agreed to let me take everything except for one seminar where all the students in a particular class bonded and met all the faculty. I took Ph.D. courses for a semester and did well, and then applied that year for the Ph. D. and when I was admitted, I got credit for the prior year. Then all of a sudden I was a legitimate PhD student. This time I read the books assigned and worked really hard and settled down and got serious. Tracy: Did you have any challenges in terms of the year that you were a special student getting into the classes? You said there’s the one that you weren’t allowed into. 24 Martin: [00:19:39] Everybody else on the faculty let me talk my way in. They were really good about it. They thought I was amusing. At the end of the first seminar, at the end of discussing all the readings and arguing about issues and meanings of things, the faculty member says, “Sorry, guys, but the time is up.” Everybody packed their bags, pushed their chairs back. I said, “Wait a minute.” Then I was used to being the boss, right? I said, “Please sit back down. We haven’t made any decisions yet.” Everybody looked at me. They teased me about that for years. I was no longer in an atmosphere where action was the agenda. Tracy: That’s funny. Martin: [00:20:35] Yes, it was. Tracy: How did you finance graduate school? Martin: [00:20:39] The year as a special student I had to pay it myself. My grandfather had died and he’d left me a little money. I knew that he would just love it that I had spent it on education. I used that money. There was still some leftover to tide me over a bit. Harvard gave me a full fellowship for five years, which I only used the four because I’d already had one, with stipend and tuition. Then I could earn money by being a teaching assistant and a research assistant. I loved the teaching and I became what they called a tutor, which is a glorified teaching assistant that gets to teach the honor students and design your own seminar. I liked that. [00:21:30] I was active in other ways, too. Then in the summers, or if I ran short of money, I would write a proposal for someone in the consulting business so that, under their name, they could get it funded. 25 Tracy: At the time that you were studying, you were studying psychology? Martin: [00:21:58] Experimental social psychology. . . . That’s learning how to design experiments to test causal hypotheses. Social psychology means that you’re studying the interaction of individuals with social systems, like groups and organizations, and even bigger collectivities. Even then I was moving to higher levels of analysis. The program was a leftover of the old Social Relations program at Harvard, which meant that you had to take qualifying PhD exams, not in one field, but three. . . . I took them in sociology with a specialization in statistics. I was really working on my math weakness, which was now becoming a strength, ironically. Then I did something like personality psychology, abnormal psychology, individual-level stuff to get the other one. I never did anthropology. That would have been far more useful given the way my interests evolved into cultural stuff. But I didn’t. Tracy: After that first year being a special student, that confirmed for you your interest in psychology and pursuing all of that. Martin: [00:23:25] Yes. . . . Tracy: You entered as a PhD student working in experimental social psychology. Were there many women within your cohort while you were there? Martin: [00:23:51] Yes. I’d say roughly half the class was women then, and it is even a little more than that in psychology now. I mean, psychology was one of the first fields to integrate. We had some problems with some of the men on the faculty. We also had some great friendships and a whole lot of support. I’d say the men that were trouble were few and far between. Since so many of the good students were women, we got our way. 26 Tracy: You didn’t have any issues in terms access to advisors? Martin: [00:24:29] No, I got gems of advisors. I was really happy. I think knowing the other women and knowing who they worked with, they, too, did quite well. We didn’t have a lot of clinkers. It was a very good department then. Tracy: It seems as though from the time that you were selecting Smith College to when you were entering Harvard, a lot had changed, at least at Harvard, in terms of allowing women and being more welcoming to women studying? Martin: [00:25:03] I don’t know. The graduate program had had women graduates for a long time. . . . On the faculty end of it, there was only one woman in the department, Shelley Taylor, who later went on to become one of the best psychologists in the world. Harvard denied her tenure and later apologized for having done that. The faculty level still had a lot of discrimination. The doctoral program did not, except for isolated instances. Then the undergraduate eventually abolished Radcliffe and merged. That hadn’t happened yet. . . . [00:25:56] There was still some residual separation. The dorms were coed, so maybe Harvard and Radcliffe had merged by then. Certainly the honor students I had were fifty-fifty. I guess things had changed in those five years quite a bit at Harvard. Tracy: Tell me a little bit about what research areas or research problems you started to become interested in during your studies at Harvard. Martin: [00:26:29] I took from my five years of work experience in anti-poverty programs a real concern with injustice and inequality and discrimination. I picked an advisor, Tom Pettigrew, who was a world famous race researcher. I 27 said to him that I wanted to study the relationship of different patterns of inequality and perceptions of injustice. I was just as interested in studying race, labor management, and male/female inequalities. I wanted to develop a general theory that would apply across groups. [00:27:24] The idea I had for the dissertation, and that was the one that won the prizes, was that if you increased the variance within the low-paid group so that people could look at people like themselves and see a few that were really earning quite a bit of money, that they would be a lot less discontented and reluctant to see as unjust the difference between their group and the higher paid group. I did that with labor management. I filmed a very realistic video of blue collar workers at the telephone company and a higher-paid group of technicians, but who were definitely still blue collar, and then their management team, all the way up to the top and down to the level just above the blue-collar workers … many levels of inequality between groups [00:28:19] I increased and shrunk in the audio track of the video the magnitude of the inequality within the low-paid group, held the amount of inequality between the labor and management constant, and then got perceptions of injustice, and asked how realistic is this pay schedule, how should it be changed? In a perfect world in another country, if you were in charge, how would you pay all these people? I was trying to get a sense of people’s distributive justice philosophy even though most of them who were in my study ̶ and this was real important to me ̶ they were blue-collar workers who actually held jobs like this in another company. They weren’t Harvard sophomores, the way all the rest of the psych studies were. I thought that the 28 people at the bottom of a distribution would have different feelings than prosperous Harvard undergrads. I studied perceptions of labor-management pay inequalities. [00:29:20] After I started working, I began to spread out. I had a lot of trouble finding good distributions of blacks and whites within any organization that was willing to let me in the door studying pay inequality. It was very hard to get in the door. If I had to do an experiment, I wanted it to be realistic with real people in it. You can see the influence of the five years of working for a consulting company on anti-poverty programs with people in Appalachia in urban ghettos that were really poor. I somehow wanted to bring that into psychology and into a business school. Tracy: The research that you were working on, you would [laughter] eventually be working in a business school. Martin: [00:30:18] No. I thought I would be working in a psych department. . . . Tracy: I wasn’t sure if that connection would have been as obvious at the time, or if you had a sense that you would teach in a business school while you were doing this work. Martin: [00:30:32] No. . . . I thought I was qualified to work in a sociology department. Some soc departments wanted me to come. My husband got a job at Xerox Park, which at the time was a premier computer science research center, and that was his field. He knew even then that Silicon Valley was the place for a computer scientist to be. It was his dream job and he said, “Joanne, you can get a job at Stanford.” I said, “Forget that.” Lo and behold, 29 I got a job at Stanford. The Psych Department didn’t have a job that year and the Business School did. [00:31:17] The Business School turned out to be really interested in me. I think they didn’t really grasp the labor focus of things. I hadn’t done the women and black focus, I just had that in my head. I think they didn’t quite know what they were getting. Tracy: I wonder if you had started work looking at minorities and looking at women, if the business school would have been as interested in you. Martin: [00:31:48] I think probably not. I mean they had to stretch to let me through the door with labor as a tacit focus, although my discussions in my data were always in terms of the magnitude of the inequality. That’s how you talked about research. Talking about its practical implications was not something that a psych department would have ever asked me about. I was surprised the Business School was willing to take me, but pleased. At that point it was clearly the most scholarly first-class business school in the country, maybe in the world. They were hiring people from basic disciplines, like psychology and economics, rather than people with PhDs from business schools, although some fields like accounting, you have to go to a business school because no one else has that field . . . . Tracy: You had gone into Harvard with an idea that you would get your PhD and maybe go back into consulting work. It seems at some point that changed. Martin: [00:33:03] I fell in love with research. I liked the teaching, too. I didn’t expect that, but I just loved it. I was good at it. 30 Tracy: Were other women in your program? Were other schools as interested in other women in your program? Do you have any sense of how typical your experience was? Martin: [00:33:30] I was the only Ph.D. student in my program, I think, who’d had five years working for a for-profit business, even though my clients were government agencies. As Harvard Ph.D.’s we didn’t have trouble getting jobs. Yes. We got placed all over the country. Most of the jobs were probably a little more interdisciplinary, as you’d expect from the requirements we went through and the reputation of Harvard as being an interdisciplinary kind of place. As we spread out, we grew older. One of my best friends was Janet Weiss and she became a dean of Michigan specializing in educational administration. [00:34:24] That’s in something she wasn’t trained in at Harvard, but it had a more applied slant. I think she was the only one. The rest of them ̶ Jenny Crocker, Susan Fiske ̶ became well-known psychologists in psych departments. They did well. Tracy: You mentioned your husband. Can we go back a little bit and talk about him? [laughter] . . . Was this the same person that you had had the ring on? Martin: [00:34:53] No. He was a wannabe rock star, who never made it, by the way. He was a fine person to play around with in the hippie, counter-culture days. I stayed single for the five years I was in consulting and had a wonderful time. Then when I went to Harvard I began to feel, at age twenty-five, that I was very old and that I ought to be looking for somebody I really wanted to stay with. On the first day of the first year at the Friday TGIF party, I met 31 my husband. I didn’t glom onto him right away, but we dated by October and he moved in by December. [00:35:42] Then we lived together most of graduate school. I think we were feeling things out or making sure, on my part anyway, that he really was going to do half the housework and half the childcare and treat me as a real equal financially. He has always done that. He’s been really supportive. His career was every bit as demanding as mine. That’s amazingly rare, especially in those days. It worked out. I was lucky. Tracy: What’s his name? Martin: [00:36:15] Beau Sheil. He’s Australian, and one fine guy. [laughter] Tracy: Were you having children while you were still at Harvard? Martin: [00:36:34] No. I didn’t. We didn’t get married until the end of Harvard. I was a little nervous about going all the way out to California, which I considered the land where people had bean dip for brains. I was born and raised on the East Coast and I thought California was full of crazies. The idea of coming all the way out and turning down a job at Yale ̶ I was like, I’ve got to be really sure of this guy. I said, “I think we should decide whether we’re going to get married, because I don’t think I’d take this job at Stanford unless you’re pretty sure,” especially because I hadn’t really thought about being in a business school. [00:37:22] He went for walks around the block for about a week at night making sure, after five years together, that we were really going to do this. He said let’s do it, and we did it. We got married at the end of Harvard. I didn’t want a baby until I was pretty sure my career was on a good track. I took to 32 the Business School in many ways. When I got promoted to non-tenured associate, they had this funny thing. You get called down to the dean’s office. They do a pretty thorough review at three years. You either get the lead handshake, the silver handshake, or the gold handshake. [00:38:11] I got the gold handshake, which meant you’re non-tenured associate, but it’s looking good. I was pregnant shortly thereafter. Tracy: What would have been the silver and the lead handshake? Martin: [00:38:24] Silver would have been, “There’s some problems, but maybe you’ll make it.” Lead was, “Get a new job fast. We’re not going to fire you or anything, but it doesn’t look good.” Tracy: At the time, when you decided to have a child, were there any considerations in terms of the tenure clock for childbearing at that time? Martin: [00:38:53] Yes. . . . Of the young women on the whole Stanford faculty, the women I knew were Diane Middlebrook and that whole cohort ̶ Nan Keohane, etc. They had gotten this deal where you got another year on your tenure clock if you were pregnant. What a blessing that was. I took advantage of it. That was the first introduction to those women and what they had accomplished and how I wanted to be like them and leave a trail that would make it easier for the women behind me because, at this point when I joined the Business School, Myra Strober . . . was still at the school. She was coming up for tenure. She didn’t get it at the Business School. I was so surprised and horrified. She founded the field of feministic economics. The hall talk was that that wasn’t an important thing. Twenty-four hours was what I remember, but it turns out it took longer than that. Within that year, the Ed 33 School had offered tenure to Myra. Ed School at Stanford. It never happens that one department challenges another and picks up a tenure hire. That was great for Myra. It would have been greater if she got the tenure she was shooting for, but the university, as a whole, rescued her. [00:40:49] That left me with a hundred men, the only woman on the faculty. That went on for years. It was very upsetting and lonely. In those days ̶I’m sure you’ve heard this story ̶ the bathroom in the hallway near my office was labeled “Faculty.” When I first got to Stanford, I peeked in the door and it was a men’s room. There was even a man in it. [laughter] There was a women’s room and he told me that it was around the corner. I went around the corner, and I’ve forgotten now what the title over the women’s room was, but it wasn’t “Women,” it was something like “Secretaries.” [00:41:41] That was where I was supposed to pee, with a fainting couch and a full-length mirror and a little living room to talk things over with the other ladies. I just thought, “This place is so unprepared.” There are a dozen other stories like that. The annual faculty retreat was held at the Family Farm. . . . It was an all-male club kind of like the Bohemian Grove. For me to go to the faculty retreat, they had to put a makeshift sign on the cook’s bathroom so that I would have a place to go the bathroom. This sounds like it’s trivial, but if it’s so ingrained that it’s even in the architecture in the bathrooms, you can imagine what it was like in terms of fitting in socially, finding things to talk to people about. I walk into a classroom the first day of class with the MBAs. Never the PhDs who were great, but the MBAs. There would always be, in the early years, some MBA’s who would just walk out, go straight to the 34 dean’s office and say, “I did not pay thousands of dollars in tuition to have some broad be my teacher.” The deans did the right thing, which was to send them right back to class. You can imagine how hostile that student would be and how many other people in the class would just jump on me because, you know, eating faculty for breakfast is fun. It was a very difficult situation. Tracy: The administration was comfortable and recognized your scholarly accomplishment and expertise and wanted you in the Business School. It sounds like in some ways, at least with students, it supported you. Did the administration have any sense of what it would be like for you being the only woman? . . . Martin: [00:44:10] No. I don’t think they really did, although having Francine Hall and Myra Strober hired five years before, even though both had left the school, they did a lot to break the ice on the most egregious sins. The Business School faculty never sexually harassed me in any way. I didn’t have people jumping on me. That made it a lot easier. Aside from the most obvious sexual things, the amount of prejudice against the idea that a woman could be a first-class intellectual was intense. What broke my heart was when I got pregnant and started to show; the two faculty who I most admired came by to talk to me. One said, “You will never be productive enough now. You were barely productive enough before. You’re never going to make tenure.” The other one said, “I’m so happy for you. It’s so nice to see women with your intelligence and genes having babies. Of course, you’ll never get tenure.” Those were my two favorites. I had to say, am I going to cry, or am I angry? I was angry. That was very 35 healthy. When I was a kid there was this story about a little choo-choo engine trying to get up a hill. Do you know this one, where it says, “I think I can. I think I can”? Tracy: Yes. . . . Martin: [00:46:01] That’s what I did. My husband was there at every step saying, “I know you can. I know you can. I know you can.” Those years, having a little infant, they put me on every committee. Every single committee all over the university and all over the Business School. Tracy: I was going to ask you that. Martin: [00:46:24] Oh, yes. I carried that. They wanted the women’s point of view. Me, of course, being a representative of all women. . . . The dean’s advisory group in the Business School had a meeting and they said, “It’d be nice if you could come.” I was two weeks after giving birth. You can imagine. I go in there and I go to the meeting because you don’t say no to a dean, especially a really sweet one like that dean. Tracy: Certainly there’s been a shift between having the ornamental woman or the obligatory woman versus sincerely wanting a woman’s input. At this time, the request to have you on a committee, what is your sense of those requests? Martin: [00:47:21] That’s a good question. They might have wanted a token woman. But like, Kennedy [President Don Kennedy] put me on some kind of committee for women and minorities. We went out and interviewed the senior faculty in each department and tried to move them along in doing that. I had no business doing that as an assistant professor, but they gave me 36 relatively easy departments, and I was outspoken, and I did help. I think he quite genuinely wanted me on that committee, Kennedy. The dean at the Business School put me on the dean’s advisory group. I thought I might be like a canary in a coal mine. If there was some kind of problem on the women’s issue, I might know him better, and therefore, be willing to let him know privately about it if I wasn’t willing to bring it up in the committee. I wasn’t shy and I did speak up. Then, after that, they put me on the MBA admissions review. I looked over the criteria, which was our job, and I said look what you’re calling leadership. You know, football captain gets seventeen points. If you’re the leader of the ladies’ volleyball team, you get half a point. (Point estimates not exact.) Now, I understand the difference in levels of responsibility between those two jobs, but that seems like women don’t have an opportunity ever to become the captain of the football team, so you need to rethink what leadership is so that the criteria permit a strong woman leader to look just as good in terms of the number of points as an applicant who is male. That was an uphill battle and took years. They really listened and they made an effort to fix that. That was an example of putting me on a committee, and it making a difference. [00:49:40] No one after two or three run-ins with me on a committee would think that I would sit quietly and be ornamental. If you put me in a committee I’m going to speak up when I see a problem. I got put on every damn committee they had. They have a policy in the Business School, the junior faculty are not put on committees. They certainly aren’t putting on university-wide taskforces on minority relations. I was ten, fifteen hours a 37 week on committees at a time when the people I was competing with, other assistant professors ̶ males ̶ were putting in two or three hours on a committee, if that. That’s been researched as a major problem for tokens and singles, pioneers let’s call us, all over the country. Blacks especially. Tracy: I think you’re sort of implying this, but the potential benefit professionally of serving on committees and then working with administrators, did that overcome the loss of time in terms of research and teaching? How did that all balance out? Martin: [00:51:11] It was a definite cost. It wasn’t an advantage at all. The decisions that are made about tenure are made on a basis of research and adequate teaching. Sometimes more than adequate teaching in the Business School. You have to have the publications in the first-rate journals. There is absolutely no way around that. An administrator coming up late in the game and trying to argue for a faculty candidate, I mean they’re not even in the room when these decisions are made. They sign off on them at the end. I’m sure they can informally influence a decision somehow, but the die is cast well before then. So that didn’t help. It was a cost. [00:51:55] Plus, I offend people when I say these admissions things that you have been doing since the school got a fine reputation are sexist. It’s no wonder you only have ten women in the MBA program. You’ve built it into the system. Tracy: Let’s talk a little about your progress toward tenure and how that worked out for you. Martin: [00:52:25] I got tenure. 38 Tracy: Yes. [laughter] Martin: [00:52:26] [laughter] I came up after eight years instead of seven. They sent out my file to thirty-seven people, I was told. Most files go out to ten or twelve people. At the Business School at the time, it was very hard to get tenure. Even one or two no’s would result in a negative decision. There I was with thirty-seven chances to get no. I would say that was a biased review. But it came out well. It really did. When tenure comes out well, then you have a boost in legitimacy and prestige because of the tenure level, but also because all these people are saying you’re the best one, two or three in the world. [00:53:23] No. In the country. Then when you come to full professor, it’s the world. It’s not really the world. It’s the English-speaking European-centric part of the world. It worked out, but it was nerve-wracking because no one had ever gotten tenure before with my plumbing. [laughter] Tracy: Can you talk a little bit about how you managed acclimating to a new environment, keeping up your research and your publishing, keeping up with all this committee work that was put on you? Your marriage and social life, your child. How did you manage this those first eight years? Martin: [00:54:14] Very little social life. That was because you just stripped down everything except the essentials. For my husband and me, our essential goal was to be with our baby. We both worked full time, and so our second goal was to do really well in our careers. One of the two of us was home by 5:30, either pick him up at daycare when we started using daycare, or just to be with them. We just did that. The two of us were running out of the meeting 39 excusing ourselves, driving across town to the daycare center, because it had to be a multi-racial day center. [00:55:04] It was at the edge of Palo Alto toward the neighborhoods that are really racially mixed ̶. Picking up the baby, getting him home: that was tough. We were very exhausted, because once he went to sleep, then we’d do some more work. It’s this old story. We had two parents with demanding careers. I couldn’t have done it if my husband Beau weren’t really doing half. We found a super daycare center eventually. Once we realized the Stanford daycare centers were structured for the wives of faculty members who played bridge and tennis during the day. Those Stanford day care centers would ask for volunteer hours in the middle of a work day. I tried. [00:55:55] I would come to a Stanford center. We dressed then, so I was in a silk blouse with a skirt and heels and I was supposed to take care of five or six infants. They’d throw up on me, they’d dribble milk on me. I’d have to change my clothes. There was no time to get back to the house to shower before I’m in the classroom again. I mean it was impossible. Those daycare centers were worthless. That was a characteristic, like the Bing Center, of all the daycare centers at Stanford. It took us ten or fifteen years, the women on campus, and some of the men, to get those centers to be more responsive to the needs of faculty and not just cater to people who were working part-time or just staying at home while spouses worked. [00:56:38] That was hard. Because we had two salaries, we could afford to hire help. We had someone, Ana, who came every day at seven and left when one of us got home. That was a long workday for her. We paid her really 40 well. She cleaned the house. In the early days she did shopping, food shopping. She took care of my son, varying amounts of time depending on how old he was. She was really a member of our family and stayed with us for fifteen years. Tracy: I do want to acknowledge that when you arrived at Stanford it was in a transitional period from a well-known regional school to [laughter] Stanford as we think about it today. Martin: [00:57:43] The Business School was more established than that. Tracy: Oh, it was. Yes. Martin: [00:57:46] It was. It had been a regional school. I don’t really know the history well enough to say whether it was a decade or more. At the time I went on the job market in 1977, it was the best business school in the country if you were a scholar. I mean no question. It was, from an MBA point of view, one of the best two or three in the country. I mean we were drawing people not just from the West at that point. Tracy: Do you think a part of you had noted that the business school was bringing people in from the basic disciplines, that its hiring model was maybe a little bit different than most business schools. Do you think that contributed to how it was doing or its success at that point? Martin: [00:58:32] Yes. Jim Howell had written a report that acknowledged that the content that was taught to MBAs, and the kinds of research the faculty were doing in regional business schools in the 1950s and 1960s, was very applied. It was atheoretical. It didn’t have a lot of respect in the larger scholarly world. He believed, rightfully so, that there were economic problems and 41 psychological and sociological issues in the management of organizations and that there’s no reason on earth those aren’t theoretically rich researchable areas that should tap the fundamental theories in any discipline. That was what caused the hiring to become more discipline-centered. [00:59:26] Not exclusively, because in some fields you couldn’t do that. But we had departments like Transportation. We don’t have that now. I mean, it’s Economics, Finance, Organizational Behavior, which is multi-disciplinary, and Marketing. Some are more applied than others, but they’re all grounded well. The quality of the PhD programs across the country in business schools has skyrocketed at the same time that some of the disciplines have gotten weaker in the fundamental discipline, like psychology became psychology and health, or psychology and business, or psychology and X. That was classic in other fields as well. That the disciplines became more applied, and the applied schools began turning out good well-trained PhDs. Hiring in the disciplines now isn’t necessary. . . . Although we still do it. Sometimes. Tracy: Yes. When you went up for tenure, at that point, had another woman been brought on to the faculty? Or were you still the sole woman? Martin: [01:00:36] When I got tenure, I don’t know. . . . Look when Anat Admati was hired. Her coming was just like a breath of fresh air. I was so excited and it made such a difference. Shortly after her, Maureen McNichols came. Anat is a mathematician. Very pure mathematician in finance at the time. Maureen was a superb accountant. You can see they’re very different than psychologists, which are seen as the soft side of things. [laughter] It became clear that we were three very different women. The men began to react in a 42 more differentiated way to the presence of the women on faculty and realized that we weren’t all the same. It just made it better. [laughter] Tracy: If nothing else, did it relieve some of your being assigned [laughter] all of these committees? Did some of that work become shared? Or had that maybe died down a little bit by the time they arrived? Martin: [01:02:04] It stayed constant for me because it was now legitimate to put me in all these committees . . . because I had tenure. I spoke up about keeping them off committees and giving them the same time to do research as other people. I think a lot of other people saw that problem, too. They may have been put on some committees, but I don’t think it was as extreme, and it wasn’t university-wide whereas mine was university-wide. I think that fifteen years into tenure, maybe ten years into tenure, I began to do more gender research, which I really fought. I mean, you’re a woman, you do research on gender. Well, no I don’t. I really fought it for a while. [01:02:57] Then, after years of going to interdisciplinary stuff at what’s now the Clayman Institute, and meeting the one woman, Diane Middlebrook in English, and Nan Keohane in Poli Sci, these women became friends. Even though I didn’t have any colleagues in the GSB I had Deborah Rhode in the Law School. She and Barbara Babcock were more senior. There were ten or twenty women on campus with tenured jobs. We would get together and talk about our research, not all of which was on gender. Some of those women were gender researchers and they were so interesting, and their observations on what we were studying were so interesting, that I kind of got seduced into experimenting with doing some gender research. 43 [01:03:48] I got activated by my own experiences of injustice and began to do things like take on roles voluntarily, like co-leading the Women’s Faculty Caucus, doing a study of the pay inequality of the faculty on campus. It was shocking. Women faculty clustered in the lower 20 percent of the faculty salaries controlling for department and status. We couldn’t get good measures of productivity, but it was inconceivable that almost all the women were in the lower 20 percent of productivity. These women had to be outstanding in each of their fields to get where they were. That was my door into campus-wide stuff. That put me on every committee to do with women. [01:04:49] I’ve always been active on race, so that meant assignment to every committee on minority stuff. Then I got elected to stuff, like the faculty senate, and eventually the Faculty Advisory Board, which I was really pleased to be part of because with only seven people on that it’s really important to have one or two women at least on that to watch for prejudice. Fran Conley was the head of it then. It was dandy. [laughter] Tracy: You talked about your shift into gender research. Let’s go back a little bit, and will you talk about the research that you had been working on? We’ve talked about the inequality and perception of injustice, but I feel like there’s another aspect of your research. [laughter] Martin: [01:05:43] Yes, the big one. [laughter] Tracy: Before the gender research that we’ve missed. Let’s go back a little bit and talk about that. Martin: [01:05:47] OK. What happened with the justice and inequality research is I did that actively. At least at the time I was coming up for tenure, it was a 44 good half of what I’d done. Already in the second or so year I was at Stanford a wonderful student came into my office, Alan Wilkins, PhD student. He said, “Bill Ouchi is leaving the Business School, and I do research on organizational culture, and I want you to be my advisor.” He said, “Everything I know about you, you’d be just perfect.” I said, “No. You can’t possibly have me. I am an experimental social psychologist, I am not into qualitative research, and I don’t know anything about culture.” He said, “I’ll teach you.” [01:06:43] I said, “What do you mean, you’ll teach me?” He said, “Just you wait. I’m going to put this corner of your desk, that’s going to be my corner. And I’m just going to give you an article to read, a short one. And if you’ve read it, turn it over and I will put another one on your desk. And we’ll talk in a month.” This is brave of him because I’m really busy. I don’t have a lot of time to read something outside my area. His first article was on myths and symbols and organizations by some anthropologist. And it was fascinating. I read it at lunch one day when I should have been doing something else. He noticed. You know, he was just coming by. My door was always open. He noticed it was turned over. [01:07:34] By the end of the day, I had another article. This title was Rituals. The idea of applying rituals to contemporary organizations, how did they do that? I read that one before I went home. You can see where this story is going. By the time I’d read twenty-five articles, I had read the twenty-five articles that were most relevant to his dissertation. He left his dissertation prospectus, just five pages, 45 and I liked it. He was applying these ideas to a local high tech company. I was off and running. He became my first organizational culture student, and that was the area that really brought me the most attention. I just loved it. [01:08:20] I was completely untrained for it. [laughter] All these years in school. You know how it is when you love something. I then became 50/50 culture versus justice and inequality. Over time the justice and inequality stuff died out because I could spend an entire year convincing a corporation to let me come in and ask its employees their feelings about pay inequality between labor and management, or blacks and whites, or women and men, and you can imagine that even if I sweet-talked ten HR people and vice presidents into it, the president would hear about it the eve before the study started after a year of my investment and nix it. [01:09:12] I couldn’t afford not being productive. I needed data pouring in. You know, the MBAs had a little work experience, but they were going to be the executives and CEOs of tomorrow. They aren’t people at the bottom of the hierarchy. It just became more and more difficult to do that kind of research. At the same time, people like Peters and Waterman and Bill Ouchi had started this new topic, very applied, of organizational culture conceptualizing it as unified: All the people in this company will think the same way about our company and we will share values which just happen to be the CEO’s values, and it’ll help us be more profitable. [01:10:04] I knew enough about corporations by then, and from the justice stuff especially, that inequality creates subgroups that disagree strongly about very important issues. If you try to brainwash them, you’re going to get 46 resistance or you’re going to get such an abstract mother-apple-pie kind of message that anybody could agree to it and do nothing different, which is why the organizational culture stuff initially was so attractive. You know, this assumption that a “good” culture is unified, implicitly promised a CEO your personal values will come to be shared by everybody, and you in the form of your company’s culture will have a guarantee of organizational immortality. [01:10:48] Isn’t that a nice promise? And very attractive, and totally untrue. [laughter] I set out to study organizations in a credible detailed face-to-face way that would show that people’s lived experiences of these kinds of topdown cultural interventions was to misunderstand or ridicule or ignore them, and that what you really had in terms of culture (as a concept to understand people’s lives at work) were really clusters of overlapping and nested subcultures. Plus a lot of ambiguity, so that when you say quality of product, and I say quality of product, I might be thinking about something quite different than you are, and not just in terms of good and bad, but in terms of what is quality and how do you get there. [01:11:41] Organizational culture turned out to be very interesting, and I used rituals and special vocabularies and story-telling, when the rituals were company-specific and the stories were about past employees, to build a record of each company that captured the differences between groups as well as the commonalities that people shared. It was a more sophisticated and complete picture of culture. That’s it in a nutshell. 47 Tracy: I can certainly see how an anthropological background might have [laughter] been helpful in this. It hadn’t hindered you in any way, that your degree was not in anthropology. Martin: [01:12:23] I think it took me a while. Not having been trained, I had to learn things the hard way. Yes. Tracy: One question about the place of story-telling. As an oral historian, that aspect of research… Martin: [01:12:38] I saw your eyes light up. Tracy: Yes. . . . Do you have a memory of how story-telling was tied in with the other aspects of organizational culture? Was there an aha moment about the importance of story-telling? Martin: [01:12:53] I had it from the beginning. I’d read broadly and deeply in anthropology by then. Stories just popped out from the very beginning as a way of explaining what was special about an organization. I used to love to follow new employees around and listen to the stories the old employees would use to indoctrinate them, and listen to the speeches of executives where they would tell stories, and then listen to the employees making fun of the stories and changing the morals associated with them, and how stories over time became changed, warped to fit changing circumstances, or twenty people tell the same story and the differences would be informative. [01:13:39] Story-telling is like one of the windows into a culture. Rituals are another place where you can really use anthropological tools, except you’re studying contemporary people in contemporary organizations and you have to be very careful. You don’t have the easy “oh, this is a strange tribe in 48 Brazil” distance that keeps you unattached. Over time, even in Brazil, you get attached. There’s a danger in applying anthropology to contemporary, familiar settings. Training students, we would go to companies. I took one of my favorite students who was serious about this but needed a lot of training. [01:14:30] We went and for six weeks we stayed in Britain and were side-byside as we studied The Body Shop headquarters, where they made the lipsticks, where they made the fuzzy peach gel shampoo, and the truck drivers. We’d go to the bars afterward and talk to the engineers and the custodians. We really lived participant observation as much as we could. I think that was a great way to train somebody, although it wasn’t the one-year apprenticeship in Brazil. That would have been even better. Tracy: Yes. [laughter] How was this work received initially? What were people’s reactions to this in terms of business schools and those circles? Did you ever have a sense how anthropologists might have reacted? Martin: [01:15:25] Yes. There was a lot of resistance for different reasons. When I talked to a group of executives, they really resisted the idea that it wasn’t one culture. They placed a lot of weight on the unified idea. Then I would present data from a company that they all recognized, even though I didn’t name it, that showed how this very famous culture was interpreted differently by people in marketing and engineering. I’d had stories and examples of what this very famous value actually meant to the people on the floor. I showed how different subcultures interpreted it very differently, sometimes just in an independent way, and then sometimes in a very resistant, hostile way. This 49 company had a reputation for everybody being the same and happy. It was clearly not. That was how I would try to convince executives. [01:16:20]I gave lots of talks to anthropologists, and the issue was that I was professionally not qualified and that I wasn’t studying a distant culture. Fortunately, anthropology was changing at the same time to legitimate the study of organizations. For example, there was a faculty member in the Anthro Department who studied India as a state. That was his Brazilian tribe. They were moving to studying organizations and studying contemporary societies, and the writing on that was wonderful -- about ambiguities and inescapable biases and perceptual differences. Then there was poststructuralism. It questioned whether anybody ever had a handle on truth. I read that stuff like a hungry bear. I just thought that stuff was wonderful. Anthropologists sometimes expected me not to know anything, and turned out I did and that I was reading the same things they were and I was going to the same colloquia they were. I don’t think I brought everybody around, but most of the organizational anthropologists came to read our stuff and see that it was serious and well done. [01:17:51] It’s a method that requires as much rigor and precision as qualitative research; it isn’t sloppy journalism. I think I had to show that I understood that in my writing and in my speaking. I tried hard. I’m not sure I reached everybody. I’m sure I didn’t. There was resistance. There were a lot of organizational culture researchers in my own field that were taking off on this idea of unity and harmony, and I was going against them directly and saying you just don’t have the evidence. You’re not even looking for the 50 evidence that would contradict what you’re saying. I know how to make that argument. [laughter] Tracy: This is a complete sort of tangent. It’s interesting in this sort of anthropological work that you’re describing, like at The Body Shop, in some ways you become the research tool, or you sort of become a conduit. That there’s less separation from you. But, of course, that’s complicated then because you somehow become a part of that research in a way. From an oral historian [laughter] point of view, can you talk about that transition in the type of research that you were doing and how you become positioned differently, or…. Martin: [01:19:31] Over time within a study? Are you talking about the transition . . . from quantitative lab research to field studies that are qualitative? . . . Tracy: That transition. Yes. The second. Martin: [01:19:44] In the beginning I’d study a company and I’d do something really sophisticated quantitatively, and then I’d do something as good as I could qualitatively and I’d publish them both in slightly different places because different journals prefer different methods. Then I started to develop hybrid methods. Nobody liked the hybrid methods. They were a little quantitative, but they incorporated the qualitative. I thought that was pretty neat, but most people preferred the pure stuff. [01:20:10] After a while, I began to see I could get so much more information from the qualitative study. I mean it was just a better method for this topic. It’s no accident that anthropologists do culture research qualitatively usually. Slowly I learned that, which is obvious to them, and 51 backed away from using the quantitative stuff. I must say that most people in organizational behavior are still quantitative. I get more reprint requests from my early attempts to quantify parts of culture using content analysis of stories to count things, scales to measure value endorsement. They just love those questionnaires, and I keep on saying I can’t find them anymore. [laughter] . . . Tracy: You talked about the student that came to you, Alan Wilkins. . . . Alan came to you and said, “You’re the advisor that I want to work with. You’re the right person.” That seems like that would be very different from your reception by students when you first arrived to having people walk out of your class and that sort of thing. Martin: [01:21:40] The difference is MBA versus doctoral. . . . The doctoral students were always welcoming. They were always a great source of support and joy. I just loved teaching them. They knew that. I gave so much, they gave so much. My rapport with doctoral students was intense and it spread from my field to becoming the doctoral director for all the doctoral programs in the Business School. Eventually I won an award, one of my favorites, it’s from the Academy of Management. It’s a national award for education. I got it for my work with doctoral students, and particularly for my work all across the country really, because I would advise students from all across the country by email and phone, or meeting them at conferences, or sponsoring their research, or reading and critiquing and citing their papers. I especially worked with women and minorities who were finding it hard at another university to get what they needed. The doctoral students have always been a big thing for me. They were a source of joy at Stanford, in all kinds of departments, and 52 then it spread nationally and I started working with doctoral students from all over the country as a supplemental person helping them make the transition from dissertation writer to publisher, to young faculty. Tracy: That’s interesting. I’d read an interview that you did with Paul Reist for the GSB. This would have been in 2007. . . . I’m glad that you brought up mentoring, because you talked about some of the challenges and being an effective mentor for doctoral students. . . . The challenges you’ve obviously managed throughout your career. But do you have a philosophy on how you mentored students, or how you approached students? Martin: [01:24:04] That’s a really good question, and I don’t have an answer. I don’t know that I have a philosophy. I just cared, I would listen, and I would try to help, and to get them to see things in a broader or more time-expanded way. The thing about doctoral students is you have, or can take, the time to treat each one individually, where they are at that moment in their development. Any student that worked with me in an extended way, I would start by having them join a research project in some kind of data collection, data analysis thing. Then I’d have three or four projects at once in the same area. We would meet in a room like this with eight or ten chairs. Each team would report on what they were doing right now. Since it was all in the same topic area, they’d read each other’s stuff, they’d help each other, the older ones would teach the younger ones, and it created a sense of real excitement that then some of them would go on and do research in the same area without me ever suggesting that. 53 [01:25:30] I would never suggest what they do their research on. It was their job to come up with a topic. I wouldn’t want to work with them unless I’d had a chance to train them beyond the coursework, and I’d co-authored a couple papers ideally, one where they’re second or third or fourth author, and one where they’re maybe the second author, or even the first author. Then when they come to their dissertation, I would never put my name on it. It’s always got to be theirs, so that they would graduate with two or three publications in addition to their dissertation, and there’d be no question they’d be a clone of mine. By the time they’re writing their dissertation, it might not even look like it’s organizational culture or justice and inequality. I mean it would really be theirs. Tracy: Do you have a sense of if that approach to students was typical of your colleagues in the Business School, or at least colleagues working in the same area? Martin: [01:26:38] I had more research projects going along simultaneously. I used this research lab model, which I’d learned from psychology. I know that the younger assistant professors who are now coming into tenure, or even beyond that into deanship, ran what they call labs. It’s the same model in experimental social psychology, and they do it, too, in their field. In the sociology end of organizational behavior, they, too, had research meetings that had some of this flavor. I think that was why our doctoral program was so good. Those students were really well trained. Tracy: Let’s talk a little bit about your time as the director for the GSB doctoral programs, in part because I know that you did a lot of work to support 54 minority students and increase their population. Can you talk a little about that work? Martin: [01:27:43] When I came in we’d only ever had one minority PhD student graduate. I thought that was horrible. The other problem we had was that the dropout rate on women was sky high, and higher than that of men. Much higher. I worked very hard, and perhaps with too heavy a hand, to comb the country for good minority applicants, call them up and convince them to apply to us. Some of them weren’t even considering a PhD program because they had big student loans, and some were not considering an academic career because they wanted to make money. I didn’t get them all to apply but I got a fair number of them. [01:28:35] We got the cream of the crop. I was head of the doctoral program for maybe five years. Maybe seven. I don’t know. This was really in the beginning. The issue for me was to graduate them. I was like an informal advisor. When they experienced things like racism, I encouraged them to come to me and we would work out a strategy for them to deal with it. I wouldn’t take charge and go talk to the faculty member who was the problem, and sometimes I would tell a student, “I don’t think this is racism. Frankly, I think everybody in the department’s getting treated that way and it’s just that they should maybe, according to you, spend more time with you, and you need to think of a way to make that happen, and here’s some strategies.” [01:29:25] Those students, and I’m ashamed of this, there were eight or nine really wonderful students, and only one graduated after I left as doctoral 55 director. It’s a very long and sad story, but it was hard getting the faculty to really support them when, in fact, many needed more advanced math training, so in many cases they weren’t as strong as the other students. Even though they were the best in the country, they just hadn’t had the really highlevel courses that the other ones had had. I got funding from Stanford to give them a prep year before they started solid math. We did all kinds of things that we could think of or they could suggest to make it work. I left before they graduated because the doctoral director usually turns over fairly fast, two to four years. I’d already been longer than that. [01:30:26] The next director didn’t have the same priorities. Those minorities didn’t finish and they were the best in the country. I feel like my support for them did more harm than good because they had the experience of failing out of a doctoral program. Tracy: Which is challenging, to say the least. Martin: [01:30:48] For them, you mean. Tracy: Yes. Martin: [01:30:49] Misery and shaking self-confidence. I’ve kept up with some of them and they’ve made really good careers in various ways, and some have even become academics. I don’t know how to solve that problem. Slowly it’s changed and it’s helped by the fact that we now have more minorities on our own faculty, so it isn’t just me. I did a better job at working on the women problem. We got our retention rate way up and changed some policies, including more financial support for both men and women with children who needed particular kinds of support when a child became ill. I also 56 worked for international students, for example, when a religious riot went through India and this guy’s parents panicked and wanted to come to the U.S. and were going to pull him out of school unless they could. We found a way to fund their coming here and staying with him for a while. Eventually they went back and he stayed in the program and graduated and has gone on to do really well. Tracy: After you immediately left as director, you saw a lot of the students not complete the program. Martin: [01:32:26] Primarily the minorities. Tracy: The minority students. Martin: [01:32:28] The minority students, for various reasons, didn’t complete the program. . . . All but one. Tracy: The next director didn’t have that as a priority. Before your retirement, was there ever any improvement in supporting minority students and improving the graduation rates? Martin: [01:32:52] Slight. Some. We had a couple of deans, including the one that was dean while I was director of the doctoral program, who shared my commitment on this issue. When you had the right kind of dean who would make money available when you made a good argument for something, and it helps the Business School has money, then there’s really no excuse for a white doctoral contingent graduating year after year after year. I think that became an issue that people shared, and slowly things began to change. Having blacks on the faculty, and then having new faculty who were supportive of racial issues has changed that a lot. 57 [01:33:41] Having the women numbers on the faculty, we’re still behind other business schools, but the numbers are decent now. Not even decent, but they’re better. Every addition of a female, especially a female with tenure, makes a long-term difference in the atmosphere of the school, the policies it adopts. We’ve had a spate of very good women deans, and each one has left her mark in one way or another. Tracy: You had brought up your experience with CROW and meeting the other women on campus. Martin: [01:34:24] Which is now the Clayman Institute for Research on Women and Gender. Tracy: I’m wondering if this might be a good time to talk about the Faculty Women’s Caucus a little bit more. Martin: [01:34:36] That didn’t have anything to do with CROW and the Clayman Institute. . . . It was a problem that we talked about from time to time. We had a female faculty caucus then. It was led by Deborah Rhode, among others. I asked Deborah if she would let me do a presentation at the meeting introducing the idea of a questionnaire that wouldn’t ask women directly what do you earn, but would just ask them to look at the figures that were published in the newspaper, which divided faculty salaries into 20 percent groups, and say in which of the groups in your school, in your department, where do you fall. [01:35:34] That kind of a design got a wonderful response rate because everybody had the sense that this was an important issue. Many women faculty suspected, but didn’t know, if they were underpaid. You weren’t 58 supposed to talk about faculty salaries to other faculty, although some did, but often not. Collecting the data, getting people involved to talk others into filling out the questionnaire, analyzing it, and then feeding it back to the Women’s Faculty Caucus -- that was dandy. They got all agitated and we got people who know how to negotiate, teach them how to negotiate, and we got people to threaten a lawsuit. [01:36:10] Equal opportunity was very inactive in Washington then, although the Department of Labor got very interested in this. We were actually led to believe that the Department of Labor was going to do something on behalf of the female faculty at Stanford being underpaid so grossly. Then there was a change of administration in Washington. George Bush went in, the second George Bush, with Condi Rice who’d been provost here. Within no time at all, maybe a month, the Department of Labor discontinued all interest in the salary issue at Stanford. All our work went kaput. What they did agree to do was to have a dean from the Law School meet with individual faculty members, not admit any group level discrimination so they wouldn’t be liable, but work with individual faculty and the individual deans of the schools to see if that woman deserved more pay. [01:37:34] Now, you can imagine the outcome of that was a lot less than we might like, but it made a difference for quite a few. And a very big difference for deans that were well disposed to looking at aggregate data because they began to say, well, you demeaned her productivity, and you didn’t like her because of her attitude, or such-and-such. If you go through every woman in the school and you have a negative that you’re believing about every one of them, did none of the men have these negatives? It turns 59 out they did, so why were their salaries 40 percent higher, or 60 percent higher? [01:38:15] Some deans ̶ not many, one or two ̶ began to see the group-level discrimination, and they really made a difference for everybody, or for a large proportion of the women. Other deans fought it tooth and nail. Biology has always been very good on women’s issues, but the other hard sciences ̶ many of them were areas of trouble. Tracy: Yes. It sounds like it took a lot of… Martin: [01:38:47] Time. I made a commitment when I was about fifteen years into a thirty-year job that I would spend fifteen hours a week on women’s issues. And I did. It was over and above Business School citizenship stuff or university citizenship stuff. I did my fair share, and then some. In addition, whether it was individual mentoring or some kind of university women or minority task force, or something for the Women’s Caucus, or then the hours on the Faculty Advisory Board, where my focus was often on those gray tenure cases of women and minority faculty who maybe got a tough deal, and delicate negotiations about that, it made my job a bigger time commitment. Tracy: We’ve talked a little bit about your trajectory. I’m wondering where this conscious commitment to devoting time to supporting women and minorities came from. Was there was a specific instance that prompted that conscious commitment? Martin: [01:40:07] I think it grew like a cancer. [laughter] I think I became more and more aware of the breadth of the problems and the seriousness of them, the 60 fact that individual women were being demeaned. It was a group-level phenomenon. People were interpreting it as their own fault, as an individual problem. I had to do collective action kinds of things through the faculty senate or the female faculty caucus or whatever we could invent, the faculty’s pay study, so that we could get people to move. Also, the numbers of people coming forward with problems. . . . Tracy: These names have come up throughout the interview. Were there other women on campus who had the same commitment that you did? Martin: [01:41:02] Yes. Tracy: Certainly through things like the Faculty Women’s Caucus you were working together. Martin: [01:41:07] Yes. I worked with Cecilia Ridgeway. We co-led that caucus, sometimes with Deborah Rhode. Cecilia was in the Soc Department and Deborah was in the Law School. We were a good team. [laughter] People had different skills. Cecilia was a strategic thinker who, on occasion, could be beautifully subtle and tactful. I was a truth-teller and I used numbers to prove my case. Deborah knew the law and policy and the federal government stuff. Deborah’s also great at rhetoric. She can speak to a large group beautifully. [01:41:55] Other people were involved at different stages, but we were like the second generation with the first generation being the Nan Keohane, Diane Middlebrook, Myra Strober generation. Tracy: That’s interesting. What impact do you feel this explicit focus and work with other women had on your career at Stanford? 61 Martin: [01:42:21] If you were labeled as a feminist activist then, you could never hold a major administrative job ̶ period. That was one of the reasons why for decades there weren’t any women deans. That and the shortage of women faculty at Stanford. I became someone who was never going to be a dean. When I started out I would have thought that I would maybe like to go that route, but it quickly became obvious that if you wanted to make things better for women and minorities, you were rocking the boat and dangerous. Maybe I’m not skilled and tactful enough to be the right person to do that from within. I worked from within, but I never went to the newspapers. I had a clear sense of what was too confrontational and I would have been ostracized or pushed out of Stanford, I think, if I’d done that. Tracy: Let’s pick back up with your shift integrating gender into your research. Where did that shift fall in your explicit work at Stanford, in terms of focusing on women and minorities? Martin: [01:44:13] Every area of research that I did, other than pure method papers, every once in a while would have a focus on gender. The justice and inequality research had studies that sometimes would focus on women/men’s pay inequality and perceptions of injustice. It was there from the very beginning. The culture stuff, it began to be able to surface in some of the papers just naturally as part of what was going on. [01:44:45] Then there was this rat-a-tat-tat from the world outside of people, “she’s a woman, therefore, she does research on women.” Oh, no I don’t. I didn’t like being stereotyped that way. I would get invited on an editorial board, and then everything I’d get to review would be on gender research. It 62 was like a tenth of what I’d ever done, and it was certainly not my major focus. I’d resigned from the editorial board. I’d explain why. [01:45:16] Lo and behold, pretty soon there would be another non-gender researcher on the editorial board facing the same dilemma I had. Then we’d talk, try to negotiate a change. There was my resistance to it. Then there was the problem of the hostility I perceived, locally and nationally, to gender research as being necessarily second rate. I questioned that. But until I got tenure, I figured I don’t need to take this on. My feminist research friends have accused me of that. They’re right. I just didn’t take it on until I got tenure. Then it was about a third of what I did. It was never more than that. It was often a subtheme of something else that I was doing. [01:46:07] I don’t think people think of me as primarily a gender researcher. Some do, but I think that’s more a reflection of my actual plumbing than it is my vita. Tracy: There’s almost this damned if you do, damned if you don’t dilemma. That people, because you’re a woman, were assuming you would be doing that work anyway, and, as you talked about your experience with the editorial board [laughter], they’d be sending you those sorts of articles. Martin: [01:46:42] There was that. The other side of it, and the more important side of it, was the Clayman Institute, which was then called CROW, and these seminars where the women from all over campus would get together and each of us would talk about our own research, or we’d invite somebody to come and we’d listen to something that we were all interested in to some extent. That’s how I became exposed to post-modernism, post-structuralism. 63 I love that stuff. That was my recreational reading in the evenings after I finished work. I think that it exposed me to new ideas, and I became more enthusiastic about doing something intellectually with it. I was positively drawn to it as being really an exciting area of research, doing things that even in the culture area we hadn’t gotten to yet. We needed to. That kind of postmodern thinking could enrich cultural thought, too. My own theories, the parts of them that emphasized ambiguity and paradox and contradiction, were a natural fit for the post-structural ideas. My intellectual life evolved in that direction and I was introduced to it by the women on campus. Tracy: Besides meeting women through lectures and talks at Clayman, were there other gathering points for women organizationally? Martin: [01:48:33] We had the female faculty caucus. As a result of first presenting the pay data, a lot of women called me to help them think through what they should do. I met a lot of women all over campus through that. Then I co-led the faculty caucus, and that brought other issues to the fore other than pay. Cecilia and I in particular took on Condi Rice (provost) on a number of those issues. We played the role of loyal to Stanford, but still in opposition on some issues. Then in the faculty senate, I was out there doing a lot of different things, not all to do with women. I got known. Then that got me elected. [01:49:32] I started getting elected to things like the Faculty Advisory Board. It just progressed. It wasn’t solely, but it was heavily driven by getting to know women all over campus on the faculty. That was nice because I didn’t know too many here in the Business School. We were so busy. [laughter] 64 There wasn’t a lot of just social stuff. We did get together over dinner two or three times a year and it was mainly the Clayman Institute group. We’d get together for dinner and drinks and talk and stuff. We had a lot of one-on-one meetings. On an average week, I’d probably have lunch with other women two times, three times. [01:50:32] Sometimes a woman I didn’t know needed advice on something, sometimes a woman who had been raped or harassed sexually, a faculty woman, and sometimes just a friend or a friend of a friend. Tracy: Since you mentioned sexual harassment, in the mid 1990s, the sexual harassment policy went through some revisions. There were a lot of questions around liability and confidentiality. Do you have a memory of that policy being revised in the mid 1990s, or your sense of the problem? Because obviously you were hearing about…. Martin: [01:51:25] When I was the only woman faculty in the GSB …. If you were raped in the Business School ̶ student, faculty ̶ who would you come to on the faculty? So I did a lot of that kind of counseling then. The university ombudsman put complaints about certain faculty “in the drawer.” There were complaints about some people over the years that were never acted on. The actual policy arguments were something I spoke up about in the faculty senate, but I wasn’t a primary person on that. Tracy: Considering your position and being one of the only women, what was your sense of how prevalent sexual assault and sexual harassment were? Did you see a change in that over the years? 65 Martin: [01:52:34] When I came I was really visible because I was the only one in the Business School. People came to me from all over campus, freshmen even, in tears, “I was a virgin. I got raped.” Over time, the university began to respond on the undergraduate level by having a widespread network of people who did that kind of counseling. I was very glad to get out of that business. At the doctoral and postdoctoral and the faculty level, the retaliation and repercussions of complaining are really career-sensitive, particularly if you came to Stanford to work with one person in a very narrow field, and that person’s going to be writing your recommendations until the day he dies. Saying no to some of those people, they immediately would withdraw support from you. An offer to talk on a panel at a conference or contribute a chapter to a book suddenly disappears. It’s a hint that you better find someone else to write your letter of recommendation. Whether you’re going to actually take that complaint up through the university hierarchy when that person’s been doing this for years and has always gotten away with it, that’s a very tough decision for a victim, and I found it awkward. I don’t want to talk about this much more because every time someone comes to you, you’re supposed to report it to the administration. Some of those cases, they would never have talked to me if they thought I would report it. They really needed to talk to somebody. I didn’t have pat answers because those people are damned if they do and damned if they don’t. We could talk more about what if this, and what if that, but like any good counselor, I wouldn’t tell someone what to do in a situation like that. I’ve been actively involved in that. By the time the policy 66 came through I spoke up, and I spoke up in the senate, and I think it had an effect on some issues. Over time, the most important aspects of that policy did get revised, sometimes better, sometimes worse. I was just one of many at that point. Tracy: Let’s talk a little bit about your time on the University Advisory Board, [laughter] and your experience. We talked a little bit about what the Advisory Board does and your memories from your time serving on it. Martin: [01:55:40] OK. There’s a lot of confidentiality wrapped around this. . . . [01:55:47] What the Advisory Board does is it reviews any tenure application that’s gotten a positive review at all the layers underneath. This is the last layer of approval before it goes to the provost and the president. Provost was Condi, the president was Gerhard Casper for most of this time. You don’t see the file of someone who was denied early in the process unfairly. You never get to see that case. The cases that reach you are either clear yes, or something that it’s fairly easy to say this should be vetoed in some way. Then there are the hardest cases that are gray. You could read this as a yes, you could read this as a no, using objective standards. [01:56:50] That’s where the Advisory Board focuses its attention. At the time I was on the board, almost every woman and every minority fell in the gray area. There was what they called “noise in the file.” All it takes is one or two or three negative letters to kill a case or to create enough grayness that the case really has to be debated. It was very important to have women and sympathetic men who were sensitive to issues to argue around the gray cases. It’s a huge job. Every one of us, we required something very much like a 67 dolly. You know, those things that carry big boxes? We had to have things to carry the big boxes of files that we had to read. I think we met monthly, and sometimes weekly during “The Season,” and there were just mounds of these things. We did it very carefully. Tracy: Fran Conley. She chaired . . . part of the time. Martin: [01:58:22] She was the chair, and Brad Efron was the second in command. Then, the first in command was Amos Tversky. Tracy: [laughter] Being on the Advisory Board and getting tenure yourself, I’m curious if being on the other side and reviewing people’s tenures made you think about your own tenure experience differently. Martin: [01:59:02] I did tenure reviews at the department level . . . 01:59:08] and at the Business School level. The Business School does this faculty review for every person who comes up for tenure. The interview is first in the department, and then it’s all full professors in the GSB voting. I was deeply involved in tenure reviews long… Tracy: Before that. Martin: [01:59:28] I can say safely that the only thing that stands out thinking back on my own tenure review was the number of letters, and I’d mentioned that earlier in this interview, that thirty-seven letters is a lot. It wasn’t cumulative. From the very beginning they wanted that many letters. That’s a lot of letters in a system where any no is important, and two no’s is like, ugh. I began to see that I was treated unusually. When it came in, it was generally positive, that meant maybe thirty-five out of thirty-seven letters were positive, so that’s good. It’s a tough hurdle for the first few women or minorities. I’m not 68 the only one; when you’ve got the pioneers coming through they are looked at hard. Tracy: That’s a good point. I appreciate you are saying that you would have been doing tenure review long before you were on the Advisory Board, certainly at the school level. Martin: [02:00:39] Most people are in a department and they just do it within their department. Because of the way the school is structured, we also do it in nine different, or seven different departments. That helped me get through the Advisory Board experience because I’d already had a courtesy appointment in sociology, I was a psychologist in terms of my training, so I was really interdisciplinary to start with. That helps. Tracy: In talking about your time at Stanford, I don’t know that we’ve acknowledged what department you were in in the Business School. Martin: [02:01:20] Organizational behavior. . . . Tracy: Joanne, let’s talk a little bit about the awards that you’ve received. Certainly what we talk about today will not encompass all of the awards [laughter] that you’ve received, but there are some especially important ones to discuss. To start, I know that you have received honorary doctorates. I was wondering if you could tell me a little bit about the honorary doctorates and the institutions. Martin: [02:02:04] First of all, I was really pleased to get an honorary doctorate. I mean, wow. That happened to other people. I didn’t ever expect it would happen to me. The fact that they came from other countries was spectacular. The first one I got was from Copenhagen Business School. I had worked 69 there occasionally teaching a doctoral course here and there and they had come to Stanford as part of SCANCOR as faculty or as doctoral students, so I’d gotten to know some of them and they invited me to Copenhagen to teach. A couple of times I went, and then lo and behold they call and say, “Come and have an honorary doctorate,” and I was like, woo-hoo. It is so good. It’s in economics and business administration. That’s sort of my field, and yet, not. But it was pretty cool and I was happy with that. Then a couple years later, 2005, a university that I didn’t know anybody at, but had a group of people who specialized in organizational culture research, arranged for me to get an honorary doctorate from them. It’s the Vrije University. It’s the one that’s not the religious universities, which is more normal in The Netherlands. This is in Amsterdam. That was fun. They had ten people with brass instruments going do-do-do-ta-doo. People were wearing costumes that belonged in a Renaissance painting. They really celebrate things in a very formal and traditional way. [02:03:58] That was the Department of Anthropology. So, woo-hoo. I thought that was fun. I thought, too, in a more serious level that just getting an honorary doctorate for my work and having it come from Europe that was a great honor. Both of them were for the culture research. . . . Tracy: I think the fact that they were both European, and as you said, one was in economics and business administration, and then one was in anthropology… Martin: [02:04:41] Social sciences. Yes. Tracy: It speaks about the reach of your research, but then also the breadth of your research. 70 Martin: [02:04:52] Yes. It was just dandy. [laughter] I was really liking that one. The other one that came along about the same time was the Centennial Medal from Harvard. Now, that was neat because that one was for research that benefited society. It was awarded every year to a few, like two, three, four, five people who had received doctorates: could be a master’s degree, but usually it was a doctorate from Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. This award is coming from the discipline, and it’s coming from having done research that made a difference to society. It was a Centennial Medal, from my school that I went to. That was probably the best award I ever got. I just felt terrific about that. Tracy: In giving you the award, was there a description of how your research had benefited society? Martin: [02:06:09] They went all the way back to the early stuff on justice and inequality. They picked up on the organizational culture stuff in the statement. Then they picked up on the gender stuff and picked out some titles that showed that I had a sense of humor. [laughter] I felt like that was maybe strategy to make the presentations of the award a little bit more interesting, but it was also a little, you know, not so serious. I was happy to get that one. It meant that it was sponsored by my Harvard department. Here I’d gone and not stayed in psychology and moved over to a business school. That was a kind of very special legitimacy to get from my department. Tracy: That makes me wonder, when you did go to a business school from your department in Harvard, did you have a sense that that wasn’t necessarily assumed that you would make that move. How did your mentors in the 71 department react to you coming to the Stanford Business School in a social psychology background? Martin: [02:07:31] Stanford was arguably, with Harvard and Michigan, a haven for good psychologists. . . . [02:07:40] To come to Stanford was a good thing. The difference between the Business School and the Psych Department, they were aware of the difference, but I don’t think they thought about it very much. I think they… Tracy: Knew that you would do good work wherever you… Martin: [02:07:57] Maybe. Hopefully. I don’t know. Tracy: [laughter] Anything more about the Centennial Medal at Harvard? Martin: [02:08:08] No. Except for it was a lot of fun. [laughter] Tracy: You received that in 2002, is that right? Martin: [02:08:17] Yes, that’s right. . . . [02:08:19] That was a busy year. Tracy: What is the next award? Martin: [02:08:30] There’s two from the Academy of Management. That’s nice because the Academy of Management is the organization of people in my field of organizational behavior, and a couple of other fields like business strategy, nationwide, and even increasingly internationally. That was really good. First one I got was the Educator Award that I talked about earlier. That was for my work with doctoral students nationwide. Then the second one was the Distinguished Scholar Career Achievement Award. That came from the division of the Academy that’s closest to my fields of interest. [02:09:17] It’s one of the really big divisions of the Academy and it’s got a reputation for being serious scholarship and innovation. That’s good. When I 72 retired in 2007, the Academy of Management, the Organization of Management Division, named an award after me. They created it and they named it the Joanne Martin Trailblazer Award. Tracy: That’s fantastic. Martin: [02:09:58] Isn’t that fantastic? It was for scholarship that cut new ground and involved lots of other people in a kind of a national movement. . . . [02:10:12] People that were spearheading that were people I’d helped, or people from Stanford, doctoral students from Stanford, who were on the prize committees and stuff. They had to convince everybody who was not my student and didn’t know me that this was a good idea. Tracy: When we talked about your work in organizational culture, you noted in the beginning that there was skepticism and resistance. I wonder if you could talk a little bit about how that area of research is regarded today. . . . [02:11:24] Martin: You asked me to highlight just a few of the awards or service things that I’ve done. Because I’ve been in a business school, something that I’ve done that’s been a great part of my education in the practical sides of running a business, which I needed for work in a business school and coming from a discipline, is that I’ve served on a lot of boards of directors. I’ve served on the board of director of a company, CPP, and on the board of the International Who’s Who of Business and Professional Women. That’s part of my gender commitments. I also served on the Board of Advisors for the National Association of Corporate Directors. [02:12:13] Also international advisory boards for collections of universities in Australia and Canada and stuff like that. I think this board service, which came before I served on the Faculty 73 Advisory Board, was like moving up a level in a hierarchy where you get a different level of information and a different understanding of where these universities and companies belong in a larger context. The board service has been a great part of my education. I think if I hadn’t done it, I would have a smaller and narrower focus in my work. I…. [02:12:56] That’s how I got some of the breadth. Tracy: Did you have a sense that the service on those boards would benefit you in that way before you’d started doing that work? Martin: [02:13:05] No idea at all. I just knew that I was interested in it, but I didn’t know exactly what I’d learned. Some of the more board-oriented professors that I knew at Stanford and elsewhere had encouraged me to do it because I would learn stuff. Boy, I have. It was a good experience. I also served on the Board of Governors of the Academy of Management. I did it for my profession, I served on board for the Who’s Who for Women, and for these international groupings of universities in countries where I had quite a bit of experience going to conferences and working with people. It was just good. Tracy: Any other awards or honors? Martin: [02:14:09] There have been a lot, but going through those things can be boring, and I wanted to just focus on the few that were important in the ways that we’ve talked about. I’m content. . . . enough!..