 Cheryl Gilkes: Mrs. Jackson, the first question I want to ask you is to elaborate on your family and your residency in Roxbury. Ellen Jackson: It's not hard for me to do that, because I guess it's not unusual either in black culture for us not to have too much history on our families. And I guess I'm one of those victims. I grew up, as I indicated to you sometime before, in Roxbury. I was born and raised on what was known in those days as Sugar Hill. Cheryl Gilkes: Sugar Hill. Ellen Jackson: Sugar Hill. This is the area between...well, actually it would start, in some people's minds, the corner of the junction of Walnut Avenue and Humboldt Avenue. Right where the Eliot Congregational Church is located. And straight up Humboldt Avenue, over to Walnut Avenue, and over to Elm Hill Avenue, this area in the early thirties and early forties was known as Sugar Hill. Cheryl Gilkes: Now you said the early thirties and early forties. What's your exact birth date? Ellen Jackson: My exact birth date and year is October 29, 1935. Cheryl Gilkes: Go on. Ellen Jackson: Well, I grew up on what used to be called the upper half of Sugar Hill. And that was on Hollander Street, you might say the upper half of Sugar Hill started at Townsend Street. . And during this period of time, we were a minority. That is, black people were a minority. There were few black people in the school, there were few, if any black businesses. But one of the things that you could always depend on, because it was a majority Jewish community, was fresh fish, fresh Kosher meats, bakeries, and fresh fruit galore. I can recall on Saturday mornings waking up and smelling, around nine o'clock in the morning, or eight o'clock in the morning, all the beautiful, yummy smells of the bakeries, half moons, in those days, and cupcakes, and hot cross buns, all the other kinds of pastry and bakery goods that, you know, you 1﻿have to travel far and wide today to get that are fresh and of a good assortment. We were lucky, we had a theater right around the corner from our house known as the Humboldt Theater. I remember it was twelve cents plus three cents tax, fifteen cents to go to that show. My uncle used to work at that show, he was like an assistant manager at the Humboldt Theater. But that didn't give us, you know, an opportunity to get in free. However, on the side of Waum-beck Street, where the theater ended, there was a fire escape and a fire door. So if someone paid fifteen cents to get in, it was not unusual for them to get in the theater and go and push that door ajar for the other kids to climb up the fire escape and get into the theater. And luckily—I'm not saying I was a goody-two-shoes—but luckily, I never got caught. I think I did it once. I know the greatest time that I remember getting caught, when I look back now, is when my girlfriend and I were going to Sunday school. We were all members of Charles Street A.M.E. Church, which is in Roxbury at the corner of Elm Hill Avenue and Warren Street. And we were members of the choir, members of the junior usher board, members of for what was called Christian Endeavor. This particular Sunday morning, we were in Sunday school, which as you know, was always for a certain age group before church service was started, which meant that you left the house normally before your parents left. And we decided we'd go to Sunday school, as we always did, but then we would circle back this Sunday. I might add, of course, this show was taboo on Sunday. I mean, everything was taboo. You couldn't go to church, I mean, you couldn't do anything. Much less to think about going to a show on a Sunday. CG: You didn't go out of the house, you didn't even sit on the porch, you didn't go anywhere. EJ: You didn't go anywhere. You couldn't make it to church, you didn't go anywhere. If you made it to the bottom step you were lucky, okay? So this particular Sunday morning, we started off for Sunday school in the usual manner, and we decided after Sunday school, we had it all planned that we were going to come back through Waumbeck Street, to Humboldt Avenue. The theater started at twelve-thirty, and we should be prepared. We'd go somewhere in between that time. And we should be prepared to sneak into the Humboldt Theater to see, of all pictures, which was the big picture of the year, in terms of what we called rated pictures, restricted rated, parents' guidance, PG, Gone with the Wind. I mean, my goodness. How could you resist seeing 2﻿it. You know your mother and father would never let you go to see Gone with the Wind, or give you permission openly and willfully. So the only way that you were going to see Gone with the Wind was that you would have to sneak. Now I mean, it was bad enough you sneaking to see Gone with the Wind, but here we're going to sneak on a Sunday. Just as we proceeded to turn the corner, to go toward the theater, my mother was turning the corner to... [laughter] Church services had just let out. Well, we weren't sure that day whether or not she saw us. But we proceeded into the theater and we sat there. And in those days, if you remember, there used to be continuing shows? And I guess we weren't so sure if we were seeing it because we wanted to see this very, very adult picture for the second time, or if we were afraid to go home, because we knew what was in store for us, because we were so sure that she saw us going into the theater. And I want to tell you, we really didn't enjoy Gone with the Wind because our minds were at home, thinking about what was going to happen to us. Nevertheless, we stayed for the second time around to hear Rhett Butler tell her, "Frankly, I don't give a damn." And we got home, but luckily for us or whatever, I don't think my mother knew we were in the show. But I'll tell you what, just the thought of thinking that she knew made me so miserable and made my viewing of the picture so uncomfortable that I don't care, frankly, if I ever see Gone with the Wind again, either [laughs]... Say I don't give a damn! But the family was, is a very small family. Unfortunately at this point, and in some ways, I guess God works in mysterious ways. I am the only one of my family who has more than two children. I have no mother and I have no father. I have no uncles and no aunts. CG: Living, you mean. EJ: Living. I have no grandparents, I have no real cousins, believe it or not. I cannot name a blood cousin that I have. I have one brother and one sister. My mother was born in Boston, she was born in the West End of Boston. CG: Now what is her name? EJ: Her name was Marguerite Booker Swepson. My grand- parents moved from the West End, my grandmother, grandfather, my mother and her one brother, they moved from the West End to the South End, and lived on a street that is no longer there, but it was off of Hammond Street. It was 3﻿called Sawyer Street. It was one of those...two, there are two or three oases or lovely little streets in there between Westminster Street—Westminster Street is off of Hammond Street—and Hammond Street. And you know, Hammond Street was supposed to be in those days, as people moved from the West End over, the street of the elite. And they lived in that area. Then my mother and father moved to, when they got married, to Elbert Street, which was on, off of Humboldt Avenue, right there, near, now where the Marksdale Homes are, right behind Saint Mark's Church. Now this was in the real early thirties, that was before I was born, because I was born when they were living on Hollander Street. So when my mother moved to the Hill, it was in the early thirties, about 193 0, '29, '30, '31. She graduated from Girls' High School, but it wasn't called Girls' High School, I think it was called Girls' Normal...you can look it up. But there was another name for Girls' High School at that time. CG: Now, how did your grandparents get to Boston? EJ: You know, I can vaguely remember my mother telling me, my grandparents for the longest time worked for a wine company owner, I don't know if it was Pastene or one of them, but they came from Virginia. And they came and were living, frankly, my grandmother grew up, 'cause she came here as a very young girl. She grew up in Winthrop, with these people, who she worked for. And then, when she and my grandfather got married, they moved to the West End. She stopped working for these people, but my grandfather continued, and that's where they met, working for the, I guess it was Pastene's, because they're the only ones I know of, that live in the Hull/Winthrop area according to my sister. CG: Who were in Boston. EJ: Who are Boston based. But they were living in Winthrop, and my grandmother was living, I mean working for them. Then when she got married, she and my grandfather got married, they moved to the Joy Street area of the West End, I can't recall which one, I think it was Joy Street, though. You know, that was the area for black people over there at that time. And then my grandfather died, so my grandmother moved with my mother to Elbert Street, and it was on Elbert Street that my grandmother died. CG: But your grandfather's name was Booker? EJ: No, Swepson. S-W-E-P...wait a minute, my grand- father's name was Booker, that was my mother's name. My mother married a Swepson. 4﻿CG: Right. EJ: It was funny. When I looked on...my mother's father's birth certificate, my grandfather undoubtedly at that point, did not have a first name. You know how you have baby boy, they don't even have the names before you leave the hospital... And what they had on my grandfather's birth certificate was "grandson Booker," okay? And the way they scribbled it, we always thought it said "grandison," G-R-A-N-D-I-S-O-N. And when my mother passed away, and we went to get the birth certificates and all of that, my brother and I noticed that it was "grandson." And the interesting thing for us is because we always thought that was a very odd first name, Grandison. So when my brother was born, my mother probably named him David Grandison Swepson, because she thought she was naming him after...and she thought that was her father's name. But if you look at the way the record shows, when you know, the ink is very old, but it really just says "grandson Booker." So it sounds like they hadn't made up their minds what to name... Somebody, his grandparents, just put down "grandson Booker." CG: Was it a Southern record? A Virginia record? EJ: It was a Southern record, Virginia record, that's correct. That's correct. But that's about as far as I can...my grandmother, they tell me, died in 1934. I was born in 193 5. My mother used to talk a lot, but you know, unfortunately, one of the other things is that you don't pay much attention to what they're saying. Particularly when, my mother was such a very gentle, I think I mentioned this before, a very soft person. Very genteel. She talked to us about our background, but she didn't...and it would be very interesting, and it was a very heartbreaking thing for her, because she raised, she had to raise... My grandmother was very sick. And it was just she and my uncle, after my grandfather had passed. And my uncle had had a terrible fall, off the bridge. And he had problems sometimes in terms of his memory. So she was really the sole person of the household during those very formative years for them, and working very hard as a seamstress, and then worked very hard as an elevator operator, and worked very hard after that at B.F. Goodrich in Watertown. In fact, she was just ready to retire, age sixty-two, when she developed cancer and was going to take...that was the first year for early retirement for women. And come out on, and begin to live a little, after raising us... CG: So she worked the whole time you all were growing up. EJ: That's right. That's right, she worked the whole time, and worked very, very hard. 5﻿CG: Where did she work as an elevator operator? EJ: She worked at what was it? Chandler's, do you remem- ber Chandler's? CG: That's almost a social institution in Boston, whose parents worked there. Those were the only good jobs. EJ: That's right, exactly. And there was another place on Tremont Street. Well, Conrad Chandler's years ago used to be on Tremont Street, then it moved around the corner, so it had to be Conrad Chandler's that she worked at for years. But anyway, she, you know, we used to talk, but I guess, I guess the records were just so skimpy and so sketchy that even for my grandmother and grandfather there was little that they could share with her that they remembered. So all of that really kind of died off with my parents. I'm quite sure that if I ever decided to go to Virginia, and at least look up, take some time and look up some more family records, I could possibly get some more detail and...stay down there a few days and talk with some more people. I'm quite sure I could possibly find out more information. CG: What about the Swepson side? EJ: Now the Swepson side. There's a Swepsonville in North Carolina between Durham and Raleigh. And when I was working, I didn't find it out until I was grown, okay? I was working, a friend of mine who was working, well, maybe he was my assistant. He was from North Carolina, down into Warren County, and I think Swepsonville is located in Warren Country. And we were going to visit a gal at that time, believe it or not, who was thinking about running against, what his name from Watergate days, Sam Ervin. A black woman, she is an attorney. And I can't think of her name off-hand. Now I'm terrible with names. But we were on our way to visit her, and Sarah Herbin—in North Carolina, in Greensboro—who was my newspaper assistant when I was executive director of the Black Women's Community Development Foundation, said to me, "Ellen, we're going with a group up there on the highway. We're going to take a detour, do you mind?" And I said, "No, it's a beautiful Saturday, I'm in no rush, not at all." It was my first time. I'd never had an opportunity as a kid to get South. I said, you know, "Let's just go ahead." And we pulled out and there was the sign, I...and she's just smiling, and I let out one scream, and I said, "Look at that Sarah." She said, "I know," she said, "I thought you'd like to see it." So we went through this little half-block town, and there was the sign, "Swepsonville." 6﻿There was a town hall, you might say the town square, a few businesses, but it reminds you of something that you see in the movies where a town just closes up on a Saturday, 'cause there was not a soul, maybe two of three people, walking around. But we had, my brother and I have, I got about three maps to bring back to Boston. And I had 'em blown up, one for my brother and one for my sister. And my brother has said that he is going to, one of these days, get down there and find out just exactly how we can... We have not done it, understandably. CG: But your father's side is from North Carolina. EJ: Um humm. My dad was, now that's the funny thing about it, by the way, because my dad was born in Tifton, » Georgia. Now so we've never been able to put how they get from Tifton... But I'm quite sure, like most black people, they moved, you know... I remember my father talking a lot more about his mother, because I used to want to go to Tifton, and he'd say^ "Ellen, they'll hang you. I can't take you home." And^T've talked to people since then and found out that Tifton is like, right next door to Plains. It's the southern part of Georgia, and it's not as small as my dad used to make me believe or I would picture in my mind. I was very close to my father. The best part about his trips home—which he did once every summer to see his mother, because his father was dead, and of course the house was in.his name. Therefore it was natural for him to return with all these peanuts. Now I remember him coming home, and we would take the peanuts, and we'd shell 'em and roast 'em, put salt on 'em, and put them in a big bowl. And we'd sit there for hours and eat these peanuts. And I am proud to tell you that, believe it or not, not that I'm a big fan of his, but I relate more to that particular time and place since Carter has become President. And it never, you know, never crossed my mind. But I have several friends, since I've become an adult, who are from Georgia and the rural parts of Georgia, southern part of Georgia, say that Tifton is a beautiful place, and it's not too far from Plains at all; it's just a small community, rural community in the same part of southern Georgia. CG: My grandfather White used to grow peanuts and pecans. EJ: That's right, the pecans. You know I'm talking about peanuts and pecans, that's correct. CG: Stand in front of the oven and wait for them to come out. [laughter] So he was born there and he came to Boston. 7﻿He came to Boston. We've never been able to put the Swepsonville connection, but we're gonna do that. One of these days, we're gonna do that and find out what it's all about. I guess for me, the bottom line, I have five children, as you know, my sister has three, my brother has one. And we attempt, we do make a concerted effort that we spend all large holidays together. My phone bill is very large because we stay on the phone. The children are very close, and I feel very honored that my nieces and nephews will always share all of their problems, all of their happinesses with me. In fact my niece Debbie—I only have one niece, the rest are all boys—she wrote me the most beautiful letter, a poem, when I was appointed to this job. And it was entitled, "That's my aunt all the way." I'll show it to you if you'd like to see it, it's really very lovely. But I feel extremely close to the kids, and I think that they feel, I know they feel extremely close to me. And the cousins are all, you know...close. And I guess my sister and my brother and I try to impress upon the kids, we never had... We're the three of us. There is a large, there's a significant age difference. I'm four years older than my brother, but the point is, I was a girl and he was a boy, and I'm older. So it wasn't until we both got older that we really became even closer. On the other hand, my sister was ten years older than me. So in a sense in those days, I was a little snotty-nosed kid, you know... To her. To her. I couldn't be really tagging and bugging along with her. So it wasn't until we started having kids that we became a lot closer and understood that we were women together with the same problems in terms of raising children and worrying about how to make sure that they were good kids and all of that. But we impress upon the kids, because we don't have a large family, that it's very important for them to be very close, and to remember that they are relatives, and all of that. And I think so far, so good. And they are close, they do a lot together. My nephew, who plays basketball, pro basketball, is living in Sweden. He came back and wanted to go to Florida to visit a couple of his classmates who graduated from Boston College. My son went, and he just got a new car and they went down, and my brother was a corporate pilot and met them in Florida. And they all hooked up together. Your brother is a pilot? Yes, my brother is a corporate pilot for Philip Morris. My brother is a major, now in reserves, he was a major in the Air Force, and he was an instructor of jets 8﻿and training young pilots who were flying, first the Phantom Jet, when it was used during those days, teaching 'em how to fly those darn things. And then, in terms of the family, we are very close. He lives in Englewood, N.J.; my sister lives in Stoughton, and of course I still live in Roxbury. I'm the most parochial, I still live nine blocks away, only three streets up from where I was born. And it doesn't look like, frankly, I'm going to be moving very soon or very far, from... CG: For a parochial person, you've traveled a lot. EJ: The summers were very interesting summers. My mother and father had a moral, an edict that we didn't stay around the street^ during the summer. I can recall very vividly the day after school, in those days a lot of camps started the day after school closed. And we would be packed, we'd get our new pair of sneakers, and off to camp we would go. CG: Which camp? EJ: We went to camp Atwater. We all went to Atwater, which is upstate, up in the western part of Massachusetts, around Springfield. CG: It's a predominantly black camp? EJ: A predominantly middle-class, upper-class, middle- class black camp. That's right. CG: What was that like? EJ: That was a very interesting experience. We had kids from all over the United States, who used to go to that camp. Mr. Mapp was the director; Elma Lewis used to be the dance director, dance teacher there. That's right. And you had wealthy kids from all over the country, black kids, from all over the country who would come to Atwater. Sarah-Ann Shaw went to Atwater. CG: Who else went to Atwater? EJ: I'm trying to remember who else went to Atwater. Carol Calloway. CG: I think that's the one that mentioned as certain people, as one of the camps that's mentioned. I have to check again. EJ: I'm trying to remember the name of the town, it's the western part of... CG: Brookfield? 9﻿E J: Brookfield, that's it. Brookfield, Massachusetts. That's right. I remember a set of twins who used to come up from Texas every year, and they'd come up in a limousine. Oh, yes. That's the camp I went to. CG: People would send contributions .to these camps for these black children, not realizing they were black middle-class children! EJ: That's right. And I want you to know that Atwater is a black middle-class, upper middle-class camp. And I guess, one of the things that you, which was very common, and more common even in Boston, was, of course, the color problem. So I enjoyed Atwater, but I guess I had problems, because I wasn't the right color, and my parents weren't poor, but we didn't have guite the amount of money that some of these other kids had. So I know who was there... Cab Calloway's niece was there, Carol Calloway, she was in my cabin...didn't call them cabins, in my house, that's what we used to call them. And I remember she used to try to hypnotize everybody. CG: Oh, really? EJ: She was exotic, to us, but it was an experience. And it was, I mean, you really had to be, I would say, an outstanding athlete in terms of swimming, and I was not, or tennis, or even in dance, or whatever, I mean, to be recognized. Because everybody there was supposed to be at a certain level and have certain types of talents and skills. So what your family or what your school or what your neighbors thought about you in terms of your being an exceptionally bright kid, you were among many exceptionally bright kids. You had to be super bright to get on. But it was a beautiful camp, particularly for those of us from the North, I guess, from the New Yorks, and Bostons, and Rhode Islands, and there weren't that many of us in this area, believe it or not. The camp drew more from the South and the Southwest. So in a sense, you can tell, and they were used to that kind of communal environment among black people. And if nothing else, the camp did afford us the opportunity to let us know that there were other elements within the black culture again that were synonymous with some of the white folks who had money and had background and could trace their greatgrandfathers back, and their fathers working in the insurance companies, or their mothers being deans or teachers in schools, and their uncles being doctors and the whole bit. So you really got, you got a more comprehensive view of what your race was about, because your were in that kind of heterogeneous surrounding, which was very helpful and healthy. 10﻿CG: It stood for something other than what the stereotype stood... EJ: Right, that's right. I want to tell you one of the most interesting things. I think it really kind of knocked us down a little, as northern black folks, because we always thought we were so superior. This is what we'd been told in...not just by white folks, but by our own people, you know, we were superior to our peer group who came from the South. So, I mean, you could see it. It wasn't anybody had to say anything. You could see it even at age ten and eleven, and that's the age I'm talking about. You were dealing with a young girl or a young boy who was from the South and who was fairly well off, or well-to-do, for what you will consider in the early forties. And you're talking about '43, you're talking about, let me see, I was born in '35, you're talking about '44, '43, '45, around that age. CG: You would have been ten years old? EJ: Sure. '45. So it was a very interesting experience. But that's how we spent our summers. And we would go off, in fact, we were packed off for all summer, and we'd come home two days before school would open, so we could get the shoes for school; you'd get your new shoes for school, your new book bag, and your new pencil box, and be ready to march out the door the day after Labor day. But it never deterred from that pattern. I can recall that pattern vividly, and my life was like that for many years in terms of my summer activity. I took piano lessons from Adele Evans, from West Med-ford, and I recall having to go to West Medford for concerts, for little concerts or recitals. And Maybelle Fenton Butler, who was the organist at my church. I remember watching her make the piano almost rock. There's a gal that I went to school with over at Harvard. I grew up with, and she's retained her maiden name, Dolores Delomba was her maiden name, and her marriage name was Dolores Mendelssohn. She was a doctoral candidate at Harvard. And we met again after many years of separation, and she told me she had been to Boston, was now back to her maiden name. We used to be mesmerized by Dolores in terms of piano, because she could sit at a grand piano, and just, it looks like the piano was just moving! And there was another young gal, Julie Perry, that grew up on Harrishof Street, whose father played with the big bands, with the Count Basies, with the Lionel Hamptons, and Jule was another great piano player, during those days when some of us were still learning how to keep our fingers curved, and your wrist up off... [laughs] You know what I'm talking about. And the ruler... 11﻿I remember one year when my father asked me what I wanted for my birthday, which was, as I told you, in October. And I said the only birthday gift I wanted this year is to be able to stop playing the piano, taking piano lessons. That was all they could do for me, is getting me out of playing piano. Then I always wanted a bicycle. That was a big thing. So I was able to stop playing the piano, on the particular birthday year I asked if I could have a bicycle. My brother had just got a bicycle, I thought I should have a bicycle. And my father told me I was a little girl, a young lady, and young ladies did not ride bicycles. And my heart was broken. And he knew my heart was broken. So he said, "Don't worry, you'll be pleased with your birthday gift." And he came home one day with a violin. I was now into taking violin lessons. [laughs] CG: Instead of a bicycle. EJ: What a choice. What a choice. CG: I would have cried. EJ: I did, I did. CG: Oh, good. EJ: There are some times when you cannot keep your chin up and be polite at gift-giving time. So he recognized that I was not going to be a violinist, and that only lasted maybe a short three months, or it might have lasted three weeks, I can't quite recall. But he recognized that that was not going to be my calling. Well, it was not my calling. CG: They gave out before you gave out. EJ: That's right. They gave out. But I never got the bike. I did get ice skates, I got little roller skates, but I didn't get the bicycle. One other thing on growing up which was fun. We used to have doll carriage contests. And this is where the whole street, all the young adults—we were, I would say, about ten or eleven years old—in the spring, there were older girls who might be twenty-one or twenty-two, who had boyfriends and things, would get together and send us little notes, all the little girls on the street, and tell us that the next week would be the baby doll carriage contest and parade. And what we would do is we would decorate our doll carriages with strings of papers, and get your biggest, prettiest doll you had, and have your mother help you sew a blanket and a dress, and the bonnet, 12﻿and you'd put on your best party dress and you'd... And it was fun, because there would be maybe four or five houses. And what you'd do is you'd go to one house, one yard, and somebody would judge your baby carriage and your, you know, your doll and you, and ask you all the nice little questions. Then you'd go somewhere else and you'd have your fortune told, and your doll baby's fortune would be told, and then you would go somewhere else and you'd have tea and lemon, I mean cookies and lemonade, in someone else's yard, and then the last yard would be where the sandwiches and the punch and the music would be. And all the girls would get together. That was a great event, okay? And it was one time that you put your best pretty frivolous party dress on, and... everybody, no one was a loser, actually, because everybody got a prize, which might be just some little packages of baby powder, and toilet water, or the little pretty smelly packages like potpourris, but something... It was something we used to look forward to every spring, and did that for quite a few years, and that was just the neighbors along the street, it was something that people used to just get together and do. CG: But these were all people who shared a sense of com- munity. EJ: That's right. CG: Also, like manners and elegance, as well. EJ: That's right, that's right. In a sense that was basic, that you would get a feeling of how you were supposed to do things, the way that you should sit, the way you should talk and walk, and drink your tea. And my mother used to have this saying—and I guess I don't chew gum today for that reason—that ladies only chew gum in the confines of their bedroom. And I don't, I'm serious, I don't chew gum today. I have a terrible aversion to seeing young women going down the street with chewing gum. [laughs] But I'll never forget, never forget that. CG: So growing up in Roxbury was a pleasant experience for you. EJ: It was. It was. It was a very pleasant experience. We had our clubs, we were cheerleaders for a basketball team at Saint Mark's Social Center... CG: So that was another focus for participation. EJ: I think that it was no question that the problem was that, outside of the church, there was no social center 13﻿for young people to get together, and that's why the church became such a focus of the community. And Reverend Laviscount and members of Saint Mark's Church, particularly where Saint Mark's was located... One of the things that, I guess, in every community, be it black or white, kids had a habit of congregating around the drugstore. And the corners of Townsend and Humboldt Avenue would be mobbed. In fact, if you remember, or if anyone hasn't told you, that drugstore was the most famous drugstore because that's where Malcolm X used to be a soda jerk during those days. That's right. All right. So that was like the four corners. It brought the kids from the lower corner of Roxbury and up, I mean, that was the meeting point. The kids where I lived would come down to Townsend Street. So you had an idea of where the kids were coming from, who was around there. But they had to stay on the corner. I mean, you'd stand on the corner, there was a little delicatessen at one corner, luncheonette area store, and then there was the drugstore, then there was a barbershop, and there was a cleaners... And all the other stores were there. In fact, Helen Davis's husband, Norris Davis, the funeral home was right next door in that same block. You know where Marksdale homes is presently located. Is this the same Mrs. Davis that's the widow now? Oh, yes, she is the funeral director of Davis Funeral Home, but it started in a storefront on Humboldt Avenue. Started in a storefront, that's correct. We used to go by there and read the signs, and that's how you knew who had passed, because it was on a little sign. Same way that Chisolm has, in the one down on Columbus Avenue. But then the St. Mark's congregation and the community started selling bricks to build a community center. And every brick we sold was for a dollar. We raised money to build St. Mark's Social Center. Mr. Raymond Jarvis, Erna Bal-lantine Bryant, and Otto P. Snowden were directors at one time or another of the center. That was a lot of money in those days. A lot of money, but that was a focal point. And then there was Saturday afternoon "Coke Hour," at four o'clock. That was the happening. When we got, jumped from Saturday to Sunday very quickly. But on Saturdays, so when you'd wake up in the morning, you'd have all those gorgeous smells would be permeating around, and you would go with your mother over to Blue Hill Avenue. Because you didn't have to go any further than that. They had the best meats and fish stores, and fresh fruit stands, and everything, 14﻿because the Jewish community, based on their own religious beliefs, they made sure that everything was fresh, that is Kosher. And black people on the Hill had a very good opportunity to shop as long as you shopped, you know, you didn't shop on Friday at sundown, because everything was closed. So Saturday would be the day that you'd trek to Blue Hill Avenue, or to one of the local stores right near our own area and get all the different groceries that you would need. You'd come back and you'd have to wash down, I remember in those days, the stairs. There was no foolishness of sinks or sweeping stairs, there was no foolishness of "I'll be right back to do it." I mean, that was part of your chore for Saturday morning. And my Saturday afternoon, Saturday evening, Saturday morning ended early, and you could get your quarter to go to the show, for fifteen cents and ten cents for your spending change, or thirty cents, whatever it might be. But the other part of it is, you also on Saturday had an opportunity to go to Coke Hour. And four o'clock, Coke Hour used to take place. Then after you've done your work, and your home lessons, or all the things that you're supposed to do, every Saturday, at four o'clock, everybody would congregate at Saint Mark's for Coke Hour. Coke Hour was something that the kids now call a disco. And you'd dance from four to seven, and have Coca-Cola, all the Coca-Cola you could drink. And it became known citywide. So then the kids started coming from in town and Cambridge, kids started coming. CG: Now were these kids from the South End? EJ: Not quite the South End, lower Roxbury, you know where... around Hammond, no Hammond Street, and where the project area is, Tremont Street, Shawmut Avenue where the Shaw House used to be. All in that area, the kids would come. Then the Cambridge kids started coming. Coke Hour was growing and it used to get very disturbing when the Cambridge girls would start dating the Boston, Roxbury boys, and then the in-town boys would start dating the Roxbury, Sugar Hill girls. And I want you to know that there were conflicts here. Because everybody's staked out their territory, and property—so that we would find ourselves becoming very annoyed with the boys on the Hill that we had grown up with, my brother too, because of the fact that they had started dating girls from in town and Cambridge, and vice versa. The girls of Cambridge and in town were becoming very upset because the boys began to find their way up the Hill and start dating the girls on the Hill. So then the basketball teams, because there were more basketball teams than anything else, you know that, all the young black boys belonged to a basketball team... So they'd take out that frustration on the basketball court. And then came the era with jackets... 15﻿CG: With the girls cheering. E J: That's right, cheering. And there was a softball game down at Columbus Park, the Carter playground. But that was off limits to most of us, you wouldn't go to Carter playground. You lived on the Hill... I remember one time when Sarah-Ann Shaw and myself and, oh, Shirley Redd and Joan Walden, Thais Austin, we had a club, and it was called Emanons. It was called Emanons, rather, because we couldn't think of a name for the club, we spelled "no name" backwards. We were very creative. But it was all those guys, and it was one guy who is now a dean of graduate students at Brown, Bernie Bruce, do you know Bernard Bruce? Also Louis Atkins, Kent Jackman, Paul Peters. CG: No. EJ: Well, Bernie Bruce. Paul Peters who was the manager of Stop and Shop, then a guy who is EEO officer for Raytheon, Kent Jackman. Louie Atkins who was a top official at Polaroid...there was a gang of us. As I said, Sarah-Ann, Joan Walden, a girl by the name of Shirley Redd, who actually had red hair; her name was Shirley Redd, and she had red hair. So this was the Hill group that we used to go around with. CG: It sounds like it was a very achieving group. EJ: Oh yes, oh yes. They've done very well. I'd say that the majority of these people have done very well. It's funny, because I'm doing another interview here at the Globe, and they asked me to name some of the people I grew up with. And they couldn't get over, in the same era that I'm talking about, you had David Nelson; you had Harry Elam; his wife, whose maiden name was Barbara Clark, Barbara Clark; you had Rudy Pierce, who just stepped down as U.S. magistrate; you had Sarah-Ann Shaw, you had quite a few people... CG: What about Betty West? EJ: Betty Johnson, yes, Betty West. But she, now see, that's where the line has been drawn, because she really didn't hang... She grew up on the Hill, but she grew up on Rockland Street, that was a... Oh well, you had these lines, these territories— That was, you know, where the Lewis School is? See, that was a little lower part of Roxbury. People who lived down there weren't considered quite the same. But Betty Johnson, and Betty did go around in our group, but you had Dick Banks, you had A1, Alan Munroe, who's at John Hancock, a vice-president. John Hancock. You had, oh Lord, who else was up... Wade McCree lived up on the Hill. You had...oh, so many 16﻿people. Alan Clark, I don't know if you know Alan Clark, who was the director of Bridge, Inc., for years, Barbara Clark Elam's cousin. Richard and Clifford Wharton grew up on Walnut Avenue. CG: What about Dolores Goode? EJ: Dolores, Dolores Alleyne, was her maiden name. That's right, she lived on Crawford Street. So Dolores Goode was up there, and she used to hang around with our crowd. There was Elaine Brown, Irma Brown Brooks who is the assistant to John 0'Bryant, well, John 0'Bryant. You had all these people who lived up on the Hill. CG: And weren't you all in the NAACP Youth Council? • EJ: We were all in the NAACP Youth Council. Yes, that's correct. But I remember one time, speaking about where you could go and where you couldn't go, when we got a little older we could stay out a little later, till about eleven o'clock. We still couldn't go in town. I mean, you got to an age where you didn't want to go to Saint Marks and see the same boys all the time, and the corner wasn't quite our style any more... CG: But the boys could wander and you all couldn't. EJ: The boys could wander. So we decided, and this was the days when Chicken Lane, this place called Chicken Lane, on Mass. Avenue, and then another place, I think on Tremont Street, right next to Slade's, okay? I can't recall the name of it. But I remember a couple times... CG: This was Connie's Shop. EJ: Connie's...yep, this was next to Slade's. I know we sneaked in town one time, and we had to be back up on the Hill, but this was the night that I guess some of the boys discovered us. And we just kept on looking at the time, and pushed our time up to the last minute. But I want you to know, it used to be a five-cent stop in those days. The five-cent stop was right near between the Boys' Club and the Courthouse. Instead of going into Dudley Station and paying 15 cents, you'd go to the five-cent stop outside of the station and board the bus. CG: Right up on Warren Street a little bit. EJ: On Warren Street. Right across from where the telephone company is, there was a stop. Used to be a cigar shop right there. And years ago, if you walked to that stop, all you had to do was pay five cents to ride from there all the way up Humboldt Avenue to the park where the trolley at that time would turn around and come 17﻿back in town. If you went inside the station, it was fifteen cents. So most people would walk up to the five-cent stop, and get on at the five-cent stop. CG: Now this is, you all are about fifteen? EJ: We're all about fifteen, sixteen years old. So this particular time, a couple times we decided we were going to go into town. And we didn't have, we had spent our money on custard, and hot dogs, and all of that. So all we had left was this five cents to get home. And I know we were, as the kids said, boogin', in those days, boogin' up Shawmut Avenue, trying to cut through, to get up to the five-cent stop. And my father had one of those great big old 1940 black Buicks with the big whitewall tires. And he was parked right there. And he said, "Come here." And we all had to get in the car, at the corner of Shawmut and Ruggles, 'cause he was just headed around that corner. And he deposited each of us at our door. And of course, we were grounded for some period of time. But as you say, the focal point was the church and the center, the community center, and those were the days. CG: Okay, you were saying that the social center and the church were essentially the focal points... EJ: ...Were the central focal points on the Hill. And our area was still a predominantly Jewish area, and this was about the only place that we could really congregate, and get some counseling and some direction, and see some role models, and also have some place to socialize. CG: Who were some of the people who were running the center at that time? EJ: Well, Hazel Brothers was there. Otto Snowden was also running Saint Mark's. Erna Ballantine Bryant used to run Saint Mark's. Mr. Jarvis, Ray Jarvis, used to run Saint Mark's. These were all the different people during the period that I recall having the responsibility of the direction of the group programs that were, you know, coming out of the center. And Reverend Laviscount was the pastor of the church at that time. CG: You would have graduated from high school around 1954, right? EJ: No, a little earlier than that. I graduated from high school in, see, 1950—oh, not much earlier, '52, or '53. CG: I keep forgetting that, there's just enough of an age difference, so some people would be young adults running things, some Boston people like the Snowdens would have 18﻿been young adults running things, while you all were just going through adolescence. EJ: You're right. CG: We talked about the NAACP Youth Council once before, right? From my own research I found out that a lot of people who were busy making change in Boston were coming through that NAACP Youth Council. EJ: That's right. In fact, it's funny, a gal who I con- sider now my oldest and dearest friend, grew up in town, in the Lenox Street Project... That was a project that was looked upon as a project that had a kind of very close, communal tie in terms of black people. And some of the same people, when that project was built, I guess', their parents lived in that particular project. And they had a place there called Social Hall. And I never went to Social Hall, in fact, as I said, the only way I knew to go in town legitimately would be to visit this one girl friend who was active and raised in Ebenezer Church. She was a junior usher, and belonged to the Interdenominational Ushers' Association, and the Juvenile Elks. Inez Rose Ashley was her maiden name. And we could go to her house on Sunday afternoons to have jello and cake. Also, our parents belonged to the Elks. So we were members of the Juvenile Elks, which used to meet at 1059 Tremont Street, the old Prince Hall. And there used to be the Chime's Brownie Bakery. We'd walk from the Hill in town, so we could save our fifteen cents to buy them those bags of the scraps of brownies. Oh, they'd be warm, and they'd be delicious, and we'd get down there early and sit there and munch on our brownies. But... CG: Who was in the Elks with you? EJ: Well, let me see. The first wife of John Bynoe, Sarah Cheatham Bynoe, let's see, this gal I was telling you about, Inez Ashley. Anybody who was close to me... My cousin Gloria Murchison Smith. CG: That gave you ties into the Barbadian community, didn't it? EJ: In a sense it did, because a lot of the people in that area, on Tremont Street, belonged to the Temple, and... But you know, I believe in a nutshell, in those days we were kind of, as black, so-called Afro-American, or black, Negroes at that point, we looked down at West Indians, we made fun of them because the adults talked about them and made fun of them. We made fun of the way they talked, we made fun of the way they looked, we made fun of the smells of their food. It was really very . 19﻿interesting, the division. So really, we didn't have much contact. And they kind of kept more to themselves, believe it or not, a lot more than they do now, and yet you have a whole new surge of migration into the community which, who are a lot more parochial, even, and clannish in their own way. But in those days they were really another group totally. The second generation was like...well, it was really a funny crossover, like you just said. It was interesting because some of the people at that point were not that old... Now, I didn't know Ruth Batson, but I knew of Ruth Batson. Elma Lewis. CG: And so she's at that in-between... EJ: Just exactly in-between, not guite the age group of the Snowdens. CG: She's sort of in, right in between the two groups. EJ: in the middle, that's right. Because she grew up in the. South End. Then she moved after her marriage to the Hill. She said she grew up in the project in the South End. CG: Did you know her by her maiden name at that time? EJ: Oh, no, no, I didn't meet Ruth till NAACP days. But I knew of her, you see, because they were all... Most of the South End community, I mean of the Barbadian community, or the West Indian community belonged to either Saint Cyprian's or Saint Augustine's. And I guess it was more the Barbadians who belonged to Saint Cyprian's, and the Jamaicans belonged either over in Saint Bartholomew's in Cambridge, and Saint Augustine's on East Lenox Street. So it was a very, very funny kind of clannish... CG: Did you know Jean McGuire? EJ: Sure, I knew Jean. She was, oh no, she was, oh Lord, what was Jean? CG: I can't remember. EJ: I can't recall. Jean belonged to... CG: Saint Bart's. EJ: What was it? CG: Saint Bartholomew's. EJ: That's right, Saint Bartholomew's. Right. I remem- ber Jean. Jean's family at that time, this is not for your record, but Jean's family was known as socialist. I 20﻿mean, you'd be, you'd get... It was funny, in those days, I mean, 'cause everybody was so patriotic. And anybody that someone said was "socialist" or "communist," you just stayed way far away from them. CG: Well, wasn't militancy a problem in Boston at that time, and especially with the Youth Council? EJ: Oh, yes. Oh, that...well, we lost our charter. We lost our charter, because what happened, we were being infiltrated, at least by what they called as dangerous... CG: So you knew Dorothy Clark... EJ: Dottie Linwood Clark was involved. The same time. Sure. Oh, Sarah-Ann Shaw, Dottie Clark, this gal June, was always June Miles, an attorney now, all of us were members. This guy by the name of Theophilus T. McKinney, Theophilus McKinney, he's a well-known doctor now in California. CG: Was he related to Judge Elwood McKinney? EJ: No, oh no. He lived on Elm Hill Park, right across from Charles Street Church. But there were a couple kids from Cambridge, and there was Inez Ashley, Sarah-Ann Shaw, Norris King (Sarah's brother), Shirley Redd, but Dottie Linwood Clark was definitely... Dottie was the president. She was the president at that time. Elwood McKinney was an attorney at that time and, believe it or not, was our adviser. And that was the year that the NAACP had its national convention here and was meeting out of the church up here at the corner of West Newton and Columbus Avenue, Union Methodist Church. CG: Well, then it was Union Methodist, and now it's Union United. EJ: Union Methodist at that time. And Elwood McKinney had his little dinky office on the little street, on West Newton Street, I'll never forget... CG: This is his law office. EJ: His law office. I'll never forget, when they had voted, the national voted to strip us of our charter, because we had, you know, these "elements" of socialists and communists who were infiltrating, and forcing us to do some things that were against the policy of the charter... CG: They couldn't believe that you kids were doing all the demonstrating and going to jail on your own? EJ: Right. 21﻿CG: Because your group was very militant, wasn't it? EJ: That's right. CG: Can you tell us a little about that? EJ: It was weird, because we were demonstrating. It was the beginning of demonstrating about various things, housing conditions and jobs, inferior education. CG: This was the early fifties... EJ: That's right, early fifties. And that convention was being, the headquarters was the church, the convention was being held over in the old Mechanic's Hall, which is no * longer there, on Columbus Avenue. CG: Out here by the Prudential EJ: That's right, Prudential, and Huntington Ave., all in that area was Mechanic's Hall... CG: That Prudential stop used to be Mechanic's. EJ: That's right. And our meetings were being held at that time at 558 Mass. Avenue, the League of Women for Community Service. And, what was the gal's name, last name? Rodney Smith, who used to play sax, who died, his sisters from Cambridge, okay? His two sisters, Sonya, Eleanor, who was about my age, because they used to live at 558 Mass. Ave., all right? They were members, and Norman Thompson, died in a car crash about two years ago, he also was in it. All these guys. And we just thought we were just right on target. I guess we were, this was a little more than the national and the local Urban League, you know, could accept. And they had warned us, and warned us, and warned us. And so we had been out. The charter was on the verge of being suspended, and it was going to be brought up before the Rules Committee at the national convention. It was brought before the Rules Committee. And we went to Elwood and we asked Elwood what we should do, and he tried to explain the dangerous grounds that we were on, and what was going on. Even though, in a sense, he didn't come out and say, obviously, he agreed, but you had a sense he sympathized with what we were doing. But he was saying that you got to find another alternative, because you're part of a national, you're an arm of, you're under the umbrella of an organization that has a lot of other things to contend with, and you gotta live by their rules and regulations. CG: And confrontation was not... 22﻿EJ: And confrontation of that nature at that point was not something the NAACP was tolerant of. So, you can imagine the impact this incident had on the Boston Chapter. I remember watching Walter White receive the Spingarn award that year, and it was really very interesting and exciting. .A very interesting time. CG: Did you know Edna Pesilessi? EJ: Oh, sure. Edna Pesilessi. Sure, sure. CG: That was guite a crowd. EJ: Who told you about Edna, now? My Lord! CG: Oh, I found out a lot about the Youth Council in doing my work 'cause I ran into a lot of people who said Youth Council, and I said, "Well, what year?" And they couldn't remember the year and I'd say, "Who was president?" And they'd say Dorothy Linwood Clark. EJ: Dorothy Clark, sure. And Edna Pesilessi, I think they just ran her out of town 'cause she was supposed to be a big Communist, you see. Then the meetings were at her house, she used to live off of Blue Hill Avenue, she was married to a white guy. And, oh, that was a mess. That was a mess. CG: People harassed her? EJ: Oh yes, they did. Oh, yeah. CG: So that Communist scare of the fifties really had an effect... EJ: Yes it did. You know, living around here, if you talked to Muriel, she might have mentioned, they even blamed the Communists for their influence for organizing parents at the Higginson School. The "Red Flame," did she talk about the "Red Flame"? CG: Oh, I think she may have. EJ: Oh, I'm guite sure. She and Otto Snowden—it was in the paper: "Headmistress says Snowdens Communists." That was a very easy label with which to incite emotions and discredit causes for equality in our community during that period. People, black people, were desperately attempting to demonstrate their loyalty to America, joining the service, buying bonds and placing flags on their homes. As I look back, well, reflect, we were the true patriotic people. CG: Undo... 23﻿EJ: And we were all so afraid of being anything less than patriotic. CG: It was bad enough to be a Communist, you didn't want to be black and a Communist too. EJ: That's right, that's right. Black and a Communist. Those days that they labeled William Worthy, you know, renowned William Worthy, Bill Worthy, columnist for the Afro-American because he had just returned from Russia. I remember we used to pass his house, Dr. Worthy's house, his father's house. [whispers] "That's where a Communist lives." You know, up on the corner of Howland and Humboldt Avenue. It was a frightening thing to us then. CG: I can vaguely remember, I was about eight or nine years old in 1944. I was 21 years old in 1956, and I can remember my father kept talking to me about the revolution. And he'd always, he'd say "Damn folks are always criticizing their own. These people are getting into trouble. We need them. Why do they say these things!" EJ: So you know what I'm talking about. That was quite an experience, quite an experience. And I think one of the unfortunate things for the Youth Council... The Youth Council, from that point on, went downhill,' and downhill, and downhill. I think that was its peak period. CG: Well, they lost their charter. EJ: They lost the charter. And they did get it back... They lost the charter, and when they did regain it, none of us really, well, we kind of moved out, and that was the beginning of some other kinds of student civil rights organizations, like the Boston Action Group, which was called BAG, and Sarah-Ann Shaw's first husband, Donald Shaw, started that, with a lot of young college students. They were picketing, if you recall, the housing conditions in the South End. BAG became a very organized and disciplined local kind of a young people's civil rights organization, because people had lost their interest, and I won't say their faith, but their interest, because of what they considered the reins on them under the NAACP. And so that group was really out there and protesting the living conditions, particularly in the South End, and the slum landlords, and the whole bit. And out of that Sarah-Ann formed, or became... CG: Now what was her maiden name? EJ: Sarah-Ann King. And she was very actively involved in BAG, that's where she met her first husband, or her only husband, Donald Shaw. And her brother, Norris King, lives in New York now. Oh, I can't recall all the people 24﻿who...but quite a few people joined that particular group. Then it moved into...oh, Bill Strickland, William Strickland, Bryant Rollins, who moved to New York and worked on the Amsterdam News, editor of the Amsterdam News, he grew up with us on the Hill. People like that. But then... CG: My goodness. EJ: Sarah-Ann was involved with the Northern Student Movement. CG: What year was this? EJ: This was in 1961. NSM started, I guess, maybe about early 1960, around that time, you'd have to forgive me, I'm just giving you a ballpark figure. CG: Okay, let's go back a minute then, because you did some other things in between. You went to school, you finished high school in '53... EJ: '53, and got married in '55, '54, got married my freshman year in college. CG: So did you quit school, or did you stay? EJ: Yes, for a while. Oh, for a few months. While I had my baby. [laughs] CG: And so you went back, right while you were married. EJ: Oh, yes. My mother made it very clear...because we were living with my mother. We couldn't afford to live any place else. But I went back; my daughter was born in '55. That was my first child Ronica Lee Jackson. And I graduated in '58... CG: You went to walk across from Girls' Latin School to Teachers' College at Boston on Huntington Avenue. EJ: That's right, and strolled right through the court- yard which separated the two institutions right into the other door. Lord, I'll never forget that. In fact, I had some ladies who were coming to my home for a meeting... received a letter the other day for our twentieth reunion and wanted to know if I was coming, I said no. I'm not into all that. I went to one reunion and that's enough. There were so few of us, that it's more than I can handle. But then we moved, we moved, I guess we got our own place. My mother said, "It's about time you guys got your own place; I can help you if you get your own place." So we got our own place. We had a very lovely apartment on Stanwood Street off Blue Hill Avenue. CG: Now this is after you finished school. 25﻿EJ: Oh, yes. But I couldn't work because I was having babies so fast. Another one was on the way. My son, first male child, Darryl Leonard Jackson. CG: How many children...you have five children? EJ: I have five, and one was born in '55, and... CG: Now what was her name? EJ: That's Ronica, R-O-N-I-C-A. Then there was Darryl in '56, and then there's Sheryl in '57. So. Then I did a little jump. You know, four years later, in, well, three, really four years, 'cause he was born in 19 60, Troy, who will be eighteen, just graduated from Concord/Carlisle and will be coming here in September. And Stephanie, who's fourteen, will be fifteen in July, who's the baby, and she's going into the tenth grade at Weston High School. But at any rate, during that period of time, NSM was forming. And the most that I could do was something on a part-time basis. And that's when Sarah-Ann asked if I'd be willing to help out. CG: So you weren't involved that much with BAG. EJ: No, no, that was in town, and again, there was kind of a... That was a little too militant for me, I guess. CG: Oh, really? EJ: Yes. For me. Now, you know... CG: Were they picketing, and standing at... EJ: Yes, and sitting in, and I wasn't quite prepared to do all that. But they were doing that and doing a darn good job of it. CG: Stopping evictions as well? EJ: That's right. That was the whole idea. Evictions and white slum landlords, and, you know, very bad health conditions and environmental hazards in terms of the people's living. The NSM came along, or was formed, in Northeast Region and that was more up my alley. Dealing with parents, and it was dealing with kids who wanted to be tutored, and get some help in education areas. And so I became the parent coordinator for that program, and I got the great sum of thirty dollars every two weeks, [laughs] We had no money. CG: Now, you hadn't been working all this time when you were married. That's why... 26﻿EJ: But I mean, there was no taxes taken out of this thirty dollars that was just like a stipend. CG: Stipend. EJ: Stipend. But we worked, we worked very hard, so that we had centers established all over the black community, in Jamaica Plain, in the South End, in Roxbury. At that point there were very few people in Dorchester, black people in Dorchester. Main organizations were either in lower Roxbury or the South End or in Roxbury itself. Around Blue Hill Avenue, for some reason, that was the beginning of the migration of white people. CG: Out of Roxbury. EJ: Out of Roxbury. And storefronts were becoming very plentiful at this point. People were taking over storefronts. But there was no way...see, at that point, Roxbury, Sugar Hill area was more residential.. There were very few stores. You'll see, but you can't see 'cause they've done some urban renewal. But urban renewal was getting started at the same time. So some of those storefronts on Humboldt Avenue were going out, they were being torn down to make room for Marksdale, and for Char-lame, and for the Trotter School, and the whole planned design that Muriel and Otto and Freedom House was very actively involved in. So the only place you could go was to the east, over toward Blue Hill Avenue, because the urban renewal plan didn't extend guite that far over. It was supposed to, ultimately, in the end, ultimately, but it started in the Washington Park area, and had not got over there. So people were in a sense, even some storekeepers, if they were going to stay in the Roxbury area, were moving from Humboldt Avenue over to Blue Hill Avenue, or they were moving back up into Mattapan, and ultimately, from Mattapan, they were moving out toward Newton and the Brookline area. You find around in Brook-line, when I go up that way now, up there Brookline Circle, Cleveland Circle, you see so many of the stores that used to be right on Humboldt Avenue, all those fancy lamp stores, all those fancy little boutigues used to be right there on Humboldt Avenue. It's unbelievable. Morse's, you know, used to be right on Humboldt Avenue. CG: Morse Shoes? EJ: No, Morse Fish, Morse Grocery Store, used to be right on Humboldt Avenue. And on Blue Hill Avenue. What is that place called? Oh, Lord, Ashmont Supply, Jackson's Glass Company, all of these places used to be right... You had everything in that area. This Jack and Jill Children's Shop was on Humboldt Avenue. And I mean the goods, because they were serving—their clientele was majority 27﻿white—their goods were excellent and of quality, you did not have to venture down to Jordan Marsh or to Filene's or to places like that, because you could buy, in these very small, little boutiques and small stores, the same kinds of very quality goods, very fine and quality goods, that you could buy downtown. So most of the agencies were getting started, like CORE in the Boston area, like NSM, like APAC and Youth Employment Centers, were all located right on—SCLC, our branch was located right on—Blue Hill Avenue. CG: What later became know as the "strip"? EJ: Agency Row. Agency Row, that's what it was called. Agency Row. Everything was located right on that... SNCC. What was the other one after that? The Panthers... CG: Yes, they had an office there. EJ: Okay, they had an office. Everybody had an office on Blue Hill Avenue, extending back down to Quincy Street. CG: And then later Roxbury Multi-Service Center? EJ: Roxbury Multi-Service Center. See, Roxbury Multi- Service Center was really part of a package of the urban renewal plan. So that was the only planned agency at that point, as well as the Grove Hall Library, a new elementary school that really was designed under a total package. The rest of them were, you know, kind of agencies and organizations that sprung up because of what black people felt was the need and the concern at the time, and what was happening on a national basis, and that these places had to have local branches. And that's what happened. CG: So Northern Student Movement was part... EJ: So NSM was right there, 378 Blue Hill Avenue, Sarah- Ann was the director. I was the Parent Group Coordinator, and she... There were a lot of white tutors. Byron Rushing worked there at that time, and you know, part of the Afro-American Museum, well, the curator of the museum. But he worked at NSM at that time. Alfred Finch, who is now an attorney, worked at NSM at that time. And I think we were the only blacks in this region with a staff... Betty worked with us for a while, Betty Johnson, in fact, she took my place until she left there to go to work for Ruth Batson. I took a leave to work with Rheable Edwards, director in the first Boston Head Start Program. But the majority of the tutors were white, and they were from most of the Ivy League schools in the area. CG: The Northern Student Movement, then, was essentially the beginning of your participation in the problems of the schools. 28﻿Yes, yes, most definitely. Northern Student Movement was the catalyst for a lot of, first of all, my keen interest was because I felt that my own kids could benefit from some of the tutoring that was going on. Ronica was going into the first grade; she was fairly bright, so I didn't have too much problem with her, but I did still think it would be good for her to get, because it was something more to get, to have the advantage of this opportunity. So I got involved, basically, right from the beginning, for purely selfish reasons, because of my own kids. And each kid, naturally, was different, and each kid in a sense, needed, or possibly benefited, or would possibly benefit from a different kind of educational style. You know, they all weren't molded for a contained classroom. And with that in mind, I decided that I'd get involved in education. And in fact, I'd been trained to be a teacher anyway, so you know, it was part of my training. I felt that one of the things that I had been lucky in growing up is that my parents, my mother and father, used to talk a lot about education. So, in those days, I think a lot of us did anyway. And I was exposed to a lot of things that I would say I felt that the average kid had not been exposed to in terms of lectures, lectures with my parents, and the museum, and the symphony, the children's symphony. So naturally, the role model, had been set for me and I wanted to do the same for my own kids. And this was a perfect setting and environment to do it. One, my own kids would be exposed, and two, I would be doing something. Because I was, I was getting bored. I was getting anxious anyway, and I wasn't doing anything. And my mind was active, but my body wasn't. And I found that this was a good outlet for me. I would do it during the time that the kids were either in day care, whichever ones were of that age, and the others were in school. So, of course, my day may be from like nine-thirty to two o'clock in the afternoon. It wasn't a long day at all because the kids were too young, and my husband [Hugh] was working. And his day was a very long day, because he was working two jobs. And so therefore, it was important that I be around with those kids, and he and I had that understanding, to be there to get them off to school and be home when they came home from school. My particular role in NSM was to act as an advocate, a parent advocate and coordinator for issues that we thought parents ought to come together around and know more about, and have some idea in terms of direction that they should be going. So we talked about, you know, tutoring, we talked about the type of teachers, we talked about the type of education, we'd have guest speakers... So many things that are still going on in many community agencies. 29﻿And at that time Royal Boiling, Sr., had decided he was going to run for office. And he would have been one of the first state reps we had in I forget how many years. Well, since Lincoln Pope. So there was a need based on the numbers in the early sixties, by then, to get more black people registered to vote. The League of Women Voters gave a small grant to Byron Rushing to help, do a voter registration education drive. And Byron Rushing became the coordinator of that effort out of NSM. So as I would talk with parents and bring those parents together, we would make a point of making sure these parents were registered. And of course, at that point, Boiling would come and talk to the parents, and talk about his platform, and he won, if you recall. But it certainly was the beginning of a lot of political social awareness, or just social awareness around political and educational and economic issues that were very important to the black community and had an impact, and would have an impact on the community's future. CG: In a way, as you started to work on the schoo]T~piece, you discovered the other pieces that were missing. EJ: Definitely. I've always said that you can work on one thing, and it won't touch on another. And once a parent, or anyone that you've helped, recognizes you're able at least in some ways to help them or direct them or refer or facilitate certain concerns that they have on one issue, they're certainly going to come back, and ask you about some other things. If you get a kid in a program, even to summer camp, they're going to come back and say, "Well, what about... You know, I got another kid that really needs to go to summer camp. Before you go to summer camp though, I'm not sure what's wrong with him and I was wondering if you could tell me where to go." I mean, one thing just kind of spins off the other, so that if you help them with education they're back talking about their housing, you're talking about their jobs, you're talking about their state of being, very frankly. And it's a very evolutionary kind of process that just goes round and round. At certain times it results, and they begin to depend on you. And it's understandable. CG: So about what year was this now? This was getting close to 1960, isn't it? EJ: I think it's just about 1960, '61. CG: So what happened after Northern Student Movement? By this time you've got the tutoring... EJ: What happened was that we... 30﻿CG: Oh, one other question I wanted to ask you. Was part of what was going on with the parents with the Northern Student Movement because of the lack of access that you have between home and school associations in the Boston public schools? EJ: That's correct. Well, actually, it was not only that. There was another movement going around several schools over on the other side, on Sugar Hill side, which had been spearheaded by people like Erna Ballantine Bryant and Barbara Elam, Judge Elam's wife, Naomi Jones, Marianne Freeman. These were the whole compensatory programs that... People were saying then, and see, in 1960 and 1961, remember, the NAACP had presented through Ruth Bat-son their twelve points, conditions... CG: Oh, no, I donxt... EJ: So there were other things that were happening... CG: Was this the local NAACP? EJ: It was the local NAACP, it had petitioned the Boston School Committee about the quality of education, or the lack of education, black students were getting. And there had been a study, a survey, more or less, done. At that time, Ruth Batson and Paul Parks were co-chairpersons of the education committee. And they had presented these twelve points of concern to the full committee. The full committee had rejected, you know, any notion that there was any de facto discrimination in the Boston public schools. Believe it or not, in those days, Louise Day Hicks was considered a friend. And they approached Louise Day Hicks, and she had reviewed these, and said that parents had a right to be concerned about their education, the education of their children. And they appealed to her to assist them in this fight to get these points about the number of books, the home lessons the students were having, the kinds of courses the kids were being offered, what was happening in some of the now predominantly white neighborhoods and schools where many of the Jewish kids were going to. Because what was going on is that you may live, say, on Hollander Street, where I lived, and you go to the same elementary school, say the David A. Ellis and the Henry L. Higginson and the grammar school. But once you got to the grammar school, and you're still living on the same street, the black kids would go to the Lewis Junior High School, and the white kids would go to the Roosevelt School, or they would go to the Lewenberg School. And there was kind of a tracking, you know, a tracking system was going on. 31﻿CG: Yes, feeder systems. EJ: Yes, right, the feeder, the dual school system. And that was happening all over. And so, because white people were talking to black people in those days, Jewish mothers and black mothers would sit down and talk. The Jewish kid would come home and he'd head straight in the house, with a mountain full of books, and the black kid would come home with no books, or one book. You could look at the books, they're both in the seventh grade, and the lessons are different, the textbooks are different, everything. That child might be taking a language where your child's not taking a language, or if your child's taking a language, he's taking a language like, at that time which was considered nothing, Spanish, while .they were taking French, or German, or Latin like some of us who were enrolled in the Latin schools. So parents were able to see the differences in the kind of education the kids were getting and also to notice that those kids after they left the junior high were tracked into...even if it was like the Jeremiah E. Burke...a good business school program. Black kids weren't being tracked in, just but a few, tracked into a college, and black kids were being tracked into, you know, manual labor types of jobs," and tracked into trade. Trade high schools, as opposed to technical high schools, or even Dorchester High School, at that time which offered very good vocational occupational programs. Or, they couldn't go to Charlestown High School, with the good electrical program, because of the hostility of the community. So the NAACP, through its education committee, had petitioned the Boston School Committee to look into this situation, and to give equal resources, and equal teaching facilities, et cetera, to black children. And there were about thirteen schools, or fifteen schools, which they used as test examples, and also they looked at the number of years that the teachers in these schools had been teaching, as opposed to the number of years that the white teachers had been teaching. The person, as I said before, on the School Committee that was looked upon as a friend of the black community was really interesting, because her voice and her statements at that time would cut across all color lines. Her statement was that the responsibility of education belongs to each mother and father to be concerned and to make sure that certain things are happening. So they went to her, and when it came time for the vote, they thought she was going to lead the pack. In fact, people voted for her, because during that whole campaign year, she was a very sympathetic person to the cause and to concerns, and once she got elected... 32﻿CG: Was this the year that Arthur Gartland lost? EJ: That's right... No, that was the next year. CG: Oh, okay. This was the year, the election before. EJ: That's right. Then she got in and she rejected the twelve points, I think it was ten to twelve points, that Ruth Batson had, and said that there was no de facto discrimination within the school system. And however, what they did vote to try, through one district, was a compensatory program, where these children were supposed to get extra help, et cetera, you know. But all of that was going on at the same time. That was going on, and the...what did I say just before then... CG: Okay, the compensatory program was at the Ellis, Hig- ginson, and Boardman schools? EJ: __Yes, that's right, which was spearheaded by Barbara Elam and Erna Ballantine. And at the same time the NAACP was making its attack... And we were getting started. And then there was another movement that was going on. A lot of people were beginning to look at ABCD, which was just getting started, you know, had been going on for a while, but regular neighborhood people were not being asked to join that board. And so there was an appeal, if you recall to Mrs. Cass and Ken Guscott, and a few other people, who were supposed to be representing us because ABCD Board was composed of mainly all business executives, corporate types, university types, you know, similar to the United Way board. The philosophy was to help neighborhoods, yet neighborhood people were not represented, so that whole matter of maximum feasible representation of the community became the resounding cry. CG: It was when Ed Logue... EJ: That's right, what was that statement, representation without participation that's what it was. Representation but not...without participation. So they walked and picketed ABCD, and that's when ABCD changed its whole charter, and decided to have these community representatives, and went to communities, both white and black, and poor communities, and had people selected to join their board. One year later they started the Head Start Program. And based on that experience, they wanted to make sure before they started the Head Start Program that they had community input. So I was representing NSM, along with a lot of other agencies, that met at that time where they were located at 18 Tremont Street, and we talked about what we thought Head Start ought to look like for kids in our communities. And Rheable Edwards was going to be the coordinator, director of the program, and I guess my big 33﻿mouth, and my suggestions—she took a liking to kinds of things that I said, and about a month later, she asked me if I would be willing to take a leave of absence from NSM and become one of the social service supervisors, supervising six people, including about, maybe ten or twelve parents in the Jamaica Plain area for the first year of Head Start Program. And I agreed to do it, because this was really a salary. Now I was going to be paid $137 a week... CG: After thirty___ EJ: Listen, that's a high... There was no way that I could pass that by, and we weren't doing that well financially. CG: Weren't you working at a bank at night? EJ: Oh yes. Oh, yes. I forgot that. Up at State Street Bank. I got fired for going to hear Martin Luther King, are you kidding, at the Garden—when they had the big rally at the Gardens... CG: That wasn't in... EJ: That was in sixty-... CG: Seven, wasn't it? EJ: No, it was before then. CG: Was that the same rally with Sidney Poitier and Harry Belafonte? EJ: Yes, was that '67? Okay. I was there, Sidney Poitier, and was it Bill Cosby... CG: Harry Belafonte, and the Ronnie Ingram Choir. EJ: That's right. That was '67? That's when it was then. So I did that for two years. I stayed on, because the program became one of the models across the country. And I decided to resign from NSM, and that's when Betty West, Betty Johnson, took my place at NSM. And that was the beginning actively of talking to parents the year that the big concern about—particularly in the area that I was living, in Dorchester, which was just Dorchester in those days, not called, not divided between North Dorchester and South Dorchester—the overcrowded conditions. And my kids were, with the exception of.... Well, the three older ones, Ronica, Darryl, and Sheryl, were in elementary school, and we were getting concerned about the overcrowded conditions, and that's when we formed a group called the North Dorchester Parents' Council... 34﻿CG: Was the Patrick Campbell School in this area? EJ: Well, yes, it was. Not quite. I'm talking about where the Greenwood School, and the, oh, Lord, Endicott School, which is at the corner of Glenway and Blue Hill Avenue, up there near Columbia Road, in that area. CG: Right. So, now, let's see, wait a minute. EJ: It was called the Roxbury-North Dorchester Parents' Council. CG: Now that was formed earlier than '67, wasn't it? EJ: Oh, yes. That was in the beginning of Exodus, actually, that was the name before we changed it to Exodus. The day that Exodus started is when we renamed it Exodus. But the Roxbury-North Dorchester Parents' Council were parents that were out of Head Start...Oh no, they were parents actually who I was... As I say, I had left Northern Student Movement. They were parents, in a sense, who, I was more or less doing the same thing with, that I'd been doing with Northern Student Movement. Now these were parents with little kids, and then older siblings, who were concerned about what they were going to do for the fall with their kids. And we started meeting, it was almost the end of the summer program of Head Start, and the parents decided they wanted to stay together, okay, and talk about the educational concerns. So we started meeting at the Shaw House, which had moved from Hammond and Shawmut Avenue up to 612 Blue Hill Avenue, right there at the corner of Columbia Road and Blue Hill Avenue, is where the Shaw House was up over.... You know where the Shaw House used to be? You know Columbia Road right across from Franklin Park? CG: Yes. EJ: Okay. Upstairs it says Shaw House. We started meet- ing there. And the word just... CG: That's now Charles Drew, isn't it? EJ: It's before Charles Drew... Oh, right there, okay, right at the corner of Columbia Road. That building was new, right, used to be Jackson Chevrolet where the Charles Drew is. And parents started telling other parents, and parents from NSM, parents from all different communities in terms of the black community at that time, who were concerned about this, started coming to our meetings, our rallies. And it grew and grew and grew. And unfortunately for us, they had a new director at that time, and I'd rather not name him. But he was nervous about all these parents being... It was a very clean 35﻿place. Unfortunately, that's why the place is closed now, committee people felt uncomfortable. And he used to talk about them dropping ashes on the floor and, you know, the whole bit, bringing their babies. And so we decided we'd move our meetings down to NSM. And we moved our meetings down to the storefront. And next door to us was the Teen Center. So we were able to, you know, just open the doors, let the parents just go between the two places. And that's where all the meetings started being held. And I mean every night that whole summer is when we used to meet to talk about what we were going to do. And it kept growing and growing and growing, but there was a small nucleus of us. And it was myself, this girl by the name... CG: This is still '67? EJ: This is '67, that's right, just before Exodus started in '68. CG: This right after Arthur Gartland had lost his bid for the School Committee because of the racist election? EJ: That's right, that's right. Because they had a Citizens for Boston Public Schools. He ran and a woman ran, Italian woman, we had a whole slate, Paul Parks was on that slate, but Joe McDonough, Joseph Lee, Bill McDonough, William McDonough, what's her name Hicks, Eisenstadt, and I can't recall who the fifth person was at that time. It was Paul Tierney, Tierney. And they overthrew the whole slate. And the only person who got in was Arthur Gartland... Arthur got in that first time around, okay? But that second time around, after '68, is when he lost, 'cause he ran on a slate with, as I said, Paul Parks. Velia DeCesare was her name, something like that, from East Boston, Velia DeCesare, that was her name. And there was one other person who was on that slate. Because it was the Citizens for Boston Public Schools, organized by an older, WASPish lady by the name of Dorothy Bisbee, Miss Bisbee from the West End. And it was considered to be the peoples' slate. But the only one who got in was Arthur Gartland from that slate. Then we ran the next year, he did not get in, because he sided and was very sympathetic openly and publicly with the black community and their concerns. CG: Right. I remember, I remember his parting speech. EJ: Right, you know, he passed in May, and I couldn't even get to his memorial service, Thursday night, they had a memorial dinner for him at the Sheraton. And I was part of the committee and couldn't even get there. 36﻿CG: So, Exodus, this is just before Exodus, we're in '67? EJ: That's right, '67. The summer of '67. I mean the fall of '67, let me see, let me get it right. Yeah, all that was happening in '67. Exodus started, the meetings started in the summer, the spring, the spring of '68. Because by the fall of '68, that was the first year...no, no, no. Exodus started in '64, what am I talking about? You got me confused, you said about the Martin Luther King program at the Garden, No, no. Exodus started in '64. All this happened before the winter of '65. Exodus started September 10th, 1964. Sorry. Because '68 is when Dr. King died. So that '67 couldn't have been when they had the thing, it had to be before. CG: Yes, 'cause it was after I... No, this was his last time he came to Boston, for the Boston Garden thing. EJ: Okay. CG: When did you start working for Head Start, though? EJ: '62, see, my...I started working for NSM in the six- ties, first part of '59, '60 was NSM, and first I worked for. CG: You sure you didn't get fired for going to another Martin Luther King... EJ: That's what I'm trying to remember. CG: Because I know you got fired for going to a Martin Luther program. EJ: oh, wait a minute. But that was after... I get my dates wrong, bear with me a minute. Exodus started in '64, I know. This had, yes, he had to have been here in '62. He was here because we had the marches, sure. And he was here, I was at another rally, and it wasn't a big Garden rally. It was just another rally when King had come to Boston. But it wasn't a Garden rally. Because I remember the Garden rally also. That was after Exodus had gotten started, and I didn't do anything but Exodus then. I was working at the State Street Bank. I think it was one of the times between the Head Start... See, Head Start was supposed to be just a summer-funded program. So I think I started in the fall of either '62 or '63, I worked for a very short, it was a very short time. If you recall, we had several marches, he had come to Boston, and he had gone to the School Committee, remember, and that's when the School Committee was still located on Beacon Hill, I mean Beacon Street, 15 Beacon Street, and I 37﻿remember we parked the buses and we couldn't get down there because they had the police and everything, and only a few of us could go upstairs with him to meet with the School Committee. And he went over and addressed the representatives at the State House. That was in either '62 or '63. That's right, because Exodus started immediately after his last visit to the School Committee, which was on the twelve points of the NAACP. Martin Luther King came to Boston to receive an award from the Jewish community at the temple on Harvard Street. I rode with him and Dr. Virgil Wood from the airport to the temple. He was preoccupied and said it was his last visit to Boston. And I think it was the spring of 1964. You see, Martin made two visits back to Boston during that period of time. And one, he came to meet with the School Committee, and prior to that he had been here, or he came again after that. Because the first time was such a...the meeting with the School Committee was such a disaster, however, he did go to the State House, the second time he came back he was invited to the State House by Mike Haynes to give the invocation, I remember. To recall it to you, what I have to do is look at something, and I can, and I promise I will, but I remember when we went, we started out, in fact, that night, because he came in like the night before, and I remember everybody was wearing SCLC armbands. In those days, if you remember, most of the black men who were involved with SCLC were wearing coveralls, poor man's, what they call the poor man's uniform, the coveralls, and the jacket, and the coveralls. I remember that, in fact, people like Jim Reed who's in Criminal Justice at Harvard University, being a very close friend of Martin Luther King's, and he was very, he was involved. And Reverend Vernon Carter, and Virgil Wood, who was the president of SCLC at that time. And Reverend Lawson, I remember Father Hughes from Saint Bartholomew's... There were a lot of ministers, naturally, involved at that time. My minister, Reverend Walter Davis, Charles Street—there was a plan to march to the Common. And I remember we were going to board some buses and ride so far and march so far. So I remember when we boarded the buses, and we got to, right here to Columbus Park, and that's why I think the school has such a location that it had such an impact on what has happened in the past in terms of the way the teachers and students going through, and what, you know, it can do for the future. We got to Columbus Park, and of course it was really very crowded. We got off to kind of form the lines and all of that. And I remember being right up front. Danny Richardson was working for that time, and Bob Gustafson, not Danny Richardson, he was the former regional director of HUD, and he'd been picked for president on this board, for president... 38﻿CG: He's on the Elma Lewis board. EJ: And also, he was working for American Friends Service Committee. They had an office at that time on what, I told you, was Agency Row, on Blue Hill Avenue. So I was between Danny Richardson and George Morrison, and Bob, who was also working for... CG: George Morrison was former director of Roxbury Action Program; he later was appointed to a position in Washington by Timilty. EJ: He had moved to Washington, but he was also working for American Friends Service Committee. I'll never forget that people were crushing, we started off in a nice line, people were humming, singing, going down Columbus Avenue. We were going to turn onto, not Beacon, what's that street by the Common? When you turn to go up Beacon? CG: Charles? EJ: Charles. That's the way we were going. CG: Or Arlington? EJ: No, Charles, you're right. We were coming down, and we got halfway down—the idea was to walk that route—and people who weren't part of the parade, march, and I mean there were thousands of people part of the march, but people were joining in all along the way. And, of course, they were trying to get to shake Dr. King's hand. And they kept crushing closer in the line. There were police, the plainclothes police, and there were uniformed police, trying to keep a cordon around the small group of us who were part of the so-called special party, marching with Dr. King. And it kept getting worse and worse. I'll never forget, we got down to, a little further down Columbus Avenue, like we were going to turn, and my shoe came off. And there was nothing we could do because they were really determined, nobody was going to touch Dr. King. You know, not this black man, you can tell that his life, which I didn't even think about, I guess, in those days, that that man's life was in danger in '64. All right? And that they had a responsibility in this town to make sure nothing happened to him in this town. So when they went toward him the police went to the rush to protect him, and my shoe was not a priority, and of course, even those of us who were supposed to be marching with him, they didn't even care anything about us, even, at that point, they just wanted to protect this man. My shoe came off, and all I remember was Danny and George just lifting me up underneath my elbow and armpits to keep 39﻿me from being trampled on, and kept right on marching. So I lost my shoe. Luckily, however, it got picked up by the group behind us, the crowd swelled, the numbers of marchers swelled, the numbers were so much that we had to get back on the buses. You see, they had the buses going on a parallel street, Beacon Street. So they brought the buses back around and said we had to get on the bus. Well, Dr. King wanted to really walk. He wanted to march, but they said we couldn't march. First of all, we'd never get there, it was jamming traffic, even though there was traffic on the side that we were marching. It was just crazy. So we had to get back on the buses. And I remember we pulled up Beacon Street, and at that time, they had made a decision that we could not all go in after him.. And I think just members of SCLC, the New England region of SCLC, were going to accompany him upstairs to meet the Committee. CG: Boston School Committee. EJ: Yes, School Committee. But I think their actions, which were par for the course in those days, were such that his discussion with them only lasted—and their attitude I guess had a lot to do with it, I know had a lot to do with it—his discussion only lasted with them I would say maybe less than an hour, and he was back downstairs. He came on every bus and he said, "Don't give up," you know, "Keep the faith." We never got a clear, I don't recall getting a clear statement of the dialogue, or an understanding of the dialogue. But it certainly, it was one of rejection with his plea to integrate schools, and assist in peaceful implementation of that desegregation of the Boston public schools. And, of course, complete, you know, denial that there was any segregation, and a complete rejection of vestiges of positive suggestions, recommendations that Dr. King and SCLC members made. So then, we moved around to come back to the State House, and, of course, you can only get but just so many in there, even in the gallery part where people sit. But, as a city, we missed the significance of Martin Luther King being in—at least so honored and recognized on the state level. It made so many people feel good. However, that night there was a rally, and a very successful one at Union Methodist Church, now known as the Union United Methodist Church. My daughter Sheryl is a member of that church. And naturally, he gave an inspiring and rousing speech. When we left, people felt very moved to continue, and were not at all, I would say, that devastated to give up. So I think the message was, you know, enthusiastically received and widely appreciated, and of course, in a 40﻿sense, people felt good that they were on the right track and his understanding and willingness gave us the kind of support...him to come to Boston. I think we just continued to press on. And in some ways it brought a lot of people closer, too, because up to that point, churches in the community had not been really that involved, believe it or not. The last great act that they had been involved in, at least some churches, at least on one part of the issue, was during the urban renewal program, but that only hit one segment of our community at that time. And that was through the Ministerial Alliance, through Reverend Walter C. Davis who was my minister at Charles Street. CG: Charles Street. EJ: Charles Street, and that's right in the heart of it. So you really didn't have that much...and of course, Mike Haynes was involved, I guess he was involved always personally with young people all the time, but even there, there wasn't that kind of total involvement of the churches as we saw after King's service. CG: But Mike Haynes was a state representative at that time. EJ: Mike was a state...and that's why King was invited to, and he was an assistant to Reverend Hester at that time. CG: Well, from here, let's see, we're at a point now, 1964-65. Is there a School Committee election coming up? EJ: There certainly was a School Committee election coming up, and, who ran for School Committee that year? Who was up for reelection? There was Tom Eisenstadt, Louise Day Hicks, Joey...one of the McDonoughs, I can't recall which one it was, I know it was one, I think it was Dana McDonough; he was her cousin, Hicks's cousin. And Arthur Gartland, that was the year Arthur Gartland was running. And he did not get in that first time. He got in the first time, I'm sorry, but he didn't get in the second time. CG: That was when racism became an open ideology. EJ: That's right, and that's when a slate was put together, well the second time, that's something we had. But that year, '64, '65, there was, yes, a School Committee election. And it was also the year that, as I say, the Roxbury-North Dorchester Parents' Council was formed, which was ultimately, the name changed, changed into Exodus. 41﻿We were concerned at that time about overcrowding. And the committee was talking about putting up portable classrooms, and we were concerned about where these classrooms were going to be put, and we were concerned that the School Committee was in a sense procrastinating in making a decision about the classrooms. Because they figured it would cost a lot of money. So, then they sent the superintendent, who was Ohrenberger at that time, back to the drawing board, and suggested that he come up with some alternatives. During that period of time, parents were meeting and were talking about why couldn't they take some of these vacant buildings if they feel that the portables would be too much, and they don't know where they're going to put them, and they have those concerns, why couldn't they take some of the vacant buildings, because in '64, just the last smidgen of the Jewish community was moving out of Roxbury, and the North Dorchester area. Like the temples, the Jewish Hebrew temples, and yeshivas, and all were very dominant in Roxbury, upper Roxbury, were being abandoned, or at least their congregations were moving into nearby Stoughton, and Canton, and Milton, and Randolph, and all of that. So there were a lot, but they still held deed to a lot of property in the community, but nothing was happening with it. Now we had noted that there was a Hebrew school on Greenwood Street, on Glenway Street in North Dorchester, which was between the two schools at that time that some of our kids—who were actively involved in trying to mobilize parents—were attending. That was between the Greenwood School and also the, oh, Lord, my memory is just failing me today. What's the name of that, it was at the corner of Glenway and Columbia Road? So there was an abandoned Hebrew school right in there, and we felt as though there was no reason why the School Committee could not lease that school; if they couldn't buy the building, lease that building, and it was already a classroom kind of structure, and take the overflow students and put 'em there. The teachers could still come to the same vicin-ity, you would not have to be reassigning the teachers, et cetera. So we thought this was a very good plan, and a grand scheme, particularly the parents, who really felt in those days that they didn't have anything positive to offer a teacher, and were made to feel as though they really didn't know as much as the teacher knew. So they felt good about this idea, and began to talk about putting it in some kind of proposal form and presenting it to the School Committee. And eventually they did that, during that spring and early summer. The School Committee did at least delegate the chief school structural engineer to look into it, and to evaluate whether or not this could be done. Of course, it could have been done. 42﻿But again, it was an election year. So it was a need not only to assure white parents in the white districts that black kids were not going to come to their schools or come into their districts; they'd also had to assure the community at large, the Boston community at large, that they were not going to increase taxes. And, you know, that the budget, the School Committee budget would not be increased, ostensibly so that they could show that they had some kind of restraint, fiscal rather, restraint, and fiscal savvy, in a sense. So they were serving their constituency and telling them exactly what they wanted to hear. So it wasn't that the school could not have been used, it was just again the kinds of, I would say, propaganda, that .they felt that they had to spew out at that point. Now, there was no question that, I think, there was no question that historically, the Committee members more or less agreed upon who the chairman is going to be, ahead of time. Certainly when they know they're a shoo-in election, and you know that Hicks is going to get re-elected. And Eisenstadt's going to get reelected. And at that time, Joe Lee had been on the Committee, was the only Anglo-Saxon, white Anglo-Saxon Protestant on the Committee, and he reminded us that his great grandfather was Henry Lee Higginson, you know, and the whole bit. Okay. But they always make some kind of deal, or make some kind of agreement, who is going to be the chairperson of the committee, who's going to get, garner the votes. Well, it was very obvious, because Hicks had just been the chairperson, that, Lee, had just come off being the chairperson, that her pet during that past year had been Tom Eisenstadt. She was grooming him, he was saying the right things, and ironically for his background, because he was Jewish on one side, and his mother, I think, was Catholic, and he, however, was playing down his Jewishness, and really appealing to the Irish Catholics and Italian Americans to win. And she was very, I would say, very pleased with him, and very enamored in the way that he was politically growing. It was obvious that she had evidently said, "I will put all my weight behind you as, if you run for the chair." Well, however, he began to, I guess, say some things publicly that in a sense were tripping her up, all right, in terms of the constituency. And I guess it was an ego trip, the only way you can assess it is as an ego trip, was to see who could get the most votes. So he would say something, and she would say something in public, and it was very obvious that they weren't checking in with each other, or they weren't really trying to work as a team. They were trying to see who was the most popular. And so it really came down to a very heated battle, and she began to make it clear to him, that she was not going to support 43﻿him. He let all his vows loose. And that's when South Boston became really, you know, a well-known, it was always well-known, but in a sense politically solidified, in terms of sticking behind one of their neighborhood own, their own neighborhood people. And of course she had always lived, or given her legal address, at Columbia Road. All right. And his constituency had been the Hyde Parks, the Roslindale, and maybe some parts of East Boston, et cetera. But more or less the other ethnic groups other than the predominantly Irish. Now the other interesting thing is that the majority of people in those days who were voting and could, can vote, and still it's the same way, vote for the school officials, or vote for school members, white folks, do not even have, at elementary level, their children in the Boston public schools. Their kids were going to parochial schools. And I mean, however, they would still get out there to vote, to keep those people in those positions. Of course, that's what happened. He began to spiel a party line that, "If I'm reelected, I will make sure, I will almost guarantee you that these people will not come into your districts; they will not come to your schools, they will not bring down the guality of education that your children have been enjoying all these years." And she was doing the same thing. We continued to press, petition them and we were rejected, I appealed, I made the presentation before the School Committee. CG: Now, when was this? EJ: This was the same year when we presented the petition about them taking over the Hebrew school... CG: The twelve points? EJ: No, the twelve points came before. Remember, the twelve points came before. This was when we petitioned that they consider taking over the Hebrew school, renovate it, and use that for overcrowded classrooms, or to relieve the overcrowded classrooms. Of course they were very, very, I would say, VERY polite, and Joseph Lee later stated that I had made a good presentation and was very articulate, I'll never forget... You know, him making the statement. But I'll never forget also, his aides and I getting into a little shouting match in the School Committee room. And it was one little small room in those days, I forget what floor it was, I think it was the fifth floor of the School Committee building, at 14 Beacon Street, 15 Beacon Street, rather. She said something about, she wasn't gonna allow this kind of action to go on, or something, at School Committee meetings, because people were making noises and, in a sense, booing. Parents were very emotional and very aroused about this 44﻿whole thing. When I got through, I think they were clapping, because as I was walking off, and I turned and told her that she'd better heed, that this was a new day, a new breed of parents, and we weren't going to put up with what she thought they could get away with before. And that we had been well trained, and our parents had told us not to take what they had taken. And I turned and walked out of the room. I'll never forget that, because every time I used to see her after that, she said, "Remember when we were arch enemies?" For some reason, we weren't arch enemies any longer. Like I said when I was working at the state department at the beginning of the racial imbalance suit, she came up with a group of parents from South Boston, and spoke to me and Paul Parks, and she said, "Oh, do I remember those days when we were having shouting matches and we were arch..." And we were arch enemies, and I'd just smile at her, and look at her. [laughter] It was nothing in my memory to make me believe that we were anything at this point but the same, I mean, at least, I knew we were definitely, philosophically different, and therefore, in terms of even dealing with people, I know we had to be enemies because her way of dealing and my way of dealing were of course opposite of each other... CG: When did you go to work for the state? EJ: That was 1970. CG: But she had the nerve... EJ: Yes, oh yes. And she spoke to Paul... CG: And what were the parents from South Boston coming up there for? EJ: Well, that was, remember now, when the state had decided to hold back the funds for Boston. And we went to court. At that time Judge Sullivan was hearing the case, the suit that the state had brought against Boston. And the idea was that the city of Boston's School Committee was supposed to be planning and developing a plan for desegregation of the Boston public schools with the state department. But they never did, they never sent any of their people. So we ended up in the Bureau of Equal Educational Opportunity, we were developing, devising the first plan, which was then a state plan. And during that first year, remember, is when the court ruled on the federal suit, and Garrity was brought into the picture on the NAACP suit, and Garrity said because it was so late when he ruled, that the first year, phase one, would be the implementation of the state's plan. But that they would have to go back and work on, you know, really revising that plan, modifying that plan, and fine-tuning it, and 45﻿bring it up to snuff. And of course now we're into phase, what is it, 4 C? [laughter] I was just wondering why Louise Day... Well, I had to, for the state, I had to head up for the state what was then called a "parents' advisory task force." And the idea was that we would select parents, or have parents selected from all over the city—black and white parents—and we would sit down and talk about the best way, we would get their input for the design of a plan to desegregate. So there was the Pixies, that's how I met Pixie Palladino, because she was just a parent that they dragged out of East Boston at that time; the Virginia Sheehy, who ended up being Hicks's secretary, when she was a city councilor, and also when she was a congresswoman, for a while. Costello, Olive Costello, out in the Ros-lindale area, and I started to meet all these characters, okay? Pixie had a twin sister, that again is jumping ahead. That's way up there. Yes. So we continued, even though... Okay, now we're back to the, this is the portable, the classrooms... Yes. We continued to appeal to them, and we wrote letters, we got petitions, and I'm really committed to support petitions. We were energetic, we were young and had babies, but we were energetic, we were young, and we were able to be out there in the street, and we were moving around. Of course, there were a lot of agencies, a lot of those____the era of the poverty programs, there were a lot of...I would say, public-service oriented kinds of things going on, and people were very aware that there was a movement afoot. There was a movement, the feeling was there, it was like a sense of urgency, a sense of participation, a sense of direction in some ways. And sort of a sense of a new, young leadership coming in that was really basically grass-roots. Okay? And by and large it was the parents who had kids who were feeling the pain as opposed to some designers who were sitting in a room saying this has to happen because it is the best thing to happen, we're really not feeling the pain. I don't say that disrespectfully, I just say that realistically it is different,•that there is a difference. They didn't have the interest. That's right, the interest is not quite the same. The purpose for the interest in not quite to same. So we were able to really begin to, I would say, educate people through our campaign, publicly, what was going on. We had 46﻿a lot of support from these various organizations and agencies, like NAACP, like CORE, which was very active at that time, like Mass. Freedom Movement, which was being headed by Jay Bergman and Noel Day at that time, by the Ministerial Alliance, by SCLC. So you had the kind of resource backup that you needed, okay? Even Urban League was active in its own way during those days. So we continued to press. Finally we found out one day, I'll never forget, we began to get toward the end of summer, and really no decision had been made, and it was clear that the School Committee was procrastinating, that the election of course didn't take place until November, after school started. We knew that they would not give in, if they did give in, or if they had any thought of giving in, they were not going to give in until after the election. And after the primary, and then ultimately after the election, and eventually after the election, subsequently after, is what I'm trying to say. So we heard, we got a tip, people were always giving us good tips, and someone told us that, at that time, Katzenbach, who was the attorney general, was going to be addressing the law enforcement agencies, at the old____ No. what was it the, down at Park Square, the Hilton, Statler Hilton, and that we ought to, because if anybody could do it, we should try to seek an injunction for them opening up school. I guess what they had said was they had rejected the report because it would be too much money for the portable classrooms. They had decided that they were going to institute double session days. Now they were only going to institute double session days in minority communities, because the overcrowding was at that point really basically only in the minority community. And we were definitely against any kind of, you know, double session day. So we decided that we would go see Katzenbach, because we understood from friends, who were young lawyers at that time, we could seek an injunction. Possibly we didn't really realize what an injunction was, but we did have the word around, we were going to seek an injunction. Note, seek an injunction. I'm serious about that. It was possibly the first legal terminology that we had ever really heard. [laughs] But we understood what it meant. So we trotted down, it must have been about twenty of us, parents, mothers and fathers, went down, walked upstairs, it was a surprise to the hotel, didn't say, you know, management didn't say anything when they saw all these black people. I am quite sure we didn't look like we belonged to any sorority, or we didn't look like we belonged to any fraternities, or any professional 47﻿organization. It was certainly clear that we were parents, and working parents, okay? So we trotted up to the mezzanine, where they have all the conference rooms, and we were even told what room he would be coming out of. We waited till he came out. And they pushed me ahead, and told me to stand up there and tell him what was wrong. I said, "Excuse me, Attorney General Katzenbach, I'd like to bring something that's happening in Boston to your attention." I said, "These are parents who represent a lot of other parents and we all have children in Boston public schools, and we are concerned about what's happening in our city. We have done all the things that we feel should have been done, in terms of going through channels, presenting positions, presenting petitions, appearing in person before the School Committee, appealing to the governor, appealing to the mayor." I said, "Now, you're the only person who we have left to turn to." And we said, "They're thinking about instituting a double session in our schools for our younger-aged children, and we're concerned because we're poor parents, we have to work." I said, "There'll be a change in the time of the Daylight Savings Time comes, the change of time comes, many of our children who will be going to school in the afternoon will be coming home in the dark. Many of our children will be going to school in the dark. Many of us have children who will possibly be broken up, in terms of the time of day they will be going to school, which will constitute extra financial burden because we would have to pay for babysitters because we must work. We appeal to you to look into this matter." And he said, "My dear young lady," he said, "I can sympathize with you." He said, "Because I live in Maryland," he said, "and they attempted to institute a double session for my daughter's school, and I promise you when I get back to Washington I will look into it." Well, we went out of there with our chests sticking out, we really got it, he was going to put the Boston School Committee in its place we didn't have anything else to worry about because he heard us, he was patient, and he displayed concern, consideration, and interest, and we went away saying, "This is over." We celebrated that night, we don't have to worry about a darn thing. Well, we waited to receive this letter, a copy, we were so naive, we were waiting to receive a copy of the letter, just telling the Boston School Committee that he had drafted. We knew it was going to come under his signature, over his signature rather, telling them, demanding that they cease and desist this action. We would get a copy of it. We waited, and we checked the mail every day, and nothing. We looked in the newspapers, and there was nothing. And it shows you again how you don't understand how the wheels of politics grind, or even injustice for that matter. 48﻿I won't say even today, twelve, even fifteen years later, that Katzenbach did not help us, but I will say some very interesting things, as I look at it in hindsight, happened that we couldn't quite at that time relate to him, but certainly he had to have initiated. That was the presence of community relations service people from the Department of Justice, who began to come into Boston, and to call us, and to meet with us, and talk with us, and attend our meetings. And that was a kind of softening of statements that, you know, were coming out right there in that period, by members of the School Committee, and there were very small kinds of clues that suggested that he had told the Department of Justice to look into the situation, even though he hadn't written this letter that we were waiting for. We could only suspect that, based on the sequence of events that followed, one or two years later, that we kind of, I guess, realized, that that's the way you do it. You don't send letters and send "cc's" to participating groups. [laughter] You don't put it in writing, you do not put it in writing. As I say, we began to, the small clues began to add up. If we learned any political lessons, we learned that one. However, because, in essence, the old plan for double-session days was dropped. That was the interesting thing. I mean, the bottom line of all that scenario was that the plan to institute double-session days was abandoned by the Committee. However, they did not say exactly what they were going to do, which meant, as far as we were concerned, and as we looked at the time, because we only had like two or three more weeks to go before school opened up, that the kids were going to go back to the same schools. They had not come up with a plan. They had just abandoned the recommendations, but they had not come up with an alternate plan of what they were going to do with the students. So we began to be concerned, began to be concerned about what we could do. And because we had, I would say, enjoyed a historical background of the freedom schools, just a year before... CG: That was the boycott. EJ: That was the boycott. We knew about sit-ins, through the NAACP actions, and in the School Committee headquarters. We were aware of pickets, because of the young people in CORE. We were aware of a lot of different strategies, but we weren't sure what strategy would be most appropriate to demonstrate what we were concerned about and, at the same time, realize some kind of result. The concern we had was because we didn't have a victim; the victim, as far as we were concerned, was our children. And therefore we felt that they could not really suffer. So whatever kind of strategy we would devise or develop, we had to really think ultimately what it would do to 49﻿them. So we did think of all of these things, because in some ways they had brought about some small but, you know, significant changes. We thought about picketing. We thought about human chains around the schools to keep the kids, people from going in and demonstrate the plight that we thought that we were in and our concern. We thought about taking our kids' places and staying in the classrooms. We thought about boycotting again. But the bottom gnawing fear that we had, and knowledge that we had, is that our kids would be losing whatever small amount of education that they could receive if any of these strategies were used because they would not be in the classrooms. So we decided, by process of elimination, that these, while they were at least able, while they may bring some spotlight to the scene, and to the concern, it would not at all have the kind of impact that we were looking for. And basically that was that our kids would have a seat, that our kids would have a teacher that would last a little longer than maybe six months, that they would have some reading equipment, that they would have some home lessons, and that all the teachers were not just coming out of a teachers' college. And so we decided we would look into what was happening in some other districts. And we said, well, it would be interesting. Because at that point, little hints of the fact that other schools were not as overcrowded were trickling through. And we said we were going to find out where these schools are, because, you know, if we take our kids, and we go over to where these schools are, and not with any thought of keeping them there, but we thought it would be to our advantage to inconvenience some of these people who didn't seem to quite understand and sympathize with our plight. Let them know what it meant to have an overcrowded classroom. We felt that since we knew the politicians and the School Committee candidates at that time were directly appealing to that constituency for their vote, that they were the people to get to, because they would then get to the politicians and say, "If you don't get these folks out of here, we're not going to vote for you." So that was our strategy. We felt that once we got in their territory, they'd pick up the phone, 'cause they knew the Tom Eisenstadts better than we did, they knew the Louise Day Hicks, they knew the Joe Lees, and they knew also that they had to vote for them to stay in office. So if they had that kind of pressure from the people that they were appealing to, they possibly would do something to help us, that is, the Committee. So we began to ask people to do spot checking, and you could still then, it wasn't like 50﻿1974, when the desegregation, you know, first you faced desegregation in Boston, you could still kind of ride down some streets and look at a building and spot check and all of that. So people began to do that. However, someone, I am serious, and maybe I knew I had to mentally block it, someone called me on the phone and said, "We can get you a census. Now, if you ever say who you got it from, we will deny it." And we were given a census, and we had never seen a census before. Well, we got this thing, I mean carried it in a brown shopping bag, somebody took it home, you would have thought we were espionage agents. There's something has to come, every different, every night. And even that person couldn't trust the next person and he gave it to, I mean, you wouldn't trust it with a Bible. I mean this was, this was really the document. It was a very interesting document, because in a sense it gave us our first insight as to how the school system ran. And what we found out is that they took this school, a building, and they break down into the classrooms, and then they break it down into the number of boys, break it down into the number of girls, break it down into age, and then break it down into grade, and you can tell not only what rooms are used for classrooms, you can tell how many rooms are used for the nurses' rooms, whatever, for the principals' offices, for the teachers' rooms, for special education rooms at that time, "dumb classrooms" as they used to be called in those days, "dumb kids' rooms." All of that, we had an idea. And it also told how many rows of seats were in that classroom, that that classroom had thirty seats, or that classroom only had sixteen, if it was a music room with equipment, if it was a sewing room, you know, what was in it, if it was an auditorium, how the auditorium was set up. So we had an idea. We looked at this, and we see that in, say School A, there were five classrooms. And classroom one had twenty-seven seats, but at this point there are only sixteen kids assigned to those twenty-seven seats, and that was in grade one. So if you take twenty-seven, and subtract sixteen, you came out with twenty, whatever, sixteen, you come out with what, eleven. We had eleven empty seats for first-grade kids. Then you go to classroom two; that classroom may have thirty seats, okay? And that maybe grade three, classroom two may be grade three in this school. And there may be thirty seats, bolted-down seats and desks. And there are twelve kids in that classroom, assigned. And then you say, okay, thirty, twelve, you get eighteen. So then you get eighteen third-grade seats left. And of course, then, all those schools had both sexes, so it didn't make any difference. So we went 51﻿through school after school after school, tallied up on the junior high school level, and we tallied up on the senior high school level, and we were able to tell how many vacant seats there were in the city. And those numbers were startling. We found out that there were something like thirty thousand elementary school seats. There were something like sixteen thousand junior high school seats across the city. And maybe something as many, senior high school seats, you were talking about in those days, ten through twelve, because you remember most of your junior highs were still seven through nine, okay? And they weren't all called middle schools in those days. Some were called junior highs, and some were called middle. But the majority in '65 were still called junior high. Timilty, Martin Luther King, what was then the Campbell School, they were then all junior high schools. And it was only... CG: Because of Patrick Campbell, right? EJ: That's right, Patrick T. Campbell. And it was only at the convenience of how a kid was tracked, that a school was arbitrarily changed by the Committee to become a middle school. But it was not a uniform kind of standard. And it did not become a uniform standard until the decision, Judge Garrity's decision, when he decreed that there was bias and segregation in the grading system, and that we must establish a new uniform grade structure, and that one through six [five] would be elementary schools across the city, and six through eight would be middle schools, and they would be called middle schools, and nine through twelve would be high schools. But what we found out in '65 was that there were plenty of seats, and when you thought about the number of minority kids, and even though we're talking about almost 52 or 53% of the school population now is black kids or minority kids, kids of color, in those days we still didn't constitute that figure. So in a sense, basically, realistically, they could have dispersed the kids throughout the city very easily. So we made plans, we used to keep, we used to plaster up all oyer Roxbury, "Do you know how many vacant seats there are in the city of Boston school system? On an elementary level we have thirty, twenty-seven thousand seats; junior high school, x thousand seats; senior high school... Why is your kid sitting in a classroom with forty-five kids? Don't you want to do something about that? Do you know there is a seat for him in a school somewhere else?" We just plastered these signs all over all the agencies, all over the stores, every pole that we could find all through Roxbury, South End, and lower Roxbury. We had 'em everywhere. And people began to look at that. We 52﻿made leaflets, we had an old mimeograph machine, and somebody who we thought was an artist in the group, and we would print it up. We gave just that, those figures, that's all we kept giving, was those figures. "School is near. Do you want your kid sitting back in classroom...? Join our group. Join our parent's council. Join us to protest this kid of treatment." And we kept churning that out, churning it out. People began to, at last... You still want to hold onto the remnants of summer, and not having to worry about anything. In a sense, even though parents have to work, it's kind of a relief period, relieving period, because you don't have to worry about lunches, you don't have to worry about books, you don't have to discipline your kids in quite the same manner, making them study and do all kinds of things. And so you hold onto that last minute. But then that weekend that Labor Day comes, you realize it's really over. And so, in a sense, it was a slow, gradual, swelling of involvement. But at the last week, it was like a sudden surge of inquiries from parents and people. "What are we gonna do? What are we gonna do? What's happening?" And then we were meeting, we had been meeting anyway, we were meeting almost very night. At that time maybe forty-five or fifty of us meeting. And the meetings began to swell, I mean, you couldn't get into the office. I mean, people were spilled out in the street. Somebody was nice enough, CORE or SCLC or American Friends, to hook up speakers outside the office for use so the people who were outside could hear what was going on inside. And we were bringing in people and making them answer these questions, on what were they going to do, and how, you know, how were they going to help us, blah, blah, blah. And this went on and on and like the last week, right around now, the last week in August. And we as the smaller group would still say we would maintain the control. Now, it was very interesting, because it was obvious that some of the agencies, professional agencies, were getting a little nervous. Because, remember now, how they were getting their funds from here and their funds from here, and they're the ones that are supposed to be speaking on behalf of the communities, speaking on behalf of parents, and then consumers of the black community... And here we were, all of a sudden, this little small group of inexperienced amateur parents coming up here and making these waves, and making these noises. So somebody decides he's going to call a meeting down at the Professional Businessmen's Club. And he said it was an NAACP strategy meeting to do something because these parents were really going to get themselves in trouble. They didn't know what they were doing. And they invited all these other agency people and didn't 53﻿invite us. Well, somebody called us and told us that they were having a meeting down there. CG: Somebody always calls and tells! EJ: Somebody always calls. That telephone, it was really... That's why I have an aversion against the telephone now. So we decided we were going down there and hear what these people were going to plan for us. So we marched down to John Bynum's place on Mass. Avenue, and we walked in and everybody got up to give the parents the seats, you know, and everything. And just as we walked in, they said, "Well, I think we ought to do this and we ought to do this. And then we better go back and see the mayor," and the whole bit. We just sat there and let them finish. And finally, out of the whole group, I have to admit, only John Bynum turned around and said, "Well, maybe it would be better to ask the parents." Well, of course, he's a politician too, in fairness. We were sitting there, they've got to say something to us, so he says, "Do you have anything that you want to suggest, Ellen?" And, of course, I've known them all my life, so I said, "Well, no." I said, "I don't have anything to suggest, simply because we weren't invited to suggest anything. It seems to me that whatever you guys have got planned, you've got planned for yourselves, so our suggestions won't make any difference, so you do what you want to do. Well, we know what we're going to do, You see, so we don't have anything to suggest to this plan that you're developing. If you'd like to hear what we're going to do, and we can tell you what we need from you, well, you join us tonight when this meeting is over, back at Exodus head-guarters." And we said good night, and we walked out. I want you to know, an hour later, they were trotting, Ken Guscott and Wes MacPherson, Urban League at that time, and Ken, and John, and they all came trotting, Muriel and Otto, all of them came trottin' back to the Exodus... CG: Now, wait, Muriel and Otto were at this big meeting? EJ: oh, yes, oh, sure, all the big-timers. CG: Was this big meeting primarily male? EJ: it was, no, no, it was not male, it was...the Ruth Batsons, the Elma Lewises, they were all the big-timers, you know, at that time. See they were all professional organization people. CG: Oh, okay. You all were still coming up. 54﻿EJ: See, we were still coining up. You see, we were still kind of...you know, they're not old enough to be our mothers, but... Well, I'm forty-, I'll be forty-three in October, Ruth must be about fifty-five or sixty. So it was just enough difference... CG: The baby sitting age difference. EJ: Yeah. They were the baby sitters, that's really what it was. And so they trotted back to our headquarters, [laughter] And Muriel won't admit that to this day, and every time they start talking about Exodus, I always look at them and laugh. I say, "Don't tell the story because y'all never tell it right." I do, I tell them all the time. "Don't tell the story, 'cause you don't tell it right." Just like I told them they don't tell the riot right, you see, 'cause the riot, well, that's another whole story. CG: Well, we'll get into that. EJ: See, you may not want to use my material when I really get wild. CG: Oh, no, this is good. [laughter] EJ: So we moved out. CG: You all had a little revolution, an internal revolu- tion, in the community. EJ: Sure. We were the Young Turks. You see, we were the Young Turks. I mean, we had a little bit of education. We were amateurs, but remember now, most of us had at least a couple of years of college at this point, you know. We had, naturally, because of them, we had come up a little better. We didn't have to scramble the same way. You know, I am telling the truth, now. You may not want to involve us, because we're not old enough yet to be part of the big NAACP, big group, you know, at the head, but we are still members, most of us all had memberships in the NAA, and a lot of people had memberships in Urban League, but NAA was the thing in those days. We walked out. I'll never forget, you know where John has the bar, and all that? Where the meeting was held. We trooped out. Bryant Rollins was the editor of the... The Banner had just started, and he was editor, and of course we had headlines every week. I mean, when I look at my scrap-book, I laugh and wonder Where we got all these headlines. Because Bryant was part of the... CG: I remember going to the Boston Public Library... You made a lot of front pages. [laughter] 55﻿Yes. And then he left the Banner, see, he went to the Globe. And we were making the front page of the Globe. It's funny, you're right, because Bryant was in town just last week. An aside, is he's doing a story. And I had told him he ought to get in touch with you, and he ought to get in touch with the guy that's doing a thing on me for the Globe, oh, I can't think of one of those...really I'm still out of it. A lot of it is just me going over, so if I sound frustrated, it's because I just repeated the story in the last six months so much. But he's doing a story which is going to come out very quickly. It's just a small piece. It's going to be a large piece, but it's not anything as extensive, on the street we all grew up, because many of us grew up on the same street on the Hill, on Hollander Street. He's looking at where some of these people are now. And you know, we talked about that in Freedom House, the Hollander Street gang. And he's been, he was here for about three weeks, and there's going to be a piece in the New England section of the Boston Globe. So I just mention that, as I say, today, just talking about this extensively, and just laughing at some of those days. But anyway, so we left and we went back to our office and proceeded to continue attempting to think of a strategy that would be really helpful to our ultimate goal. And finally, after we listened to all of the agency people report, extol their abilities and expertise and experience, and it was about one o'clock in the morning. This had been happening night after night, everybody had to get up there and say their thing. We were still sitting there. And we used to say, "Now what the hell are we going to do?" Because after spending four or five hours listening to people, no one had come up with a strategy that we could still live with. And with a good core of us still sitting there, kind of despondent, said, "What are we going to do?" Finally, I don't know how it happened, I can't even recall which one of us said it, "Damn it, we ought to do it. Let's take the damn kids to their school. Take 'em for a couple of days. Motorcade. Get a motorcade going. We've got friends who've got a beach wagon. We'll put all these kids in the car, we'll take 'em to these schools like you said. We'll put these kids in there, and you know doggone well, once we get in their schools, girl, they're not going to allow us to stay there, you know they're going to pick up the phone, well, they're going to call somebody." "Yeah, that's a good idea, let's do that." "Okay, well you call, I know so-and-so, he's got two cars in his family, and my car seats six people," and... So we decided that's what we'd do. 56﻿So naturally we started signing up these kids. "How many kids do you have in your family, how many kids you got in your family, how many in your family gotta go to school?" So we took all our kids to start off. We knew we could not commit ourselves without committing our kids. Right up front. [laughter] Then we started, we said, how are we going to get other people to do this, and we can't tell anybody, because if they know we're going to do it, they'll have something planned. And so what we were going to say, "We've got a plan, and sign your kids up for the plan." That's what we said. And we started with a long cardboard; we said, "If you're interested in your child attending a different school than the school he attends at the present time, please come to the..." Exodus headquarters, I mean, what was still called the Roxbury-North Dorchester Parents' Council. "Please come to the Roxbury-North Dorchester Parents' Council's office, and sign your child up." And we put these things all over the place. We had them outside of our building, we had them in the stores, in the drugstore 'cause we knew the drugstore owner. At that time he'd let us keep one on his counter, and we kept it in Ashmont Supply, which was right down the street. We kept them in all the places we could, the barber shop. And people were signing up. And every day we'd go and take them down, and take their names down, and put them on five by seven cards, addresses and telephone numbers. And we'd, you know, We'd keep these things. So finally, the press began to bug us. Because they couldn't pick up what was going on. And every night we were still holding these community meetings. And the press, I'll never forget Jeannie Powell, who is now the foreign correspondent for Moscow, used to come; we used to bar them, "We don't want any press in here." And we accused the professionals of calling the press and having the press come so they could get press. We didn't want press. And they'd stand outside, and you could see the lights and the cameras and there was all kinds of complications going on, people were arguing and telling the press, they distorted the way we were looking at things, and we were developing our plan, and so we didn't want them to say anything until we were ready. And when we were ready, we would call them; we didn't need them. We weren't press seekers, and publicity seekers. I mean, we were arrogant as we could get. Independent and arrogant. And righteous, I want you to know. Nobody's as righteous as we were. [laughter] And so we never let them in. But finally Betty Johnson and I were being asked to appear on the Bob Kennedy show, the guy that died... And it was a talk show. And he was supposed to be the best. If Paul Benzaquin called, all these different people. And 57﻿this was the "night before school. Okay, we'd come right from the schools, the School Committee had made no decision, but had decided that the pressure was on. So the press had begun to say, "What are they going to do for the parents?" And they began to pick up our figures, and investigate and find out that our figures were accurate; we weren't that far off in the figures that we had quoted in terms of the numbers of vacant seats. And they were beginning to question and query, here it is election time, and September, right after school started, the day after school started, like the seventh, was the primary. And these kinds of inquiries were coming in the paper, and the responses from the candidates weren't as well thought out and well defined as they should be, and so there was a little concern. But they were still smart. Those politicians were smart. They said, "All right, we'll consider what we will do at an emergency executive meeting at five o'clock the day before school opens." CG: The day before, that was the day before... EJ: Wednesday after Labor Day, 'cause the schools opened on Thursday, all the time, no matter what, they were always open that Thursday after Labor day. So that Wednesday, they went into session, and we decided that we would accept the offer of Kennedy to come on his show, talk show. At the same time we had planned to announce, to have a community rally. And we had sent flyers and leaflets out, and we expected, maybe, we'd get a hundred people, a hundred and fifty people, because we had been getting a hundred, a hundred and fifty people. Well, if they had known, I'm quite sure, at that time, we were going to have the crowd that we were going to have, they would never have granted us the use of the Jeremiah E. Burke School. Because Betty and I had to go to the radio station, WBZ, but I'll never forget, and a guy by the name of Frank Silva, and another guy who is dead now, used to own a store, Richard Dennis, one of the fathers, and, oh boy, it was a lot of the Exodus fathers and mothers, were going to go up and start the rally, and Betty and I were going to go down and be on the talk show to explain what we, why we were doing this and the whole bit. So we went and calls were coming in, people were calling, and we were nervous, it was our first experience. First time I've ever been on the radio. And they would blank 'em out, and they would ask us questions, and some good questions. People wanted to know why, you know, weren't our schools better. And we said that's what we were trying to do, but no one wanted to listen, and we were a minority, a minority didn't have any representation. 58﻿We were smart enough to see the politics of education, and all the things that impact on education, the City Council, the representatives, and the budget, and the mayor, and the state house. It began to all kind of, just unfold, as a perfect puzzle, you know, a puzzle, a finished puzzle. You know, all the fragments and pieces that you never put, the pieces that, as I said again, have such a heck of an impact on one child's education in the system is unbelievable. But as you speak to one thing you realize that that calls for this, and that calls for this, and you get that, this, that calls for this. And then there were all kinds of dangling participles, in a sense, that all had a way of being connected, you know, something had to connect 'em. And we were able, as we began, we got built up even spiritually in this conversation, because these people, in a sense, were even tapping our sense, our brains, more, more I think, unknowingly the kinds of questions that they were asking us would prompt certain types of answers, I guess, and responses, that they had not even thought about. But they were just commonsense kinds of answers, more or less. So while we were on the air, we were going to be on the air for three hours, and the Committee was supposed to vote. It was previously agreed that, you know, the vote came in, that they would announce it, and they would ask for us to respond. Well, I mean, we were very dramatic, I told you, and righteous, and nothing came before our community and nothing came before our cause. So we were in the middle of the talk show, and Kennedy turns to us, and someone comes in with a message, and then he turns to us and says, "Mrs. Jackson, Mrs. Johnson, the decision, the vote's been taken, the decision has been handed down, Boston School Committee. The children will return to their present school sites this year. What is your reaction to this?" "We have nothing except outrage to say at this point, to express our outrage, and we must leave, because we have work to do." And he said, "But you promised to stay for three hours." "We are so sorry, we have work to do, we must leave the station. We must go back to our community," and we go up and we walked off the... I don't know what he did with the rest of the time, but we got up. Today, I wouldn't even, would not, I must say, I would be a little more political. I wouldn't do that today. Today I would play it out, some way, and possibly take the time to explain what that really meant, but the one thing we could think of was action. Not any longer talking, we had to act. And unfortunately react, you see. So we quickly got in, I don't know if Betty had a car at the time, I think Frank Silva was waiting for us. That was it. They must have heard it up there, and they had sent one of the tenants to pick us up. That's what it was. They were waiting downstairs, one of the guys. And 59﻿we got in the car, and we drove madly to Jeremiah E. Burke. We got to Jeremiah E. Burke, it really hit us, because it was overwhelming, all the people that were there. There had to be about eight hundred people in there, inside the auditorium. Outside they were all over the place, because they couldn't get in. Plus all the police. Now this was my first time to be really thrust into this kind of stuff, and they're saying, "Come on, Ellen, come on." I'm looking, and... "Come on, you got to say something." I said, "What do you want me to say?" "Well, the plan. You're going to tell them about the plan." I said, "Are we really going to do it, are we really going to do it?" [laughs] "Yes, we got all these people signed up, we gotta go. Come on, Ellen, you're the spokesperson." They're pushing me, and we walked up there, and coming behind the curtain on the stage, [laughs] Walked behind the stage and the curtain, and there was Marguerite Sullivan, who was the deputy superintendent of schools. And they had dispatched her up to give us the news, which we already knew. So she said, "Mrs. Jackson, I must talk to you." I said, "I already know, you don't need to." She said, "You know, I hope you all are going to be very careful. I don't know what you are going to do, but I think we ought to talk about it." I said, "You had your chance to talk about it. They took a vote, they made the decision, there's nothing really for us to talk about." So she said, "Well," she said, "I just hope you realize that..." She did know, there were hints, because we had, as I said again, I don't know how we did it, but we kept that a closely guarded secret. They knew we were going to do something, but they didn't know exactly what it was. So, people were making speeches, the Guscotts, the Bynoes, the Batsons, the Snowdens, everybody. Otto, not Muriel, because at that time, Otto... 'Cause this was fire and brimstone stuff. Now that's where you get Otto all riled up, you know. He was in there, communities got to stick together, for once the community's got to unify behind the parents, these parents have come out and they have been hanging on to this thing, and he was going... And I couldn't hear him. And finally he said, "Ellen, you got to get up there now. They want you up. And you've got to get up there and say something." I said, "You already told them, I don't need to go out there." [laughs] CG: You will go be a leader... EJ: Troublemaker, you will get out there. As one of my very close, later to become close friends, said, "Ellen," she said, "I don't even remember, I have to tell you very frankly, what you said, but you looked so pitiful and so 60﻿skinny," because I was really skinny in those days, "and all I could think of," she said, '"cause I hadn't seen you." She said, "I heard about this Ellen Jackson and these powerful statements." She said, "When I ever saw you standing, so pitiful, on the middle, on that stage," she said, "That child needs help." She said, "I gotta join." And I tell you, she would tell you that today. She said, "All I heard is oh, this woman is something..." She said, "I expected to see some big..." I was really thin in those days. She said, "Big old woman, all this puff-puff noise." She said, "When you ever stood out, came out on that platform," she said, "Oh, my Lord, look at that poor little skinny girl." But I remember going out there, and I couldn't see because of the lights, and there were so many people. But what got me is that everybody stood up and started clapping and cheering. And then all I remember saying, "I can't tell you what it is, but I've got my kids going." I said, "All my friends got their kids going, and if you believe in us and if you believe in our kids, just come on up and sign up, and we'll get your kids to school tomorrow." And that was all I remember saying, something in that fashion. The next thing we know, it reminded you of an old-fashioned revival in church, because, you know how you begin, after the preacher has really given this fire and brimstone speech, or sermon, the deacons come to the tables to collect the money, you know, two tables... CG: And people start marching. EJ: And people start marching. So people were coming down the aisles, and I was saying, "Where are all these people going?" They said, "Fool, they're signing up. You told them to sign up." [laughter] And they were coming up, and signing up, just like they would be putting the dollars in that church basket. Filing around, filing around. Then it was, oh, I guess that it must have been around eleven o'clock at night. We took all these cards, and we looked at each other, six people, and we said, "What the hell are we going to do?" CG: Tomorrow. EJ: Tomorrow morning is school. How are we going to get these kids to school? We went back to the office and we counted. At first, Betty had two hundred fifty kids. How we going to get them... We ain't got that many cars... We're talking about ten, fifteen cars or so. So then, somebody who came back and said, "Why don't you call a bus company?" We said, "We don't want any bus company, we don't have any money." "Well, somebody I know is involved with NSM, or involved with American Friends Service, involved with one of the civil rights groups, a white 61﻿lady, she always helps out, why don't you call her?" So I said, "Do I have to call her?" He said, "Yeah, you got to call her, and tell her. Everybody knows what's going on." So somebody called somebody in'the community, and somebody gave us the number and they went on back to sleep. Gave us the number, and then they gave us her name. Her name was Mary Berger, in fact just as you called, came in the door, that was her calling me on the phone. And I'll never forget, I called her, and I guess again, part of the naivete was, I thought, you know, they were really saying, "This lady's going to write out a check, for us to get these buses." So I called her, and I said, "My name is Ellen Jackson." She said, "Yes," she said, "I know who you are." And I said, "We, you know, so on and so on and so and so, and we don't have any way of transporting these kids, and somebody suggested I should call you and maybe you'd have some ideas." I said, "Well, maybe this is the thing," because she, you know would say, "Well, okay, I'll write you out a check," because we knew, or we had been told, we had heard, there were a lot of wealthy white folks who were writing checks for civil rights organizations. We didn't consider ourselves a civil rights organization; we considered ourselves a parents' group, but we thought, they would maybe think this was important. So she said, "Well," she said, "I don't know just what to tell you." She said, "Well, let me make a few calls," she said, "I'll call you back." So we stood right by the phone for twenty minutes, and she called me back. She said, "I have one number," she said, "I want you to call her. She lives right here in Newton where I live; her name is Betty Arnold. And she owns a bus company." She said, "You call her, and you tell her what the situation is." So, she said, "But you guarantee her that you will have money for her, and you will be able to pay her." So I called her. Spoke with Mrs. Arnold, it was about one o'clock in... CG: This is Arnold Bus Company? EJ: Yes. And the lady who owns Betty's Rolls Royce. She used to own it, she and her husband. Okay, so? CG: Oh, the plot thickens. EJ: So I called her, and I said, "Mrs. Arnold?" And I told her, she said, "Yes, I know, I just saw you on TV a few minutes ago." I said, "Well, we have some students that we'd like to transport tomorrow, and you're the only person," I said, "that might have some buses, stand-by buses that we can rent. And we will pay, I know we're going to pay." I said, "We'd like to rent your buses." 62﻿She said, "Well, how many do you think you need?" And I said, "We have two hundred and fifty students." She said, "Well, you might need about six or seven." And she told Fletcher, that's right, I couldn't think of his name, Fletcher Roberts, that she thinks my number is off. But what I remember, in terms of the number of buses that she sent the next day, I remember her sending at least ten. And the reason I remember ten, and it's not really important, is because I remember she had said something about having stand-by buses, given the nature of what we were doing, the thinking was if the kids had to be brought back into the city, or brought back into their neighborhood, that is, that we would have a way to get them by dispatching the buses back out to the schools, okay? So that's why I remember ten. But she says she thinks it was more...like six or eight buses. But I think it was eight to ten. But that's minor. Anyway, she said, "Well, all right," she said, "I will have them there." She said, "What time?" I said, "We want them there early, because we want to, we're going to have to do this..." I didn't tell her, but the idea was we wanted to get there early so that we could surprise. We wanted to get there before the normal neighborhood kids would get to the schools. So we said, "We'd like them there at six-thirty, quarter to seven." Looked at the clock, it's three-thirty now, okay? So we go home; she tells us we're going to have the buses and bus drivers. So we all go home, get a few hours' sleep. And my husband by now... I'm beginning to get sick, and my husband is having a fit about me, this activity. "You're not well, you're under doctor's care..." So I get into bed, slide into bed. He's sleeping, snoring away. Couldn't go to sleep, as anxious, knowing I've got to get the kids ready to go to school, and in fact couldn't let them know they weren't going up the corner to the school. Have to sneak them down to Exodus headquarters... CG: Still Roxbury-North Dorchester Parents' Council. EJ: Still Roxbury-North Dorchester Parents' Council. It changed that day, the very first day in school is when we named it Exodus. I finally got up and fixed him breakfast, I don't know how I did it. But you know, when you're overtired and you're anxious, you don't feel tired at all. I didn't feel tired at all. I got up, got those kids dressed, and I had our kids going... My youngest boy, who will now hopefully be coming here in a year—just graduated from high school and he wants to work a year before he starts college—Troy was just starting school, going in the first grade. That's right. Starting into school. And I got the four older kids, took the little ones, Stephanie, 63﻿who's fifteen, going into the tenth grade, took her to the baby-sitter, which was two doors down, came back. My husband had gone out the door, gone to work, and called a cab. The kids said, "Where are we going, Mommy?" I said, "We're going to school." "Oh." So we started down. The cabdriver said, "Where to, lady?" I said, "378 Blue Hill Avenue." I was living on Fowler Street in Dorchester. So we came out of Fowler, a little short run off Harvard Street, onto Washington Street, okay? Coming down Washington Street, he passes by Stop and Shop, gets to the Jeremiah Burke, he says, "Damn." I said, "What's the matter?" He said, "I can't go down that way." I said, "Why can't you go down Blue Hill Avenue?" He said, "I don't know. Some damn fools have the whole avenue blocked off." So my daughter, Sheryl, said, "That's you, Ma, he's talking about." [laughs] And that's my Sheryl who is now a senior, going into her senior year at the University of Lowell, who said it. We got off, and the kids walked in, 'cause they knew where they were, and all sides, both sides of the street, were all these shiny yellow buses, and all these people, all these police. And Otto had worked it out with Deputy Joseph Sayer, who was then the deputy commissioner of traffic for the City of Boston Police Department, to block off from Grove Hall, Blue Hill Avenue, all the way back down to Quincy Street. So we had that whole area, so everybody had to detour. Because we had so many buses and kids walking back and forth, assigning kids to buses. And of course, all the press. Because they must have sent up every piece of equipment and press person that they could spare, to find out, they knew something was up, but they didn't know where we were going. We had a plan, of which I forgot to tell you, right before we went home, we had made... Well, she [Betty Arnold] might be right now that I think of it, because we had made seven envelopes, six or seven envelopes. And in these six or seven envelopes was the name of the school, the names of the kids who were going to be assigned to that school, the grades that those kids were in, and on the envelope—those were all sealed—on the outside was the name of one of our group who was going to be the team leader, the monitor. Plus we had decided that we'd take and use our professional civil rights agencies, and we would have them monitor what we were doing. And we said, we want one of the professional civil rights group persons to be on the bus with our parent to monitor this whole thing. So Ruth Batson rode the buses that day, and Vernon Carter, everybody you can think of. White folks who came in from the suburbs 'cause remember you had your fair housing groups, all kinds of folks wanted to take a group of kids. 64﻿CG: Wanted to participate. EJ: Wanted to participate. So we had the envelopes, okay, and the kids' names, and their grades. These lists. So we walked down and they wouldn't get the lists out till I got there. And they said, "Ellen, we've located the kids." And the kids were going, "Hi, Mrs. Jackson," waving, and I felt so the tears were coming up in my eyes. Then I realized that people were waving, telling me to look behind me. I thought they were still talking about "Look at all the kids." So I kept on walking down the middle of Blue Hill Avenue, because you could walk on the...and I didn't even look behind me until I got almost to the office. And just as I got to the office, this person said, "Look behind you, Ellen, look behind you." And I turned around and who was walking right behind me but Louise Day Hicks. As I was coming up from the Columbia Road side of Devon Street, she had come down Devon Street from the Warren side, and had been let out at the corner. She was coming down to tell us that wherever we were going to take these kids, we better make sure we had transfer cards. Well, we didn't have transfer cards, and we decided we weren't going to worry about transfer cards, because we were taking advantage of the open enrollment, all right? And our understanding of that law, or ordinance, was that if a parent wanted to take advantage of a vacant seat through open enrollment, they must provide the transportation for their children, and their child was eligible to be seated in any seat, any school where there was a vacant seat in his grade. The paperwork took place afterwards. So I turned and I looked. And she walked up and she said, "Do you have yellow transfer cards for all these children?" And I said no. She said, "Well, you know none of these kids, I should warn you, none of these children are going to be accepted into these schools that you plan to take them to," she said, "without the transfer card." I remember I was getting ready to say something to her, and one of the parents who had been very silent, but had been very active, very involved, she pushed up, and came between the two of us. She said, "We tried it your way. Now we're trying it our way," and turned around and said, "Come on, Ellen. We gotta go." Because we wouldn't let her into the Exodus headquarters, we had taken her to the opening next to our office, which was between our office and American Friends Service, another little storefront place there, and this is where we had this conversation. The press was trying to hear what we were saying, and in fact that did, that particular statement was part of the statement that got, you know, I heard all over the city, that "we're doing it our way." 65﻿So finally we go back, and we have our six attendants, our people, our mothers and fathers who are going to ride these buses, all right? And we ceremoniously hand each and every envelope, and we hug each other, you know, we're going off into battle. Now I wanted to go. I didn't even know where my own kids were, I mean, that's how well we had organized this thing. I did not know, that morning, until later on, which was very cute, where my own kids, what school my own kids were going to be assigned to. Because we had entrusted that secret with three people of the small group; it was their responsibility to make the assignments and to fix the envelopes, okay? I wanted to go, and they said, no, you got to stay here because you're the spokesperson and you gotta give the orders from here if something goes wrong. Okay, you've gotta stay. I've got to be the general. So I was put in a back room with two phones. Nobody could get back there to see me. They had all the community guys, big guys, you know, "Who do you want to see?" "Mrs. Jackson." "Can't see her, sorry. What's your name?" I mean, they were protecting me. [laughter] "Oh, yes, sweetheart, what's your business?" I mean, if you could get back there, you were a big-timer, to get back to where E.J. was sitting. All right? I mean, like going into the Oval Room. But it was really, I'm laughing, and I don't mean to make light of it, because I tell you, the sense of community was so beautiful, the spirit that was there is something I'll never forget. With all the trials and tribulations that we were going through. And I'll never forget, we were sitting there, and what we were doing at this point, the bus the kids were on, the bus captain would get on the bus, and the monitor, one of the civil rights persons would get on the bus, and the press would come and say, "Where are you going?" "Can't tell you," then tell the bus driver, "Close the door," wouldn't even tell the bus driver where he was going, and wouldn't, still wouldn't tell him where he was going, would give him, just tell him to turn here, turn here. So it was the funniest thing when you heard the press, because they were wheeling and dealing, turning corners. They didn't know when the buses were going to turn, because they didn't know, even the bus driver did not know where he was going. Which might have been a shorter route if he knew where his destination was, but he was going where we were telling, "Take this street, take this street." He didn't know. So we had buses, as they said, wheeling and careening in and out of streets...just a maze of buses, yellow buses going every which way. And over here's the camera crews, trying to get on and follow these buses. We went to many schools that first day. We went to, I think, thirteen schools. As we say, we opened up 66﻿thirteen. "And how many schools did we open up today, how many schools did we open up today? And how many more schools did we open up?" We went to Hyde Park, and then we went to Roslindale. We went to, even as close as Mat-tapan, would you believe, the Tileston School was predominantly white at that time, on Babson Street. The Lewenberg was predominantly white, right there, up on Wellington Hill. I mean, just four or five blocks up from these people, where some of our kids were living, and here they were not going to be able, if we hadn't done this, to even, at that point, get into these schools, you see. Over off of Geneva Avenue, you go straight down Geneva Avenue, there were some schools over there, right now the names slip my mind, but I can get all that out for you. But there were about thirteen schools that day. And they pulled up, and of course these principals were alerted, but nobody knew whether or not their school was going to be hit or not until we got there. And in most instances, a parent would get off the bus, and the monitor wouldn't say a word. We had already talked about that, and the kids were... We had made signs, "Hi, may I come to school with you? May I join you in your classroom?" So a lot of kids had construction, yellow construction, or red or green, and signs saying, "Hi, my name is..." you know, made like animals. We had cut out and they had crayoned in their names... Children introduce... The kind of thing you do in kindergarten, right? But we had put these signs on, the kids' names and, nice, pleasant statements. The kids were all wearing...almost every kid had one on. So we tried to say, we come bearing gifts, our children, in a sense, treasures, or whatever you want to call it. And we come not with malice, but the fact that we wanted a chance for our children to have a decent education, and one step is in a decent classroom, and a decent classroom may be as simple as having his own seat and having a book, and again having his own teacher. But for us at this point that's a first simple step. And that's all we want. So the parent would walk up to the door in most instances, the principal would come to the door. In most instances he was very nervous, very upset; but he did not bother them, he would let them in. Now at the Henry Grew School, the principal decided that he's going to be a Wallace or not a Wallace... What's his name who stood in the door? Who was it who stood in the door? Faubus. He's going to be a Faubus, or he's going to be an Oral who stood in the door. Well, his standing in the door prompted him to have a heart attack and die the next day. 67﻿CG: Really? EJ: Seriously. Oh yeah, he had a heart attack. Because he was not, he was going to bar... Now that shot, that picture of him standing in the door is in my scrapbook, and I've got to get my scrapbook because... CG: You mean that is the last public picture of the man before he died? EJ: Yes, because he's got all those pictures and things. Right there, just like Faubus, in front of his school, principal of his school, saying we weren't coming in there. I'll never forget, there's a picture of a guy that I grew up with, by the name of John Scott, whose kids were in the Exodus program, ended up in a medical program; and his son, who started in Exodus, is one of the METCO coordinators, Mark Scott. As you know, most of the kids who went through Exodus, when METCO started, a lot of those kids, who had been on the frontier and the battle line front, we felt, ought to get a chance to go through METCO. And I remember the picture shows him, pointing, his mouth wide open, most likely telling this man off, you know, "You better get out, go on home." CG: Right. Don't stand in the way of progress, man. EJ: The idea was the kids would stay on the bus until our person had a chance to go through the school, and survey the school, and make sure that our figures were accurate. But see, they had gotten wind, somewhere, because what they had done in some instances was to unbolt the seats and the desks and to remove them. You could tell they had been newly removed, just recently been moved. So that in a school classroom where we had figured on finding twenty-six seats, they had removed it down to make room only for the sixteen students that they had already assigned to this classroom. They had removed all the empty seats in many instances. Or they would say that that room's not being used because we use it as a storeroom... They would have, in an empty normal classroom, they would have boxes of materials and supplies stacked up so that the room would not be able to be used, or could not be able to be used as a regular classroom setting. It would be used as a storeroom, because they would have crates and boxes and maybe audiovisual equipment and all of that. We found many classrooms that weren't even being used. They were just, along with the classrooms we knew about, we'd found other classrooms, completely vacant classrooms with seats in them, bolted-down seats, which were not in use because they didn't have that many children. And the fact is that they were not removable, as I say again. 68﻿The two significant things that you were able to determine from that is, one, it surely highlighted the number of people in these communities, contingent communities, like the Hyde Parks and the West Roxburys and the Roslindales and South Bostons, that their kids, elementary kids were not attending the Boston public schools. But they were saving seats in their home districts for them. In a sense they were still being counted as Boston public school kids. They were going to parochial schools. And that's what was constituting all of these vacant seats. However, as they were taking the census, they would count them in terms of the district, as part of that school district. Do you understand what I'm saying? All right. Now where we had no alternative school system, like a parochial school system, all of the minority kids would be assigned, except for a very, very sparse few, to public schools, and a few were assigned to private schools, but that was so few in number it wasn't even worth counting, saying it made a dent in the number that had to rely on public school education. Then they would say that whole list, if you would come across a room that was vacant, completely empty, they would say, "That's the special education room, and those assignments haven't been made." I mean, they had all kinds of reasons, or that the teacher hadn't come back and they hadn't gotten a permanent assignment for the teacher yet, or they hadn't got the teacher who was going to be permanently assigned, or some kind of excuse. However, the parent would go in, count the seats where he found, or she found the empty seats, and go back to say, "Give me four kids for fourth grade, give me three kids for the third grade, give me two kids..." They would present the cards to the teacher in that room, and say, "We are enrolling as students in these classes." And of course, simultaneously that was happening all over Boston, the city, where you'd know the TVs, that anybody who was sitting home most of the day, thought Boston had gone mad. There were a lot of people who thought we had gone mad, including black people who thought we had just gone completely, stark-raving mad. But I always say, that there wasn't a parent, and they were few in number...I don't say it was every, but there wasn't a parent who made the commitment who wasn't there with their kid. The difference, that we were there. I mean, those parents stayed with their kids. They didn't put the kids out there and expect the kids to face the hostility by themselves. They were there, and the kids knew, because those first few months, we had somebody monitoring all the time. Because they were doing all kinds of evil things to our kids. Like, if they would accept the child in the classroom, they would, in a sense, what we were afraid would happen in many instances, and 69﻿has happened in the South in desegregated school systems, they would become resegregated in the classroom, by either placing all the black kids in the back row, or placing them all in the front of the classroom, facing the whole class, a sea of white faces. All right, in a sense, which was a total kind of devastating trauma for our kids. We complained about all of these little subtleties. But we were determined, if a man would say, principal would say that a teacher was not assigned yet to that classroom, then we would say we will leave you X amount of students. And he'd say, "Well, they can't sit in there." So we'd take them into the nurse's room. They would sit in the nurse's room. But we knew that school could hold, accommodate X amount of kids. We made sure that it was up to its full complement by adding our children along. We, as I said, we did that. At the end of the day, they had to block off from Seaver and Humboldt Avenue straight through Grove Hall, all the way back down to Roxbury and Dudley Street. There were that many federal, state, city officials, newspaper people, who were coming in from all over by the end. And that was a Thursday. That Friday morning, that Thursday and Friday, I don't think Blue Hill Avenue ever was the same after that. But it was funny, because remember, the bottom line for us was a couple days, Thursday and Friday. We figured Thursday and Friday we could do it. And Monday we were going to be all clear. Now remember, we hadn't raised a darn dime. We haven't raised one penny. So what we had to do was construct. Also, people were coming in, inquiring all during the day while we were assigning kids to classrooms, how they could sign up. So we constructed like a desk, an intake desk in the front of the office, where parents, volunteers were sitting signing up new children. Whose parents were coming in and saying, "My kid went to his school today, but I want to sign him up for this program; I want him out of his school." So we had to sign up, and we weren't barring anybody. It was no restrictions of any kind, or regulations or requirements, or any criteria set up for a child not being accepted in Exodus at that time. We had a few white parents that came in, who wanted their kids moved out and sent to some other schools. Umm hmmm, there were some white parents. CG: That was on the news. EJ: That's right. And then we ran out of buses. That's when it really became a community effort. That's when a lot of suburban fair housing people and those human relations groups from the Lexingtons and the Arlingtons were coming in and volunteering their car, saying, "I can take eight kids to a school, just tell me where the assignment 70﻿is." We had, oh, more people. We had to use a lot of private cars, because we didn't have more... And I guess, in a sense, as I began to unfold the story more and more, that she's possibly right, that we only had six to eight buses. Because we did run out of...she had other runs, she was basically in a business, okay? But we did utilize personal cars and station wagons, and people were doing that. They'd come in after they dropped a bunch off, and say, "I got those kids enrolled, give me another group to take." And parents were patiently waiting for children, and they had a place to sit in our office, or stand on the sidewalk, until somebody came back from a run and would go and open up another school. Our strategists were in the back with their maps and were pinpointing... [laughter] "One, territory one taken over. All right, now, we'll take...what have we got here, we'll take some more names. Okay, how many seats we got, okay, send the next group." In a sense, we were just going back and forth, back and forth. At the end of the day, when buses came, and I have to admit, that's really when Otto and I really got very close, because Otto was at my side that whole time. He would say, "Don't answer... Don't tell the press this." He would guide me in how to answer the guestion and all that, how to make a press statement. I'll never forget, we were hastily typing up...you hear names, just like my kids now, they spell something, well, not now, because they're older, but it's almost like you spell like you hear. And you hear these prominent names and I would look at some of those press releases today, as amateurish as they Were, they were still very professional. We had sense enough to put, "Immediate Release," the day and the time and the contact person, the spokesperson, and the whole bit. During the day, that was when the name... because one of the reporters said to me, "Well, what are you calling this?" I said, "It's a North Dorchester Parents' Council." He said, "Well, you kept talking about the movement, what is the movement?" I said, "It's our movement, it's a parent movement." He said, "No, but I mean, what's its name? What do you call yourself doing?" I said, "Well, what we call ourselves doing is taking our children out..." How did we put it? And Joseph—who was it? Moses. "Casting our children out to reap," you know, the benefits, so that they could come home and sow the oats at home. In a sense we were giving them a chance to go out and gain whatever they can, and come back to benefit their community. And I said, "That's sort of an exodus, because we don't mean to stay out there. We're coming back, we're coming home." And he said, "Is that what you call it?" Otto said, "Yes, yes. Tell him yes." I said, "Yes, that's the name of the group, Exodus." [laughter] Oh, wow! 71﻿EJ: And in the end, when they all came back, around three o'clock in the afternoon, all the buses were coming back. The head of the bus company, I mean like the manager, Mrs. Arnold, Betty Arnold said, "Do you want us to return tomorrow?" And we still hadn't raised any money, so I said, "Oh Lord, some of the parents... Yes, we want a few more buses tomorrow." So Otto says, "Well, you got to tell the press. Everybody's milling around. They want to know what they're going to do. You've got 'em hepped up now, you've got to tell 'em what you want. You got 'em all hepped up now." So I got up on this crate, and I said to the kids, "Did you enjoy the day?" "Yes." "Do you want to go back?" "Yes." "Do your parents want 'em to go back?" "Yes." "Well, have 'em here tomorrow morning at seven o'clock sharp. Go home now and do your home lessons." And there was that, what do we parents do? We added more kids on to it, and we sat there, and we signed kids up. By this time my tiredness is coming down on me too, and we hadn't done anything. In the interim I found out that my child is nervous, my Troy, and is climbing up a tree in the school yard, they were assigned to the Martin Milmore School in the Back Bay, right over there on Peterborough Street. And he didn't want to go to his classroom, 'cause he was taken away from his brothers and sisters. So he went up a little tree. I had just bought him some new shoes, and this child, me losing my shoes, and my boy had lost___ And what had happened, they had thought he was lost, 'cause he was hiding in a tree. They kept saying, "We can't find Ellen Jackson's kid." We had the short-wave radio, the police had the radios in the back where I was sitting, and every time I heard one child was lost and they couldn't find him, and they're talking about the kids found, but he's lost his shoes. And they said, "What's the child's name?" "Troy Jackson." I said, "Oh, that's my kid." Up in a tree, brand new pair of shoes, and as hard as times were then, so...him losing a pair of shoes. One shoe. I mean, he didn't lose two. You wouldn't have felt so bad, but here he comes home with one shoe. And the hardest thing is my husband's saying to me, "He had no business over there anyway!" If he had gone to where he was supposed to go, as far as he was concerned, he wouldn't have lost his shoe. So then Betty Arnold called, naturally the manager went back and told her I had said, "We want more buses and we want 'em now." She said, "Now, are you prepared to pay for this?" I said, "Oh, yes, just send us a bill. We're ready, you know, we're prepared to pay." CG: She must have been very nervous. EJ: I'm sure she was. She had plenty to be nervous about. Wasn't as nervous as we were. But do you know, during the day, we hadn't even started soliciting. The﻿first person who came in to give us five dollars in an envelope was...a little, small, slight-built, black man from the community, and walked in and laid down on the desk, and said...laid the envelope down and said, "I'd like to give you a small donation." He said, "I'm very proud of you young people and I know you're going to need some money." And then the merchants began to go. Lenny— what's Lenny's last name, Roxsmith, or something like that, owns old Ashmont Supply. He went up and down to all the merchants on Blue Hill Avenue, and he collected in one...that same afternoon, like five hundred dollars. And then money started coming in, people were sending in two-dollar donations, and three-dollar... Said, "We know you got to pay for those buses." The next day we received a call from a woman by the name of Peggy Lamson, from Cambridge. Her husband is Roy Lamson, at MIT, and she said in this very gravely voice on the phone, "Ellen Jackson?" I said, "Yes." She said, "I'd like to come out and see you, and talk about this program that you've got going." She said, "You must need money. How much are they charging you?" I said, "Well, it's $1500." At that time it was $1500 a week. It ended up to be $3750, three thousand seven hundred fifty dollars a week. That's a week. We were raising it, and we were paying the bills. That's right. CG: How many children was that? EJ: We had around a thousand kids, at that point, was $3750. So each kid is $3.75 a week per kid. CG: But still, that was the 1960s, right? EJ: Yes. So it was $1500 for these six to eight buses. She says, "What's the cost of eight?" I told her, and she said, "Well, I would like to come up and visit you. I'll be out Monday morning." She came up Monday morning, and she stayed around. You could tell, a very well-to-do woman, very efficient and crisp. In fact she wrote a big story on Exodus in the Boston Magazine, about a year or two later, and in fact, has put a book out, a couple of books out since then. She did a book on the first black senator after Reconstruction, in South Carolina. And she dedicated the book, 'cause I introduced her to Constance Baker Motley, she dedicated the book to Constance Baker Motley, because Constance helped her with a lot of her research. But anyway, what she did is go back, and she must have talked to about fifteen of her friends, and came back a week later and presented this check for $5000. And she suggested a telephone solicitation, and she became a member of the Exodus board, and stuck with us until Exodus, of course, eventually dissolved. And the same with Berger, who you know, began to organize the Friends of Exodus in sixteen surrounding suburban communities, and 73﻿organized a very large first fundraising that we ever had, a fair we had that October, with Count Basie at the Commonwealth Armory, where we had five thousand people, including the governor and the mayor and the senator and John Updike, and, oh, here I've got all these pictures, and oh, we had a time. People came as far as New Hampshire in buses...which was so significant. And we sold Exodus buttons for a dollar, and we had these gals called Exodettes, who were carrying these buckets around with the buttons in them, and Mel Newhall helped organize that whole thing. And we had gone down to the Armory, and we had blown up balloons all day long, we had just... The fellows had to put a dance floor down, and we were able to bring... We brought all the champagne, somebody donated all the champagne—well, donated it at cost to us—and we set all these tables, with all these new white friends we had gotten, volunteers from the suburbs, and League-women types came in and helped us decorate the tables, and put favors, and information and envelopes for people. And I think we made something like seven thousand dollars that night, after all the expenses were paid. But, you know, we continued to go through that. With Monday morning, when more kids... I think by Monday we had increased our number from two hundred fifty to something like four hundred twenty-five, and it continued to go. Then we had this peak, and it stayed at that time. Oh, well, really what happened was, we peaked the first week, and we didn't know what we were going to do. The parents were beginning to get nervous about how the kids were going to get out there. They liked the schools. Then what happened, a lot of parents started, who had cars, just taking their kids, not bothering with the bus service that we had, began to take their kids to school on their own. And in the interim, we began to really run into problems and snags with the School Committee insisting on... First of all, we never thought about parental consent to taking the little children, so we had to draft these little sheets of paper and get parents to give us the authority to enroll their child in the school. Also, we had to make arrangements to get their transfer cards, and we were running around getting transfer cards for kids. And there were a lot of behind-the-scenes, just nuts-and-bolts legwork that had to be done, but people were willing to do it. And then when you cite, you know, what went on. And all those small details that went in there, but the point was, that as you do something like that, other things began. They, people ask you to do other kinds of things, like a parent will come back and say, "Can you find a tutor for my kid? Do you know about a summer program? 11 You know. If you do something half way right, then people begin to rely on you to know where to go to get other kinds of services. So we began to find 74﻿ourselves a little bit involved in a lot of things. But still basically around the child, around the youth. Because we did run summer programs, camp programs, overnight programs, camp programs, we ran tutorial programs. We received a grant one time from the Globe to run an apprenticeship program with kids; we had an Exodus newsletter. I published it, next time we meet, I'll pull some of those things out so that you can see them, because they were really, for amateurs at that time, they came out very well. And we had a Sunday a month, which was Mother's March. We decided to do what the Muscular Dystrophy campaign does, or the Heart Fund does, and we went door-to-door. We had all kinds of bake sales and cocktail parties. And we raised money, and other people helped us. It was a feeling, anywhere, everywhere you'd go...you'd go in a store sometimes that you'd never been in before, and you'd see a can, and the level was rising in the can. I mean, people would call us up and say, "Can somebody come down? I got...I put a can out for you and it's full." And my kid came down and we had some mad day, counting dimes and separating nickels and pennies, and rolling them up, and taking them to the bank, so we could pay these bills. CG: The bank tellers must have wondered at all these nickels and dimes and these great big withdrawals. EJ: That's right, large withdrawals. And eventually Jerry Grossman of the Massachusetts Envelope Company called and said, "I can't make a big donation, but I will, for the next year, supply all the stationery that you need." We got somebody to develop a logo, and that's when somebody made the bus with the two wheels on it for us, you know, which was the Exodus, a great big "E" with a "X" like a bus, and that was the Exodus logo. And other people donated their services. That's when Jean said, "Well, I'll do some research and train parents to help do the interviewing, and pay them." And we began a lot of different things. But I'm tired. We've been talking so long. CG: Okay. You've run out of steam today. I understand, because you've explained a lot. [break in tape] CG: Ellen, last time we talked we were just beginning to look back on the Exodus movement. Troy was going into the first grade, and you were beginning to discuss who was on the King-Timilty Advisory Council. EJ: I don't remember who was on the advisory council. I can see his face, but I can't remember, for some reason... 75﻿CG: Let me jog your memory with Attorney Katzenbach? I believe you mentioned Attorney Katzenbach. EJ: Oh yes. That wasn't King-Timilty. That was Exodus. I think what happened was that Attorney General Katzenbach was in Boston to address members of the various penal codes, appeals systems across the state, and law enforcement agents. They were meeting at what was then the Hilton, now the Park Plaza, located in Park Square. I don't know how we even, as I say again, it was really interesting, Cheryl, how we would be given information, or information was transmitted to us. But somebody was always imparting a piece, a tidbit to us, that would be helpful and advance our cause, so to speak. And somewhere, somehow, and through someone, we found out that Attorney General Katzenbach was going to be speaking and addressing this group. And we decided that we ought to confront him, or at least speak with him regarding the fight that we were presently, or in the very near future, the very next month, going to be faced with, and that was the double-session day. So there was a group of us, parents, mothers and fathers, who were—there must have been about twenty-five of us—who walked into the Statler, that's what it was. It wasn't the Hilton, I'm sorry, and I went up on the mezzanine. We asked where the meeting was being held, and the desk clerk told us that it was upstairs on the mezzanine. We walked up to the mezzanine and they were just breaking up. He was walking... We wouldn't have known Katzenbach from a hole in the wall, from the rest of those guys, and you can believe that the majority of them were all white anyway. I mean, all of them—there might have been maybe one or two black people in the group. We walked up to him, and I remember somebody shoving me, and I found myself facing this fairly large man; and he had a very pleasant face. I told him my name, and that the group with me was members of an organization called the Roxbury-North Dorchester Parents' Association. And that, by and large, that was because we came from that area. That we were...it had been suggested that we might speak with him very briefly about a situation that he might be able to intervene in, and that was the problem of the potential double-session day that was being proposed by the Boston School Department officials to the Boston School Committee, for a vote. And that we had serious problems and reservations about that program or that kind of a schedule, in that we were poor, and that many of us were working parents, and that we had more than one child, and that the children in a sense may find themselves in a morning session, part of our family,, and the other part of the family would find themselves in the afternoon session, and there was a problem of those who got out of the morning session, of babysitters or being picked up, because we were talking about our elementary school children, and a 76﻿few junior highs, at that time. But by and large, we were talking about elementary children, the children from first grade through at least the sixth grade, as the previous structure was structured, grade-structured. CG: And this was only going to be the Roxbury-Dorchester? EJ: And it was only speaking to the overcrowded condi- tions within the Roxbury-North Dorchester area. We indicated that this was going to add an additional financial burden in terms of babysitters again, and the bother of placing children, or even having them picked up at that age in the middle of the day, when taking them to a day care center was really out of the question, and again financially unfeasible. And for those children on the second shift, let's say, who would be going to school in the afternoon, in the winter, we were concerned, the days that early evening, early evening darkness, and that if they stayed in school as was, at least alleged, to be proposed, till four o'clock, we knew that at four o'clock it would be dark. And that it was just a total disruption of the family, and that it was a total disregard of the way of life of minority families. The routine, breaking the routine that in many ways was going to severely impair any kind of real, you know, familiar atmosphere within households. We really pleaded with him that what we wanted to know from him was, how we could go about seeking an injunction to keep the School Committee, once this was presented to them, from implementing this particular plan. He was very receptive and very sensitive to our plight. He said he understood exactly our concerns, and said that his family, that he lived, actually, in Maryland, outside of Washington, and that he, at that present time, had just recently, with his own family, gone through the same anxiety within their school system, because the school system that his daughter was attending had instituted a double-session day. And that he naturally didn't view his plight as a difficult one as ours, but certainly knew the pressures and problems that it was causing in these households. I mean, he certainly was able to relate very quickly and I think, very honestly, with our concerns. He, interestingly enough, said that he would look into it, and did not go any further. But we went away again, I guess as amateurs, and new in dealing with this business, just assuming we knew that he was going to send a telegram the next day to the Boston School Department and Committee, saying to them, "Cease and desist from your activity." We were waiting for a "cc," waiting for a cc to us. All right? But we never heard from Katzenbach directly again. But, as we looked back and reflected on how things began to emerge, what kinds of issues and activities began to take shape across the city, and various people who were 77﻿brought into the city from Washington, it was very clear that he had signalled the appropriate agencies, both federal and within the city, that they were going to watch this very carefully, and make sure that legally, and also politically, that their decisions were wise ones. And the reason I say that is because the double-session day was defeated, as you know, and secondly, we began to be visited at our headquarters—at that point we were sharing, due to the generosity of Sarah-Ann Shaw, who was the director of Northern Student Movement--the offices. Because, as you know, I was working with Sarah-Ann. So we were beginning to receive visits from specialists from the community relations service office of the Department of Justice, asking us if there were ways that they could help us, if they could serve as liaisons between us and the School Department, and who were more or less just around, observing, and I guess, in a sense, picking up the temperament of people, the tempo, and then reporting back, and someone along the way was making it clear—we never could tell who it was, who they were, let me say it that way—but it was very clear that a message was being transmitted to the mayor, to the governor, to the school officials, that you guys better watch out what you do here, because there's a potential of a larger problem than you anticipate, and at this point the parents are within their rights to be concerned, and the kind of inflammatory remarks that were coming out of the School Department and, more ,or less, the School Committee members' mouths were such that, you know, it could have gone any way. CG: This is now at a time after Arthur Gartland has been pushed away from the School Committee... EJ: Arthur, at that point, was actually not even on the Committee. Yes, he was on the Committee, but that was his last term. Because he was the only voice of support at that time that we had on the Committee. CG: Let's see, this was around '65, '66? EJ: Oh sure, '65, the end of '65 and the beginning of '66, that's right. Because Exodus started in '65. CG: Right. Just let me get the dates straight. So at this point, federal people really are looking at the situation. EJ: Yes, they were looking. And they have that special talent of being very good listeners—the CRS people, I will say at least... CG: Now CRS is... 78﻿EJ: Community Relations Services of the Department of Justice, and they were more or less mediators. CG: But at the time there was no case going, so there was really nothing to mediate. EJ: No, they were trying to hopefully bring out, to avert any kind of a case being brought. But eventually a case was brought, as you know. CG: Yes. Now, how long were you with Exodus? EJ: From its inception until 19... Oh, what was it? Let me get it together. Officially, in a capacity of executive director, which was 1969-1970. Then I began to do, I was still the director, but we, I decided, I was offered... Well, what happened during that period, I was cited by the United States Council of Women as Woman of the Year. CG: Now what year was that? EJ: That was 1969. And it was really funny because, when they called from Washington,, and the chairman was living in Washington, I can't remember her name—I'm terrible at names—-whoever was president of the Council, Holly Rob-bins, I'm sorry. CG: Holly Robbins? EJ: Holly Robbins, R-O-B-B-I-N-S, called me, and she was ecstatic and she was excited. These 5,000 ballots had been cast, and I had been nominated, had been selected from all these names. And I had never heard of the group, so you know, to be very honest, I was very happy, but I couldn't kind of generate the kind of enthusiasm at that point. CG: Now is this after the Look magazine article? EJ: This was after the Look, no, this was before the Look, that was February first. The Look magazine article came out after that. I have to get those dates straight, I do have to do that. I'm doing it for you because I'm pulling out stuff now, I'm finally finding stuff, 'cause I'm getting ready to move. So, I don't know, half the stuff I've lost, the kids tell me some of it's down in the basement, I am really frantic about this. But I do know... CG: When in doubt, call me. 79﻿You know, the library over at Radcliffe has asked me that, but I have been waiting for Byron to see what he was going to do. They had asked several times for my papers and things. And so I am trying to get them in some order for my kids, if nothing else...but I can't remember. That is something that I know, every time I look at those things, I say, "I've got to get some dates for Cheryl so she can have these accurate dates." But anyway, I think it was before the Look article and the McCall's article, and the rest of those articles that came out afterwards. But anyway, when she called, I said, "Fine, yes." And she said, "We will pay your passage to come to New York to receive the award." In fact, Bob Boyd was undersecretary of HUD, and presented my award to me. Oh, that's another link in the network. He was the luncheon speaker, in fact, and he was still undersecretary of HUD, and I remember him very well. We always laugh about that, because that was my first time meeting him. And I said, "Fine, I'll come to New York, and I'll accept this award." Well, that was a big deal for the group, because here we were getting this, in a sense, everybody thought it was national recognition for the whole group, and rightfully so. But then we decided...we were caught in a dilemma. What was I going to wear? And I don't remember anything else about that. I think that, I always say to people that the Roxbury community, and even part of our suburban community, was very well represented, because I think with the exception of my underwear, everything else belonged, except my shoes, to somebody else. The hat, the suit, the scarf, the pocket-book, the gloves... The only thing I had that was my own personally were my shoes and my stockings. [Laughter] So we were well represented. But I remember Mrs. Robbins kept calling and saying she wanted a biographical sketch. So we sent her my vita, didn't think anything about that. And they kept calling back, I never will forget. They said, "We want to know more about her, you know, besides the sketch." So finally Bryant Rollins, who was still the chairman of the board of Exodus at that time, now editor of the Amsterdam News said, "Well, let me call the..." I'm sorry, what is he doing at the Amsterdam News? He is the editor. He's a writer and a professional, and he said, "Let me see if I can exact from her what she really wants."' So he called her, and he said, "Oh, in a sense what she really wanted to know was a little, a brief account of my life." And so he put that together, and what Exodus really was all about, and this was woven into a very beautiful leather-bound book that I received from them, which is really very lovely. I still, naturally, have all of those kinds of things. 80﻿And off -to New York I was packed, with a chaperone and several of the Exodus board members, like Mr. Lindsay, who's now retired, but had the insurance company in Grove Hall, came down to New York to be with me. And a very dear friend of mine, who I grew up with, she came along as a companion, to New York, and several of the ladies, who I guess were responsible from this region, in nominating me from over a Western candidate. I can't remember. But I'd just gotten, so much was happening, Cheryl, at that time, I have to tell you that I can't remember all of it. I mean, things were happening so fast. But her name was Ann... I'll remember. Just put Ann and I'll try to get her last name for you. Very Brahmin. She and her mother were members of this council, and they were the ones who had recommended, nominated me. But they came down, naturally, and she's now living in Washington. I don't recall, but I'll get it, it's somewhere in my files. I guess we weren't prepared for that day, because we got into New York, and we got into the hotel, and I walked up to the desk, and said who I was, and said that I thought they had reservations for me. And the gentleman at the desk said, "Oh, yes, we do." And the next thing I know, they were taking our luggage and putting it on the elevator. You know, it wasn't my first time in a hotel, but I was not prepared for this particular reception. And I walked into this lovely, lovely suite~I mean, very large, enormous, ornate suite. And there were flowers and bottles of champagne, and congratulations, telegrams from Senator Kennedy, Senator Brooke. Oh, my Lord, it was just crazy...from the community folks, various organizations, my family had sent flowers, my brother. And then there were all kinds of letters, as I say, and telegrams and things. So we had a ball. I mean, we weren't used to this style of living, she, my girlfriend and I. We sat up there, and we opened up...we popped the champagne. And a few minutes later, there was a tap at the door. And we opened the door, and there was a very, very genteel lady, a white lady was standing there, with a gorgeous, antique, gold-headed cane, tipped cane, and said that she was my hostess, and she was from Nebraska, or Utah—not Nebraska, was from Utah—and if there was anything that I needed, please don't hesitate to call her. And so we ordered dinner in the room that evening... CG: The works! EJ: Oh yes, it was cute. I had prepared a kind of acceptance speech, and I wanted to really go out. The first time in a big city, not the first, but since I was grown, you know, I hadn't been there in years. I'll never forget, my companion, my girlfriend said, "No, you can't go out. You gotta go over that speech tonight." And we went over the speech, and we made some changes. It wasn't 81﻿really a speech, but it was a kind of acceptance statement. And we finally went to sleep. The next morning the same lady, my hostess, was back at the door, and said, feel free...the business meeting was still going on, and the luncheon would not start, where I would receive the award, at noontime...if I would like to see what the end of... It was like a plenary session that morning. It wasn't a plenary session, but it was a full session. If we'd like to come upstairs to the conference area and listen to the last speakers, we were welcome to, but be sure and get my rest. And so we decided we'd leisurely get dressed, and we decided we'd float upstairs before the time for the luncheon. And we walked up the stairs, and we walked in a room. And the meeting was just about, it was a very large conference room. And the room was, there had to be about a thousand women in that room. And I said, "My Lord," you know. "Is this what we're attending?" And we sat down, and of course we could tell that they were looking at us, because there weren't that many black women there, at this particular session. And wondering who we were, coming in late anyway. Because the interesting thing, the organization does not tell who the winner is until the lunch. It's always a surprise, even to the members, they don't know who has been selected. CG: Just tells the executive board, huh? EJ: Just tells the executive board. So naturally, I am quite sure they weren't expecting a black woman to be the recipient [Laughs] of this particular award. CG: Right. Ej- so we sat there, and we listened, and finally at the end, we found my hostess. And she said, "There is a small reception, with press, in your honor. And why don't I escort you to the press room?" And we walked into the press room, and there was a bar and tables, and there were all these people from various United Nations, probably United Nations various countries, women in their native garb, African women, Japanese women, oh, all over. Unbelievable. One of the most exciting things for me was, well, interesting things, and I'll tell you who it was, she's dead now, but I don't know if you want to use her...Mrs. Carter, Lisle Carter's mother, Lisle Carter, president of the University of Washington, D.C., used to be chief protocol officer under Johnson. His mother was a member of the executive committee, and she was one of the few black people, and really interesting. When the hostess went through the door into this press room, she turned, and she said, "Oh, she's with me," talking about me. And my girlfriend was behind me, and she said, "Oh," because 82﻿she had stopped for a minute to look, to pick up some literature, because all along the corridor, they had tables of literature. So she was just picking up literature to take back to Boston. So by the time she gets her derriere across the threshold, Mrs. Carter stopped her, in a very cold voice, and said, "This is for invited guests only." And so I turned, and I heard that, and I said to the lady, my hostess, I said, "If my friend doesn't come in, I've got to leave. I can't stay here." No way I'm going to receive an award and the lady who came with me from Boston, to hold my hand and make sure I was all right, was not going to be allowed in. So of course that was taken care of. But it stood out in my mind, because all along the way, even though they were looking at us, none of the white ladies ever said anything... And here we have one black woman who had to be so cool. To be the guardian, the gatekeeper— Yes, the gatekeeper, as usual. And then it must have dawned on her that I was the recipient of the award, because when my hostess went back, and said to her, "She's with Mrs. Jackson, and she is her guest. And she is coming in. She's expecting some other guests," very discreetly, in other words, saying, they may be black. You know, in a nutshell. We walked in, and there were reporters from the Reader's Digest, the Washington Post, and New York Times, and McCall's... That's when I first met McCall folks, because they came back afterwards, and they were all there. And we were the only black people at that time in the room, except for a bartender, because they had a bar. And I'll never forget that experience. Because I walked up to get a martini, and I was drinking martinis then, and he was just beaming. And I spoke with him, and I said to him, "How are you?" He said, "I'm fine." He said, "Are you the recipient of the award today?" And I said, "Yes." He said, "Well, I am so proud." And you could tell he was. So he was there fixing me some whopping martinis. [Laughter] But it made me feel good, you could tell that he was just as pleased and proud. He said, "I want you to know," he said, "I'm proud." He didn't go into shock. That's right, he didn't. And he was beautiful. But it just meant so much, you know, I could tell it meant a lot to him, and it really kind of made my day. And they finally, Mr. Lindsay and Ann and her mother came in, and we sat around and I met all these various dignitaries. And finally we went upstairs to the grand ballroom, and there had to be at least 3500 women attending this luncheon. Thirty-five hundred women. 'Cause I was invited, I 83﻿always think about it, after I made my speech... Who was the guy who was head of HARYOU at that time? CG: Kenneth Clark? EJ: No, after Ken. The black guy...quite skinny, wore glasses, I can't think of his name. That's terrible. I'm telling you, I'm getting old, I can't remember names. It's awful. But we had attempted to hook up, this is for HARYOU in terms of getting money, and it was really quite a... And he was there; as I looked out into the audience, my friends who came from Boston had front tables, these two tables. But the room was packed. There must have been about twenty-five of us at the head table. And I got up. And...had given me this beautiful... from the gang in Boston, this beautiful handkerchief. Because I'm very emotional. And she had said, "Ellen, when they present the award, don't start crying. Remember. But don't bring out a kleenex," like I keep this kind... She said, "Use your lovely linen handkerchief, and don't do this or that, because you'll smear your make-up," and I wasn't used to wearing make-up. CG: Right. Ej: "Dab your eyes." So all I can remember, I could feel my eyes welling up, you know and I looked down and she was sitting there, very discreetly, doing like this, because I was just getting ready to go just like this with my hand, smear across. And I took my little handkerchief, and I dabbed very lightly around the eyes. [Laughter] That was funny. And I said to her afterwards, "Were you all proud of me? I can't even remember the back of my hand, and do what I'm used to doing." But I guess that speech, I still have that copy, I really will get those out and... After that, I was asked if I would come over, they would pay for an extra day, because I was going to fly right back, and speak to the women's council of the United Nations. And then when we got back upstairs... Oh! It was my first time at Playboy, they took me to the Playboy Club in New York, we went out on the town— CG: The National Council of Women took you to the Playbody Club? EJ: Mr. Lindsay and the people from Boston... CG: Oh, okay. Ej: it was my first time in a Playboy Club. That was really interesting. Then we came back, and we were going to order dinner for some of the people from Boston, and a few of the friends from New York. And we called downstairs and ordered dinner, and then about half an hour 84﻿or so later, the tap on the door. We opened the door, and there are about five waiters and the hotel chef, and flowers and candles with these two long tables...rolling, because the suite was enormous. There must have been seven of us who were going to dine in my room, in my suite, and they rolled this table in, and he stayed, and the waiters stayed throughout the whole meal. With towels, you know, and they stayed... And that had never happened to me before. So I couldn't even eat. I would, you know, just lift... If I so much as lift a glass and drink something, they would be there pouring... And there was, of course moire complimentary champagne, and oh, it was unbelievable. My girlfriend and I always talk about that...and she's really quite a dear friend, our kids grew up together, our families are very close. Her name is Inez Ashley. I keep saying my girlfriend, her husband was the head of, was the regional director of, what was it called, CSA, Community Service Administration, for this region, Ivan Ashley. CG: This was Ivan Ashley? EJ: Yes. And I remember we came back to Boston the next day. So I was really very tired. And she said, "Gee, you know, the Exodus gang wants to have a little party or something for you." No, she didn't tell me a party. She said, "Gee, Ellen, we got to go by and tell the Exodus gang what a wonderful time we had." And I said, "Well, okay." I said, "Well, we can do that." And she said, "But you look terrible." She said, "You really must go get your hair done." And I said, "Why do I have to go get my hair done just to go see the Exodus gang?" You know, no big thing. So she said, "I just think you better go get your hair done." She said, "Nobody will want to see you. You've been out representing us, and all of this and that. When we hit Boston, right on the front page of the Globe was, you know, "Local Leader Receives National Award." And the Globe had a beautiful write-up on it, and it was on the front page. And so I just couldn't understand why this girl wanted me to go get my hair done. CG: You should have figured that out right... EJ: That's how naive I was. I said, "Look, I'm going home to see my husband and my kids. And if I feel like I have time," I said, "I will go to the hairdresser." So as life had it, we stopped in the cab to Estelle's. And it was very interesting. Because those were the days when all the community agency leaders, the civil rights leaders, Tom Atkins, Lovell Dyett, Dexter Eure, you name 'em, John Bynoe, everybody would stop. They used to have this thing from four to seven, and it was called "Happy Hour." They would stop. Leland Nelson, Charlotte Nelson, they weren't married at that time, but everybody. Otto Snow-den, everybody would congregate at Estelle's... 85﻿CG: Was this four to seven? EJ: From four to seven. These were the good days, back in the sixties, when Estelle's was a place that you could go to. And she said, "Let's stop and look... I kind of want to speak to... Let's stop in there." And as it was, it was just about four-thirty. And I remember John Bynoe, and Lem Wells, who was then working for Mayor Collins as an affirmative action officer for Boston City Hospital to help the hospitals, and he was still very active in NAACP, and now in New York working... He's been sick, but was working, he's very active in Urban League and NAACP here in Boston. And Lem Wells was in there, and John Bynoe, and they bought a magnum, and there was the champagne again. "Ellen's back in Boston. We've got to show her our appreciation for getting this award for Boston." So they ordered a bottle of champagne. And somebody else came in. So by the time we left there, it must have been about six o'clock. So I said, "Now I know I can't go to the hairdresser. I've got to go home." So we got to the house. And then my husband, who I expected to be a little upset because I hadn't come right home, said, "Gee, Ellen, you better go to the hairdresser." So I said, "What is this hairdresser business?" Right. So finally I said, "Well, okay." I said, "I really don't feel like going to the hairdresser. We're just going down to Judy and Bryant's, who live right down the street." I knew where the gang was going to congregate. And there was just a few of us getting together. So I said, "Well, I'll go to the hairdresser." So I went to the hairdresser. And I did change my clothes, luckily. And I got to Judy and Bryant's, and they must have had about 150 folks there. And there were more flowers, and they gave me a beautiful watch, and you know how poor they are, but they were so happy they gave me this wrist watch. 'Cause they said, "You're traveling for us, and you don't even own a watch. You don't even know what time it is," in which case you don't even know the time. "We can't have our representative floating around the country with no watch." So I got my first Longine watch, and I still have that beautiful watch. Okay. And we got down there and there were long-stemmed roses and all. So they were saying, "Well, we're going to..." There were hors d'oeuvres and drinks, and we just had a good time. We told them again what had happened, and all, and everybody was passing around the plaque, the book. And finally Bryant said to me, "Gee, Ellen," he says, "We've got to make a stop." And I said, "Where are we going?" He said, "Well, we're going to have a little thing down at Estelle's." And I said, "Well, I was at Estelle's earlier." "Gee," he said, "some of the gang is going to meet us down there." He said, "We've got to get down there." 86﻿I didn't know at that time that there had been a phone call, and John Tinker had called them, and what I found out later is that they had closed off the whole club for a big community party which they were hosting for me. And it was a surprise. So when we pulled up in about five cars, okay, in front of Estelle's people were lined up on the sidewalk talking about, "Well, we can't get in there tonight. It's a private party tonight." And Webster Lewis had just come to Boston, and was still studying at the Conservatory, but Webster was a very good friend, and he was playing part time with a small little group at Estelle's. And we walked in, and he started playing "Exodus," the theme song from Exodus. And all these people, oh, there must have been about 400 people in Estelle's. So once my party got in, they had one whole side with the tables and flowers and food, and, you know, the regular plastic trash barrels? Well, it was full of small split champagnes. They were just giving out, they were coming out... Two people were holding these barrels with this champagne in it. And we just partied hard. [Laughter] We partied hard. And we didn't even have enough sense to go home, then. We went to one of my girlfriend's who was a soul cook specialist in the group. We still kind of congregate at her house. And got to her house after that, and she had fixed pigs' feet, and ham, and fried chicken, and greens, potato salad. So a very small group of us went back to her house. And I guess we went home about seven o'clock that morning, the next morning. My husband and I, I'll never forget. CG: Sort of like a regular rite of passage... EJ: It was, like a wedding, or christening. It was unbelievable. Well, I think it was that everybody felt as though they had a part of it, were part of it, and wanted to celebrate. But we just had a good time. I remember the waitress trying to get through the crowd, because people were coming up to the table to extend their congratulations, or say hi, and... CG: Laying on hands... EJ: That's right, you know. And the poor lady was trying to get through...Margot, I'll never forget. She was a lovely waitress, an old timer. You know, old timers who know their job, and do it with style. And she was trying to weave, and keep her smile through this crowd. And one of our gang just took the tray from her, and said, "I'll deliver the drinks for you, 'cause you can't get through here." You know, there were just so many people. They were dancing in the aisles, and it was just crazy. But it was fun, it was really a lot of fun. So, that was like, you know, I guess toward the end of the week and you had 87﻿the weekend to rest up, and back with the buses again Monday morning, and business... And the thought of raising $1350 was like, was very... You know, the interesting side of that whole thing was that the year that I got, I think it was the second year because...oh, I don't know what's wrong with me. She died, she wrote a book on nature, what was her name... CG: Rachel Carson? EJ: Rachel Carson had received, thank you, she had received the award the year before. I was the second person. But after that, the award...what came with the award besides the plaque and all of that, was a $5000 gift. CG: Stipend? EJ: And I said, "My God, why didn't they wait one more year before they gave it to me?" Given me $5000. You know. We didn't get any money. But it was interesting that after that, it did, you know, carry with it a $5000 gift. CG: Oh, so you didn't get the $5000? EJ: That year. 'Cause Exodus could have used that money. CG: You could have used that money. EJ: Oh, my God. Very frankly, we would have split it half and half. CG: So you were the second person after Rachel Carson? EJ: That's right, that's right. CG: All right. So that was 1969? EJ: Right. CG: That's incredible. What else was happening then? Well, Exodus would have had its regular routine, it was still finding spots for children to go— EJ: We were still finding spots — CG: Still raising money every week to pay for those buses? EJ: That's right. It wasn't long after that, I guess, that Chris Clark, who wrote the book, what's it...she wrote the book, she's a lawyer, out of Philly, and Mary Randall, and approached Mary, and she has a book, oh, it's about manners, it's called... 88﻿CG: Oh, how to treat black people? EJ: That's right. CG: Yes, that etiquette book. I don't remember the exact title, but I remember that book... EJ: Okay. You know what I'm talking about. CG: Right. How to behave around black folks, right? That book of etiquette for white people. EJ: Yes, for white people. They wrote that book. They came to Boston, and I'll never forget. Because we were getting, there were always constant threats, even in a big city. People were always threatening me... CG: Really? At that time? EJ: Oh, sure. And we'd get obscene phone calls, and hate letters, and all that, and tapes in the mail, you know, about the operation, and you know, racism was prevalent. I mean, there was no question. CG: You know, that's an aspect that has never really been talked about. The fact that once you become visible like that... EJ: Oh, yes. Oh, my Lord, my phone was tapped, and the whole bit. I still have the remnants of an old rusty camera, posted on the telephone wire pole and pointed right at my house. Oh yeah, oh yeah. It was very clear that they were really trying to see if they could identify any kind of... CG: Communists... EJ: That's right. Affiliation with me of the organiza- tion to, of course, discredit it. But it got to a point that I was never without a male escort whenever I went to speak, to raise money in any of the outlying communities. Exodus had its own, by that time it was able to afford a wagon, and we had a wagon, and I did have...I don't really want to call them bodyguards. But in a sense I was never allowed to go on any speaking engagements and I was driven from my home to work. I mean, that's how serious... CG: And here this, the people in Exodus just took it upon themselves to make sure you were protected. EJ: Oh yes, the men. That's right, the fathers. And there's one young man we hired after a while specifically for that. His name was Ralph Trotman, who is still a security officer for the Boston School System. 89﻿CG: Trotman. EJ: Trotman, Ralph Trotman. And it was unbelievable. CG: That's incredible. EJ: And I remember the day... CG: A community has to protect you, because... EJ: No one else will protect you. Yes. You know, because of what's happening right now. Are you through on that tape? CG: No, let me just end this tape, right now. EJ: That's what I was saying, is that the bodyguard busi- ness, or this male escort, Ralph Trotman, Chris Clark and Marion were... Marion who I knew, but at that point didn't know all that well, we had been in each other's companies in various kinds of demonstrations, rallies, and meetings. But I didn't know her well. They came to visit me at Exodus, and I'll never forget. They had a guy with them, and the way the office was situated was, it was a long storefront, and the men had fixed it up very nice. We had panelled and decorated it; it was one of the best-looking offices on the strip. In fact, all of the other interagency meetings at that time, which were held on Tuesdays, were held at our office. CG: And this was all done by the men of the group? EJ: Oh yes, the fathers of the children in Exodus, and other volunteers. And several of the guys were on a B shift, so they would come and get the kids off in the morning anyway, help us get the buses off. Frank Silva, who worked at MIT, worked the four-to-twelve shift at MIT, and Ralph at that time, well, he was full time for us, I forgot he had... Well, we had a guy who used to be our postman, and he resigned from the Postal Service and came to work for Exodus and then we sent him off to New York, and he went on to school...and has just moved, you know, up and up and up. So most of the guys, including women too, who were involved in Exodus, were able to be stimulated and motivated to go back to school, or to pursue better jobs. And Donnie Harris, Kennie Clark's son-in-law, had always wanted to write that kind of history of what, and where the parents or the originators of Exodus ended up. Because there were several, like Jeanette Bowen, who was a teacher of Afro-American history down at Lowell, and now is a teacher, certified teacher in the Boston public schools, and Audrey Butler. I could go on. 90﻿But the point I want to make is when Chris and Marion came to see me, several of the men were around, and they walked in, no one knew them, and asked for Ellen Jackson. And they said, "Why do you want to see her?" You know, I mean, we were that paranoid, because things were really kind of crazy. And finally, after a lot of interrogation, and making sure that they weren't some of the "plants," because there were even black plants, as you recall, in those days, people who were sitting in your meetings who were actually reporting back out. So they were escorted back to my office, and they talked to me about this particular program that was not quite the same program the NCNW, the National Council of Negro Women, with Dorothy Height, had going. But it was going to be a similar kind of program. It was going to be called, "Black Women's Community Development Foundation." And they were funded by the Miller family of Indiana, the big tractors, I can't even think, you see them on all the... CG: Caterpillars? EJ: No, it'll come to me. My Lord, you see them all over the country. CG: Mack? EJ: Mack truck? What is it? The Miller Foundation... Oh, my Lord, this is terrible. The big yellow trucks, they are everywhere, but they...big haul, part of the Teamsters and all that. But anyway, they were the foundation. The owner was Irwin Miller, and the foundation was called the Miller Foundation. And Jim Joseph, who is now with the federal government, was on the board. Myrlie Evers was on, Medgar Evers's wife was on the board; Jean Fairfax from the Legal Defense Fund in New York, was on the board. Bill Sorenson, Ted Sorenson's brother, was a member of the board. And they had approached me to come to, to move to Washington, to more or less develop and design, and to program, develop programs for this organization. And basically the philosophy or the theme was going to, the objective was to identify community groups and agencies that were involved in social change, across the country, minority groups. And I was very interested in that, but you know, one of the problems, as I looked at it, was moving to Washington. At that time my husband was working for Sylvania, and it was a semi-skilled kind of position, and I was concerned about what that meant to him, a move to Washington, in terms of a job, and of moving my kids from school. Not having any family, you know, and really not having any kind of collateral to get started, it was a difficult kind of decision. But having a curious and aggressive nature, I said, "Well, let me come down for the interview, and see 91﻿if it's something that I'm interested in." So I went to Washington, and I met with the board. And they were more than enthusiastic about my considering the job, and really wanted me to not worry about a job for my husband; they would even help find a job and a house for us. But we struck an agreement that I would commute, which was the biggest mistake that I ever made, in terms of fairness to them, and also fairness to my family. However, for the period that I was there, which was a little over a year, as the first executive director for the Black Women's Community Development Foundation, and I think the gal, Ina Smith, who took my place... CG: Ina Reed Smith... EJ: ...was then identified. And she, I think she may have lasted two years, and I'm not sure whether or not they're still...I think they are in existence. Many things came, kind of spun off from it, the Black Child Development Institute was really founded by the Black Women's Development Foundation, but then it kind of spun off and went on its own, and got incorporated on its own. Because it started right in the same building that we were located in, on Connecticut Avenue. But one of the problems for me was just that, trying to keep a pulse on Exodus, because I still was in a sense the director, even though it was part time and we had put in place a person by the name of Audrey Butler, who was kind of voted by the board, Exodus board, to be the executive secretary and do the day-to-day kind of management that was necessary. But I was responsible for signing the checks and making, you know, those kinds of real long-range decisions that had to be made. So that meant keeping, and touching base with them when I did come to Boston. And then of course, again, my husband was really left, very frankly, with the upbringing of the children, and getting them to school, and getting them fed, dressed, and ready for their daily activities. And he was very good in doing that for quite some time. He used to have a saying that, "Well, I don't really see my wife," he said, "we pack a bag on one day, beginning of the week, and she leaves for Washington," and from Washington, I would go to the coast, the West Coast, or to the South, because I was traveling all...three-fourths of that job required travel. Visiting, staying a few days in a city, meeting the people who were involved in the organization, helping them to identify, develop a proposal that I then would bring back and recommend to my board, and then helping to get matching funds from the various federal agencies on the Hill. So it was a fantastic job, and if I had sense, I would have really just cut the umbilical cord with Exodus at that point, and really not been inundated with all 92﻿that. Because it was difficult. Then with my family, naturally, what we would have done, was to take the chance and move to Washington. And I guess my career course, or path, might have changed slightly. And I anticipate, and I really, I think it would have. It's a conjecture, but I really do think of the various opportunities that I was exposed to. Because it's not long after I had, I took up that position, I received a call from the Litton company, and they were interested in me coming to the West Coast to become the vice-president of women's affairs, the Women's Division. And they had a house ready, and the whole bit. Now that was the only one that our family was really excited about, you know. "Let's go to California," you know, and the whole bit. But I guess I'm still...I guess I'm a homespun kid, because as old as I am, I have never lived outside of Boston, I don't have any desire to move from the area that I live. I've always lived in upper Roxbury. I just bought a house that was right around the corner. CG: Oh, nice. Do you think that maybe the kind of investment that the community had on you, and the way it communicated to you had something to do with that? EJ: Well, I think that when I say cutting the umbilical cord, it was my cutting the umbilical cord. The community was certainly a family for me, I really felt very protected. I felt that I belonged to the community in a real spiritual way that was very, very comfortable. It was like being in, I guess, the mother's womb, you know, very warm. There was no place I couldn't go, and it was family. Everywhere in the community, you know. In a way it was good for me, but it did have impacts and not all positive impacts, on my family, my husband, on marriage. Because I wasn't theirs any more, and in many ways I belonged to a lot of people. And it was very difficult for my husband to deal with, and he did, because he's just that kind of man. But at a point in our lives, alone, longer down the line, we had to make a gut decision that this just was no way to live, you know, in terms of a marriage. And we are very good friends, and he is, and he would tell you that I am his best friend, he is mine. And even though we are separated, and have been for the last several years, I mean, there's the holidays, the birthdays, any occasion... I take care of his business, he takes care of my business, I mean, you know, the whole thing. We just don't live together. [Laughter] But the Washington experience was an experience, and that was a kind of demanding experience simply because that meant on Wednesdays, my staff in Washington wanted their paychecks. So I had to fly to Washington, make sure I was in Washington at least one day a week to sign payroll and take care of bills. We got paid every two 93﻿weeks, but I had to make sure...then get back to Boston and make sure the payroll here was taken care of. And then make sure my own bills were being paid. And again, it's not only just the black and poor... Well, it is black women in this society, which was then what we called a changing society, and had a very large conference to speak to that issue, the role, the dual role that we had to play. And it certainly affects, and I know that if I had had maybe less number of children, I might have done certain things differently, I may not even have gotten involved in Exodus. If I had not been married, I may not have gotten involved. I may have been more involved, but in another way, in the struggle. CG: More in a professional career path... EJ: Path... that's correct. CG: ...rather than in a community commitment kind of path. EJ: That's right. So it has a lot of implications and ramifications, in terms of what decisions or which course you choose. And I sometimes reflect on it, by myself, and always in a kind of musing way, just to consider where I may have ended up, okay? I don't think I've done too bad, but I think I would even have done some other things that were some, well, I guess, goals of my own and ideals of my own as a child, as a young woman coming along, in terms of challenge and the future, a career... CG: A professional career. EJ: A professional career. And so I did take on that job, and it was a hardship on, I think in fairness, to the organization, and me. And we did do some fun things. I had an assistant director... CG: What were some of... EJ: Oh, we were involved in the guilting bee, the Missis- sippi quilting bee, we funded them. CG: Okay, now this is 1970 you're talking about. EJ: This is 1970. We went to Mississippi, which was a lot of fun...involved with women who were making various beautiful cute quilts that were then sent up to Lord and Taylor's and sold for X amount, hundreds of dollars, and percentages were going back. But they needed a place, because they used to meet in various homes to do that. And this was a social kind of gathering for them. But their work, their handiwork and the beauty of those quilts were such that it was a chance for them to make some 94﻿money. So we were able to get certain types of equipment that they needed which could, you know, help them move along faster. And they had, in this development, a place where, like an old broken down community center, we were able to help them to rehab that, and to then find brokers to sell those quilts up here. And we were in another part of Mississippi with John Buckington, who is a community organizer in Greenville. Yes, that was in Greenville, Mississippi. And we got very involved with that community organization, and assisted them in just doing...voter education, voter registration, and again, talking about economic development with them. We got involved in a housing project program in Chicago. We were involved in a community agency in Ohio, in Cleveland, around the Cuyahoga County area, they needed money for new programs to get off the ground, seed money. Mainly our money was seed money, to help them get off the ground, and then to help identify areas in the federal government that might... And there was a lot of money around in those days. So many of them were able to, and we were able, in terms of technical assistance, help them to put their proposals in the appropriate form and format to be reviewed. And naturally, the board itself consisted of the type of people who had reputations already, established reputations, who could pick up the phone, or at least guide us, as to who we should approach on behalf of these groups. CG: Because when you say people like Jean Fairfax... EJ: Oh, sure, sure. Myrlie Evers and Ted Sorenson. Yeah. So it was a very good experience for me. I went to California, I went to Oakland, and got involved in a couple of groups. I went to Watts, and got involved in a Harambee group, in helping fund Harambee... CG: I'm glad you're talking about this, because I've heard a couple of references, sort of fleeting references to the Black Women's Community Development Foundation, but people didn't really know what it was. Thought it was some kind of government plot... Did you run into that at all? EJ: No, I never did, actually, because it was very clear, frankly, that Jean, Marion, and Chris, who were, I guess, members of NCNW, didn't feel as though they were really answering the questions, or responding to the grassroots. And that what Black Women's Community Development Foundation attempted to do was really talk about grassroots groups, okay, and to fill that vacuum, that void. But we did have a lot of good contacts. CG: Did you have a good relationship with the National Council? 95﻿EJ: We met with them immediately after we got incorporated. We went to New York and met with Dorothy Height, to make sure that they understood that we were not trying... We would never, I mean, in that organization, there would be no way that we could do it, anyway. But we were not really... I won't say that we were at opposite spectrums, but at least the strategy and the constituents were going to be different. And the programs that we were talking about were people who were attempting to pull their own selves up. It was more or less to provide seed money and assistance... CG: Technical assistance. EJ: ... to grassroots groups as opposed to women who already in a sense, made it... CG: Knew what they were doing. EJ: That's right, and had some sense of direction. So we met with them. And I don't think, unfortunately, that the Development Foundation ever really got to that point, because it really required a lot more time. It was a national community agency. That's the best way to put it. It was really a national grassroots community agency, which meant that, first of all, we needed a staff. There were only really three of us, two of us actually, myself and the assistant director, Sarah Herbin, who moved up from Greensboro. She was from Greensboro, and was commuting. CG: Was she a black woman also? EJ: Black woman. Fantastic woman, who had been formerly with the American Friends Service Committee. She moved down. She was an older woman, very savvy, and in fact, when I resigned, she became acting director for quite a while. And then Inez came in, and I think she...I know she did, because I...she resigned. And her husband was still in Greensboro, but she used to have a small apartment in Washington. CG: Oh, so she was having a commuter marriage too. EJ: oh, yes, she had a commuter marriage. And for her it might not have been so bad, because she didn't have any children. And she and her husband had been married for quite some time. So they understood, there was kind of an understanding there, you see, which was not quite the same. I was still, I was, oh my Lord, just in my early thirties when I got interested, and it was no time to be leaving your husband and four kids, or five kids, you know. As I said, my husband used to say, "We pack a bag in the first part of the week," and I would walk out the 96﻿door and then, at the end of the week, when I would come in, he would just slide out a new, a fresh load of clothes in the suitcase, and I'd slide in the dirty clothes in the suitcase. [Laughter] He said, "That's about the best I can tell you about Ellen." [Laughter] CG: It's funny. Someone read an article on commuter mar- riages and they found that blacks had proportionately more than whites. EJ: Oh yeah, yeah. He'd say, "The contact we have is when we touch the suitcase." Exchange suitcases, the dirty clothes for the clean clothes. But on one of my trips back to Boston, it was very interesting. I was at a meeting, and Tom Winship actually said to me, "Are you still commuting back and forth?" And I was beginning, very frankly, not to feel well at that time, it turns out my sickness was beginning. I didn't know what it was, but it was really taking a toll on me. And he said, "That has to be a lot," based on, you know, his knowledge and aware ness of what I was into. And he said, "It seems to me you ought to take some time off, and maybe, you know, take a fellowship over at Harvard." And I said I would be interested in doing that. He said, "Well, let's get some people to support you." And he said, "Would you be interested in the Kennedy School Institute of Politics?" And I said, I certainly would. Because it would be a good opportunity to review right after the Exodus experience. And I met with, of course, the members of the board, the executive committee, and at that time, Adam Yarmolinsky was the chairman of that board. And of course they accepted me. Vernon Jordan was there at the time. Vernon and I were the first two black people on a full-time fellowship. They had their small six-week Institute seminars, but we had year fellowships. It's much easier for a black man, or a man, to continue to keep in touch with that. But I don't...they still, you know, I did go to the dedication. I was invited to all the big parties and all that junk. But that's the best thing it does for you, it gets you to be involved with a whole lot of folks. And I think it was my third time meeting Jackie Onassis, and the whole crowd. [Laughs] But that was an experience, because David Broder from the Washington Post was there at the same time. I really had, we really had big plans. He was going to really help me in a sense to do the research, not do the research, but just kind of put it together. Doris Kearns was there as a Fellow and she was writing a book on Lyndon Johnson. And just being there, however, was a burden, because people would constantly call, you know, knowing that I was back in Boston. Because I resigned then. 97﻿CG: At the Black Women's Community Development... Now this is 1971. EJ: '71, so I really didn't give it a chance, because I was still being called on to do community issues. So that I really enjoyed it. I did conduct... CG: That phone ringing early in the morning. EJ: Oh, Lord, yes. And then I'd get over there, and they'd come over, "Well, you don't have to come here, we'll come over there." But I did have my class, I ran my class on the politics of education. And around forty people came, including Ken Haskins, who was a student. All of a sudden, I was a student of Ken's and then Ken ended up being a student of mine. Or I was a student first, and then I ended up being a student of his. Because he had just come out to go to the Ed School from Washington... CG: Oh, he'd come up from Washington, and now he's presi- dent of Roxbury Community College. EJ: Now he's president of Roxbury Community College, but he was a student in my class, and I ended up, when I went back for my master's, taking a course from him, with him, over at the Ed School, which was very interesting. We had about forty people, and we met weekly, and we had various speakers come in. And they talked about the politics of education, how it impacts upon the black community. So I did that for a year, as a CBS Fellow, and received my certificate from them. And I liked it. And I decided I would enroll back into school. So I applied for a master's program at Harvard and was accepted, and got my master's... CG: Now what year was this? EJ: It was 1972. CG: Okay, 1972. And how long did it take you to get your master's? EJ: Oh, a year, a year and a half. I got my master's certificate. I really took, about '73, because '72 and '73, I was working on... I was going to go into the doctoral program, but I got sick. I really got sick in '73 and I was put in the hospital for a while, quite a while. CG: What was wrong? EJ: Well, I had a malignancy, a cancer. 98﻿CG: Oh, my goodness. So you, oh, you're really improved then. EJ: And so then, in that year between '12... Well, it started while I was in the master's program. And I'll never forget Bill Owens, because he used to have to take me to the hospital, and he knew. And he used to, I'd get sick in class and... CG: oh, he was in class with you? EJ: Same time. Virgil Wood was in class, John Young... who else was in that class at that time? Erna Ballantine? CG: This is the master's class now. EJ: Yes. We were all together. And that whole class went on you know, into the doctoral program. I couldn't. I ended up with my advanced graduate... CG: With advanced graduate studies. In addition to the master's. EJ: That's right. But I took sick that year, and I had to have two operations in '72/'73, and I went back in '75, '74/'75, I'm sorry. I was at Freedom House when I took sick again. No, my last operation... My last operation was in '74. CG: And you just, you kept on going in spite of all of this. EJ: I've got, full of maps...from the back to the front, up and down. There ain't no more that they can cut out. They have cut everything out there is to cut out. But I've been in remission for quite a while. CG: That's good. So Bill Owens used to take you to the hospital. EJ: oh yes. Bill used to take me to the hospital. CG: It's interesting, these little networks here, isn't it? EJ: Don't forget, he was running for office, and I had many a long meeting with him. CG: So what did you do after you got your master's? EJ: Well, as I said, I took sick. I really didn't do anything. I went to work for the State Department of Education during that time. 99﻿CG: This is in '73. EJ: '73. In fact, we had a group... Neil Sullivan was still the commissioner of education. And he was an adjunct professor at the Ed School. And he became very close to several of us who were in the program. And he and I, I had just come out of the hospital. And they called me and said, "We would like you to consider a job. It won't be taxing. We would like for you to be project director of Title IV," which was technical assistance for desegregation for racial imbalance. And your staff, you can select. And I got all my friends who had just got their masters from Harvard to come over. There was a white guy who used to hang around, Paul, and Greg Rich was...Greg at Northeastern. He was a research intern for us, because he was still in school, and a gal from Springfield by the name of Dee Sworn. So they used to call us the "Harvard Kiddie Korps." And Erna Ballantine... CG: The "Kiddie Korps?" The Kiddie Korps?" EJ: The "Kiddie Korps." K-K, too, H-K-K. Neil Sul- livan's Harvard Kiddie Korps. And Charlie Brennan was the director of the Bureau of Equal Educational Opportunity, and I was project director. And he had also been graduated from Harvard, and was working on his doctorate. So the whole office... CG: Sounds like a plot. EJ: Well, that's what they thought it was. It was a plot for all these folks. And they called it, Neil Sullivan's Harvard Kiddie Korps. And Erna Ballantine worked for me for a while as a consultant, and she was still, you know, getting her degree. So I started off, actually, I remember the very first meeting I went to, the gang came to get me. I guess, as I say, it's because I've always felt part, you know, so close. And they came to get me, and I was still in a wheelchair at the time. I went to the first meeting that they had of the Bureau, and everyone kind of looked at me and said, "You sure this lady can do this work? I mean, she can't even stand." You know. And it's funny, because that reminds me of when I first came to work here. And, it ended up that was a good experience. And that was the first suit, you know, that the state brought against the city for not complying with the racial imbalance law. And then the hearings, with the masters...not the present masters for the federal case, but the masters for the state case. And the master then referred it back to Judge Sullivan, and he felt that in some ways the state had taken on too much responsibility, was too aggressive in some areas. Because Kiernan had cited, the board cited Boston, they decided 100﻿that at that time Springfield moved a lot more rapidly in terms of compliance. CG: Which is... They just did it. EJ: They did, they certainly did, and without any real, any violence at all, minimum violence. And they ruled that both parties needed to go back to the drawing board. It was just at that point that a federal suit came down, a federal decision came down from Garrity. And because it was so late, what he said, and in his opinion, in terms of remedy, rather, is that we would implement the plan that the state, which we were architects, in our particular bureau of, for that very first year, as a start. And then the School Department officials and the State Department officials could get together and develop a plan. As you know, it ended up that we never...and I, by that time I was getting ready to leave, because Muriel and Otto asked me to come to Freedom House. That's when I left, I started working in 1974. CG: They pulled you back into the community. EJ: Right back, yes. And I had sworn I wasn't coming back. I know one thing, I would never go back again. [Laughs] CG: Oh, what was the difference working for the state, rather than working for the community? EJ: Well, I'm just tired. Basically, it takes, it's a lot out of you, not that this job isn't too, but you just... your life is just not your own. And I think, as my doctor tells me all the time, my lifespan was being cut in half by the life that I was living as a community worker. And he said, "You won't live to be forty," at that time, you know, if you don't cut down. I was getting less than three hours sleep a night. And that was my own commitment. But, you know, it was that kind of open-door policy. And it's rough, physically. And I jumped right into, with a group of... The thing is, is that we had talked about it through a group that was formed prior to the coalition, Black Advocates for Quality Education, which used to meet at homes, included people like Dexter Eure, Ruth Batson, and Betty Johnson, and Jane Edmonds was in it at that point, and Joe Mitchell... CG: Now what year was this? EJ: This was in '73. This was just a group, you know, we just got together and talked about, you know, the significance. . .the school issue. CG: The concerns and the issues. 101﻿Yes, around education. Terry Brown Lewis, Webster's ex-wife, a gang of us. Talking about school? That's correct. And you know, we'll be with her all next weekend in Washington. She's godmother of one of my kids, also. We talked about the fact that we, you know, never had a flow of communication or information about what was happening. We were always reacting. So the thought of the Freedom House Institute on Schools and Education really kind of blossomed out of, grew out of some issues that were surfacing, discussions that surfaced during the meetings of the Black Advocates for Quality Education. You know, we were frankly talking about research and development which would disseminate, after students like yourself, or people who were working on doctorates who wanted to do research. We would try and gather the kind of information, and hold the kinds of forums, so we could foreact instead of react...and talked about a review, an educational change, but in a more positive posture, as opposed to usually reacting to something that policy makers had already come up with, and that, in many instances, was not at all conducive to our needs, and not at all sensitive to the plight of the black child in this large system, both financially and politically, and educationally. I mean, the key again, educationally. When we started the Institute, we found ourselves filling a void of information dissemination immediately, because we were the first group, in a sense, Freedom House had, through its Institute, to really pay people to spend twenty-four hours of their day working on educational issues only—in our community. And we had an educational specialist, you know, we had a tutorial director, but we had no one who was really, no part of, component of your organization, really spent their time and was paid to do that. And then, of course, Freedom House raised money, so that we had an adequate staff. And, as you know again, the rat race started all over again and the problems with desegregation. So that we never really were able to do what I had anticipated was going to be a very lovely, you know, educational research. You were going to have a think tank for the black community. Exactly. And I'm not at all complaining; I don't think that Muriel and Otto would complain, but it certainly was not what we had in mind. So you were back to the short hours and... 102﻿EJ: Sure. Four o'clock in the morning, then being at these various stages. Otto and I used to ride around, they'd be at these various stages, and make sure the youngsters were being picked up and there weren't people bothering them, or you know, whatever. CG: I remember one day I came to see you, some children had fallen under a bus, and you had to take them to the hospital. And then you had to come back and take your own kids to the hospital. EJ: That's right, to the hospital. Yes, remember? And then bring those parents together with Marion Fahey so she could explain what had happened, and what she was going to do, because that's when people began to make inquiries into the problems with the various bus companies. So it was, yes, four o'clock. And then, if something happened, I mean, folks would march on Freedom House and demand us to find out what was happening, what was wrong. CG: ...that nice empirical research that needed to be done so people could plan ahead... EJ: Yes, yes. And still...we did put some things out, but nothing like what we had hoped to do, Cheryl, nothing like we had hoped to do. CG: That is incredible. EJ: You know, I've got to get my... Because I think what would be very helpful to you in terms of the real chronological history is to get my books and... You remember I told you, a young man over at the Globe. and I've got to get my stuff back... I can't recall. What is his name? I don't know what's wrong with me today. CG: You can't remember names? EJ: Yes,...educational writer. Fletcher, Fletcher Roberts. And I think you could, you really can get a real sense of the historical, because it's kind of a... And I don't know whether I'm doing it purposely or subconsciously, but I seem to be blocking it out. CG: The exact chronology. EJ: Yes, yes. CG: But the events are there. EJ: Yeah. Some people, and a lot of people will say, "Remember..." and then I do. I'll say, "Oh, yes." But I haven't been able, I don't know why, but I haven't been able... Because there were good times as there have been 103﻿bad times, and there were some very, very touchy times for my family, I guess. So as much as it was good, I think the kids have suffered in some ways from it. So maybe I just find myself repressing almost... Almost 900...that's an exaggeration, but I mean, you would not be, I don't think you'd be surprised...young people that call, "I'm writing a paper, I'd like to talk to you about it." And I have to say no, I have to give it up, I can't do it. I can't do it, I really can't go through that. You know, kids who are in college, high school kids, people who are now doing research, you know, and I'd really have to go, I really have to refuse to do it. I didn't... After I finish with you, I'm leaving it alone, I'm not doing any more. And I really...you know, I really___it's a time that I'm really, really ready to let rest, and any time anybody else... You need to get away from it. Yes. And anytime anybody wants to do books, they can do it, and maybe someday I will really sit down with someone and write it up. Right now what I've started doing, which is very good for me, is I have really begun to take the clips and put 'em in order, chronological order, so you can see from the very first day what happened, you know, a lot I haven't said to you. They just fall in a sequence, on a month, year basis, just what was happening to me, to the organization, to the community, because I have a wealth of information, I really do. Let me just go back one second. Did Freedom House Institute on Schools and Education come out of these informal meetings with that group... That's right. We used to always meet. We used to meet once a week. And the reason we did it, because at that point there wasn't any real organization again dealing directly with educational issues. And many of us were involved in educational programs. Because there were so many in the community at that point. There was METCO--- Exodus--- That's right. That's right. When did Exodus... Exodus started before... It's the grandmother of them all. Right, but there was — The point is that we were — 104﻿That was before you joined this program... That was at, that was during, again that was '74. And that was during the deseg. But I'm talking about prior to that, many of us had moved off, like I went to Washington, and then came back and worked for the state. We didn't really have anything happening, but we had, like Jane had been elected to the School Committee... And there was a young man out in Medford that was on the School Committee, a black guy, and then of course, Betty was involved in EDCO. Ruth was still involved with Solomon Carter Fuller; we were all in NAA. You know, so we felt that we needed to come together and exchange information. So we just got together informally. We were very informal. But we called ourselves Advocates, Black Advocates for Quality Education. And we just thought about what we needed. And from that, Muriel and Otto really picked up the ball. With, I think, very frankly, the support of that group. This is needed, why don't we try and get it funded. And we did get it funded. Just establish it. And ironically, it was very funny, because as we look at the make-up, or the purposes and goals of justice in the original proposal that we developed, we found that white funders had a lot of problems with that kind of concept. And then we came back and said, "Gee, we need some money to keep the natives guiet..." And they had the money... But they really had some problems of us planning ahead, to get together and talk policies and do our own research. Black researchers, you know. Contracted, subcontracted, interning, work-study, whatever you want to call it, but picking out issues, doing surveys, and all of that. It was frightening to them because they knew that we would possibly begin to identify, uncover, information that we could use in a positive way, and challenge some of them with patterns and, that's right, that were in place at that time. But, you know, we were given a very lukewarm kind of supportive backing, and I think if it hadn't been that Freedom House was already receiving money from several of these foundations, and said that this has got to be part of our program from this point on, that it would never have gotten off the ground. But then immediately after school opened in '74, under desegregation, they were at our door, talking about whites helping out, we'll give you some money, including the federal government. [Laughs] Including the federal government. And it was very, very interesting. No other place. Nobody else wanted to manage things that way. They got the integration that they needed. 105﻿EJ: That's right, that's right. It was unbelievable. CG: That's an incredible story. EJ: Unbelievable. CG: What's the most dramatic confrontation you remember, in your days of living and working in the community? EJ: I think maybe the most dramatic was that I mentioned to you, the very first day the buses rolled for Exodus..-. CG: Right, when Louise Day Hicks came marching down the street... EJ: Marching down...hoping. [Laughs] "They don't have these transfers." A speech, lecture, to make sure that we understood that children would not be accepted because they don't have their yellow transfers. And, you know, she'd be willing to work something for the children. "We tried it your way and now we want to try it ours." And that event was one of the most dramatic confrontations, yes. CG: Listen, I wanted to ask you, because you were, this is the next step after... EJ: This is the next step... I was called, and asked if I would consider this... CG: Wait a minute, wait a minute, I'm going to turn this over now. CG: Let me now ask you, since the Freedom House Institute, you have come here to Northeastern University as the Affirmative Action Officer. How did you get here, what's your title, and what's it like? EJ: Well, I hold the distinction of being a full-fledged dean, which in this University is a 3.3, and is the third in line in the pecking order, from president, to vice-president, and dean. And also with the 3.3 classification, which applies to all faculty and administrators, and you have responsibility that... In all of those areas, and you're responsible for monitoring the affirmative action objectives of the university, as set down by the guidelines of the federal government. You also have to encourage the university to develop programs that will attract minority women, and of course, meaning more blacks for me, and to assist them in identifying some of the inherent problems that have, in a sense, kept minorities 106﻿from being considered, to sensitize them to negotiate with them, to mediate grievances, to attempt to... Well, I too, I'm in a sense a hearing officer, on a day-to-day basis, until it gets to a point where our own internal grievance procedures are exhausted. And it's my responsibility to notify the aggrieved party, that they still even though the university...whereas in some instances I have not been able to support the premise that it's a firm grievance...to notify the aggrieved party that they do have other outside resources, such as MCAD and EEOC, and OCR, and HEW, et cetera. CG: Do you handle grievances other than those... EJ: Any grievance. Handicap, equity, salary equity, Title IX, sex discrimination, age discrimination, all of that. All of it. The whole bit. This university is really very good in terms of the structure, the affirmative action office. People refer them to us. We do have a handicap coordinator who reports to us. We have a Title IX coordinator, they report to us. CG: Title IX is what? EJ: Is sex discrimination in athletics, female athletics. We are involved, we keep a tab on any number of...mainly the tradition was, we tried to help with research projects and identify monies specifically for increasing the numbers of minorities in graduate education programs, and at professional schools. Because it's a very low number. In fact, we just got a $300,000 grant from NIE, which I feel very proud about, because it was for the subject for advanced research and graduate studies for minorities, which in a sense suggests that minorities who come here for a year, and women, for a year, and do a sort of a, have a sort of sabbatical leave, but work on research and write. And in many instances, particularly in the South, you know, that's what keeps a lot of black men and women, from getting tenure, because they haven't had time to do their research and publish. But this is... CG: Oh, it's more a post-doctoral level. EJ: It's a more post-doctoral center for minorities and females. You just, it was just recently funded, and I'm on the, I helped with their proposals and also did an analysis for the president's office on the institutional relation... Because once the funding runs out we plan to keep it going. CG: Keep it going. EJ: Try to keep it going. And last year we had applied, when I first came here, they had applied for it. But what 107﻿happened was that Radcliffe got in, and Radcliffe got the money. It's called the "To increase the participation of minority persons and women in interdisciplinary research on education." And so we're just funded. CG: Good. EJ: You know what I'm talking about. And we have our planning committee set up, and I report directly to the president. Which is a little unusual, because most affirmative action officers report to somebody in line, and I don't. I do have, in fact, that's why I had to run down before our meeting. CG: Do you think that makes you somewhat structurally unigue as an affirmative action officer? EJ: Yes, it does, I know. Across the board. I belong to the National Association of Affirmative Action Officers, and they have asked me to run for president this year, and I refused to do that. I would be standing on my past history, I do know a lot of the people... I do, also sit now with the affirmative action officers from this region. We're broken up into regions, just like the federal government. Region I, includes Vermont, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and Connecticut. And it's Vermont where I speak to that conference, and we are co-hosting a reception with the Congressional Black Caucus in Washington. There are other formal activities that we do join in on. But most of my colleagues, counterparts report, are not... Well, there is a lot of co-mingling these days with affirmative action and personnel. In a sense, there should not be. Affirmative action officers need to monitor personnel. In many instances you will find affirmative action officers who are called EEO officers in personnel, and it's guite different. CG: I worked across the state at one point. An affirm- ative action officer was the head of personnel, and when you called her, she said, "Are you speaking to me as the affirmative action officer, or as the head of personnel?" And whenever you spoke to her as the affirmative action officer, and you'd complain, of course, she'd get testimony and respond as the head of personnel. EJ: It's very important that they work close together, but it's also important that they be separate. And they are separate here. Now if anybody was going to, at this university, restructure, which is the proposal, that we eventually possibly move really to have an expanded role... CG: Affirmative action officers have to be independent. 108﻿EJ: You have to be separate, independent. And you also must have the respect, and therefore titles are very important. Because I guess I have the unique distinction of being able to deal directly with the deans, most of whom are actually... CG: You're a peer of the deans. EJ: That's correct. I sit with them, I meet with the president... CG: At the deans' meetings. EJ: At the deans' meetings. I sit in joint executive vice-president, at the joint meetings of the executive committee, which is the vice-presidents and the deans. And you then have an opportunity, because, to really hear, and also you have input, at that level. Which is, then, really funnels down. And I don't want to at all downplay middle managers. Because the chairpersons of departments and professors are very important. But luckily we do have good relationships... Of course, you've got people who are always going to be bored with you. The funny thing about this job, they say, "What are they going to try on me today? What are they going to get over on my today," the paperwork, you know. And then, you know, finally I think, they realize that we really need the paperwork that they send. We research out. And they know now I think, very much, that they have to respect us as professionals. It's bad enough, and the job itself, the title affirmative action...is a very negative... It's perceived as a very negative kind of...because this is a position, particularly with white people who assume that affirmative action precludes qualified people. You know, try to bring in those who excel. Okay? And a nasty article that was written on Josie Alexander suggests the other day that she wasn't picked because she was the most qualified or capable, but she was picked because they were insistent that this follow the strictest guidelines of affirmative action. And I always have to, I might have a copy for you as you go out the door, if you don't, I'll get it to you...but always have to remember, constantly remind these professors and deans and chairpersons, and whenever we are conducting searches, that we're not suggesting to you that you should take unqualified persons. But don't tell me that in the interest of getting a qualified person, that you can't do affirmative action. Because there are qualified minorities, and they're out there. And you can do your job of getting your qualified person, and also do a global good faith effort, an aggressive good faith effort, with affirmative action outreach and recruitment. So we constantly have to keep that in mind, and again, I say that, 109﻿because I don't want to at all suggest that middle managers, or the faculty, naturally, are not cooperative. Because they are. They view themselves as academics and... And they don't want to, they're here to teach, and that's how I understand it, they're here to teach. They have a job, just like we do, and if we don't work together, they can't get to teach. So it would be best just to cooperate, right? CG: You have to be diplomatic. EJ: Yes. You have to really just be blunt, and tell them that this is not me, this office is not an office unto itself. It's, you know, here because the university voted it in, and because of the kind of funds that it gets, and the kind of student body that it has, dictates, according to the federal law, that they must have an affirmative action office. Except this university also voted for an EEO policy. And if they felt that they could not abide by that policy, they need to take it up with the board of trustees and the president. Because I was doing my job, and I was just another office, the same as they were, okay? But luckily, we seem to have, I think, now, a respect, command a respect, because we carry and perform in a professional manner. But I think the university gave us that opportunity through the president and the board of trustees, in terms of not housing us with personnel, not putting us in with the vice-president for administration. We have our autonomy. We do not go to, and I say this from fact, known fact, we have our own budget. Most affirmative action offices do not have a budget. I have my own budget, I submit my budget like every department in this university, up or down. I request a supplementary budget when I have to. I do not have to request permission to talk with anyone, I can hold up an appointment, and that is the biggest clout that we have. And right now, we're in the throes of reviewing salary equity between females and males. We are now in the process of...which is really reviewing tenure. We just tenured two black professors... and now we're in the beginning of a big fight, over a professor who was supposed to get tenure but did not. And they're using something negative that he said happened to him twenty-five years ago. That's why...again, I have to go down to see the president this afternoon, today or tomorrow, at two o'clock. Because they are denying tenure, and he threatened to bring this whole thing out in the open. Now when he was hired by...the university knew; the president does hope for me to review a little about his background. He has served not only the university, but the community at large as well. And certainly he has been a man of integrity and stature and of an example for young people. There's a double standard. And the reasons they are 110﻿using, some of them are not understandable. But we've got our... But we're really in agreement. And I think all will be well in that situation. The students support him, but apparently the college voted rejection. So that's a terrible situation. And the school itself has a terribly .. .we're dealing with a school, that we're talking about blue collar worker youngsters, who are pretty... CG: Just a sec. (Break) How similar or how different is being an affirmative action officer like being a community worker. How much of what you learned as a community worker is used in this kind of work? EJ: Oh, a lot. A lot. The only difference is that you do have time, a lot, you must keep a timetable... In terms of...a timetable. Things have to change. There's got to be visible change, which is consistent with the goals and timetables as set in the guidelines of EEOC. Secondly, you do come with, at least on the individual basis of the university's commitment, with the president and the trustees' blessings in hand, right behind you. You must have that kind of support, as opposed to saying, "I'm out there fighting the cause" with just the community that has no clout. CG: No power. EJ: No power. People will, they do know that you do come representing the president and the board of trustees. They listen a little better, and they know... The thing is, you're talking about money. What you're talking about...of any kind, but you're talking about dollars. Because the university is not about to put out money for crazy cases, and you see, once I can't solve a problem, that is mediate and solve a problem, resolve a problem to at least a mutual agreement between the parties, then that costs the university money. And as much as I can keep us out of court, and keep the general counsel for the university away from here, the better it is. And as I say sometimes to some of the deans and the faculty members, "Look, you know, I can't recommend to the president pay, that they use any money on this. It's just crazy." You realize it's the president and the trustees that want the schools always to operate in the black. They start paying retaining fees for an attorney, because when we go downtown, it's, you know, going to cost us money. We'd better come up with something that we can settle in house. Because it certainly doesn't look good if I have to keep calling Paul Pratt, and tell the president that Paul Pratt's in trouble with his faculty again, because he's made sexist remarks or...you know, or something of that nature. I just use that as an example. But, I think that the difference is that you do have, unique to your university, if you are... If you start out with the 111﻿backing of the president, and the appropriate staff, and that's very important in this business, and access to data, that you can at least be able to make some contribution. It's not volunteer, it's not unskilled, in a sense, and it's just not...but the issues that you, in a way, in terms, it's synonymous, it's because you're still dealing with racism. You know, basically, you're fighting for change. But that's where it's so equal it isn't even funny. CG: Have you met a lot of affirmative action officers? EJ: Oh sure. CG: Have you been able to meet those who, say, don't have a community work background as you do? EJ: Well, no, because I think one of the concerns that the affirmative action officers are concerned about is the stringent... Now, most universities are even looking for people who have law degrees. We have several affirmative action officers, Bob Johnson, for instance, at U. Mass. campus, Bob is a lawyer. Julius Office, who just resigned to go back to teaching. And he's opening up a law firm at the University of Lowell. And he has a legal background. And you find that we don't feel that that's necessary, as affirmative action officers. We do believe that you must have a pulse on the community, that there does have to be certain administrative skills possessed by the officer. A very good knowledge of the law. We do believe that an advanced degree is helpful. And it can be in any area. But we don't see that the... I think that we're still fairly flexible. Because, just remember, Cheryl, this is not seen, been seen, as a profession. It's just now evolving and emerging as a profession. CG: That's what I meant by the word "professional." EJ: Yes. So there are some things that we think need to be put in there, but it more or less deals with your function, and how you are reporting. Not so it does...a community organizer cannot... You know, a community organizer really cannot, if that's the background, cannot be an affirmative action officer, as such. It's just too much of a traumatic change. CG: Do you think those transitions, working in the state office of education, working for the Black Women's Community Development Foundation, working for the Freedom House Institute on Schools and Education, helped to shape, to make you the proper person for this position? In addition to the work with Exodus? 112﻿I think that was part of their interest, but the caveat for them was, of course, that I had degrees. You know, basically. I mean, sure. It's real PR, it's really a lot of PR inside the university. The affirmative action officer really has got to be somebody that people, creden-tialed, and also someone that people feel comfortable with, okay? I find that, as someone said this to me, "You don't run into problems. You don't have any problems because it's your personality." And really, not to brag, but I don't run in...sure we have problems. But by and large, once we're sitting down and I'm looking you straight in the eye in a sense, because it's my job, my job. I am even against them, I am doing what I'm being paid to do. And that is to monitor and to assist them in increasing the numbers of minorities on this campus. So we do that, and in various ways, and to make them more sensitive to the fact that they've got to interact with minorities, and accept them, those that are here, as professionals. It's hard enough to be a black professional, and be accepted as a black professional, and to be able to operate in a predominantly white environment is very difficult. Because they refuse to believe that we can go to the Harvards and the MITs and the BUs, and possess doctorates, and post-doctorates, and you know, all of that. But a lot of it is that very one-to-one kind of... If you set down guidelines of the federal government, and it's up to you, according to the characteristics of your university, to really decide and develop how you're going to frame and shape your affirmative action plan and program more than to plan the program. We have instituted a system whereby people have to come to me. Don't write me letters and tell me "I need this," but let's talk about it. And explain to me, maybe I don't understand how I help, and if they don't have a lot of minorities... Let me look at the availability data, and find out what, who is being turned out, how many are being turned out across the country. What is the utilization, based on the availability of data? Are we underutilizing? For what reason? Are they not available? Not being trained? So we need to encourage or develop programs with the high schools, that get the kids involved and exposed to policy, so that we get them in as students, and somewhere along the line there will be a kind of reciprocal effect. You know, because they are out there. When you do your research eight years from now, and then I have white folks when I say that, say, "Look, I'm flexible. Tell me what the problem is. I'm not dumb, I can understand. I can't wait eight years." I say, "That's very strange, because you told me I should wait." Oh yes, I've had that... 113﻿CG: You should give little history lessons. EJ: Yes. I'd say, put your hands with mine. In fact, let me just read it to you, because I think it's really funny. One of the biggest traps, affirmative action officers take them, their job, too serious, you know. I take myself, in terms of a person, but I'd never take a title seriously. It just says, "The greatest occupational hazard of a university EOAA officer is self-deception. Too often they perceive themselves as Saint Georges commissioned by executive order to strike killing blows against the dragons of discrimination with the sword of higher authority and the might of civil rights. They hack away fervently, only to find their opponents unscathed and themselves frustrated and dispirited. To avoid these pitfalls of the trade, they need only to apprehend their true position within the vast corporate and political scheme of which academe is the inextricable part." I always say to people, "Don't...you know, I can't perform miracles. You know, it's a teamwork effect, and effort," and basically, you know, I think that there are some EEO officers or AA officers who really believe, 'cause they have their title, hack away. And I say you're not going to give me a heart attack. I don't... I take the mission, I don't take myself, I guess I'm saying, the position that seriously, but I take the mission very serious. And with that, and in that context, you know, I'm going to be consistent and very much on the case. CG: So you don't put yourself in a straitjacket. You know what you have to do, and you're going to be flexible about doing it. EJ: That's right. I think it's the only way to do this job. CG: I have another question. How much of that nice relaxed nine-to-five... EJ: oh. [Laughs] A little more, very frankly. Four- thirty, I want you to know. This university closes down at four-thirty. I, however, am a very early riser, and prior to this last small episode I was coming in here at seven, simply because I can't sleep. And I get up, and it's easy and it's quiet, and this office is usually, you know, inhabited by nine o'clock with a lot of folks who just want to come and talk. Sometimes they just want to talk to you. And they don't know whether or not their issues, you know, sound silly, and they feel comfortable. So I often times find three-quarters of my day, is almost like a doctor's office, just sitting, and listening to people, trying to form in their mind, maybe the frame of reference, whether or not... Is it them, or is it the 114﻿job? Are they really being shafted? And they may not want to go someplace else, because they don't want to be made to look silly. And I think that what we've done here is to keep information, I know we've kept information, very confidential, while we try to develop an environment of relaxation, and an open-door policy that says, no one's problem is that small, that everybody's problem is a problem. And we're here to hear that, and help them work through it, and sort through it. We've found that when we've done that, when we walk through it with them, in many instances, and this is black and white, we have, believe me, we get just as many white complaints, all right, as we get minorities and females. We get white males...oh sure. And we sweat through it, because sometimes people can make you feel... The thing is not to make anyone feel as though they're not important. 'Cause really, what bothers you may seem, you know, as silly to somebody else, but to you it's important. You need to know that somebody will listen to you with respect and hear it out, and then say, well, you know, I certainly understand what you're saying, but, you know, this is what I think you said, and certainly, you know, you still have your own right to do what you want to do. I've found if I said to them, Okay, now this is informal. Everything is informal until I tell you I'm going to put it on paper. Okay? We can talk for the next four weeks, you can come in, and I'll say, "All right, now this is what happened." If I say, "Go back and talk to your supervisor. Try this route." You know, write something. And until you come to me and really say, "Look, I'm ready to grieve." I say, "Now let me tell you what that means." And you'll find that a lot of times they'll say okay, they'll take the paper, they'll leave the office, and you won't see them again. CG: I've had that experience with minority grad stu- dents... want to write a memo. EJ: You have. CG: I said, "Let's not put it on paper. Let's talk first. Go talk to the man." EJ: That's right. That's right. CG: Because you do not want... EJ: They think about it, and say... CG: in the world of academia, paper is the source. 115﻿That's right. And nine times out...when you see them two or three months later, they're moving around. But maybe at the time they were bothered. And rightfully, you know. Substantially and justifiably bothered. But then I guess I think, you sort of have to let this one go. I always say file it. Keep your own desk memos. You know, file it. Keep your own, when you come out of a meeting, and if you think there is an agreement that has been struck, and, you know, write it up. And thank the person, and reiterate what the agreement was. And just file it away. And you know, always keep your own history of whatever it was. So when you come, you've got... It's not, "Well, he told me," and you say, "you misunderstood me," you know, that kind of foolishness. But I have found that people do need somebody to bounce that stuff off. And even though there are other places where they can go, people go where they feel most comfortable, and you try to do so that they feel comfortable. And I think that it's working. You know, when you think of what affirmative action officers say, say to me, "Ellen, since you've been here, has the percentage increased in terms of people?" I couldn't, and most affirmative action officers, if they're honest, couldn't tell you that there have been people and increases that they can cite. But the thing is for me is that I don't like to see the revolving door, which happens even with students. You want to see them through, get their degrees and graduate. We have good staff, let's keep them. Let's talk about new ways of encouraging or attracting faculty. But the numbers are small, the increases are small. And they don't happen...you lose them as fast as you get them. And I think if I had more of a...I think that we have more of a problem in retaining, because... That's where we gain...they come in that door. It feels good to bring them in. But then the problem is helping them to stay here. And I think that the odds are against them in staying, because so many factions work against them, and factors work against them. Tenure consideration, promotion considerations, you know, all those, committee considerations, all those things begin to play in their subtle ways. So that you say, there's no mobility here for me. So you decide to leave. And you leave on your own. Then the federal government looks, and they say, the increase in the numbers that come in, as opposed to the number that leave, you know, is nothing. So I say, once we get them here, we've got to keep them here. So our numbers have not increased. I've seen some increase, but they haven't increased substantially. And I don't think that I envision increases that are substantial. One is, there is still the economic market for 116﻿universities. Universities, particularly if you get a degree in a professional school, engineering, business, you're a lot more marketable, or paid, than even with your doctorate. There's no pay. People are shocked. Sure, sure. See, if you get a Ph.D., you're driving taxicabs. Okay? Besides their jobs. Okay, so, there it is. CG: The last time we were talking, you were talking about the coming changes that had to be made, and the role of the affirmative action officer in bringing about these changes. I see, since I was last here, you have been busy being activist, and saying things again. Would you care to tell me about... It seems like it's part of that learning process that goes on with community action. EJ: It's clear. I've been here exactly fifteen months now, and it's clear that they were very kind, and afforded me a certain amount of honeymoon period. But it wasn't long that the honeymoon period was over. I recognized it had to be over, I think they did too, because it was almost business as usual. What I mean by that is the cliches that normally or the pat statements that normally accompanied the forms for employing someone, or not employing someone, began to surface again. One of the things, in terms of the role of affirmative action, and I always quote it, because I think it's so appropriate, as I told you, it was in the Forum, which is an Equal Employment, EEO newsletter. And it's up there, and it really just basically indicates that if we take ourselves too seriously, that we will spend our time thinking that we have a righteous sword of Executive Order 11246, and strike down all the dragons, you know, of discrimination. And that we will find that we will be exhausted, and we really will not have changed anything, you know, even attitudes. And that we will be defeated in instances, and those same dragons will surface and continue to move along in the same natural form and routine that they have been accustomed to. So I think that it's important as an affirmative action officer to understand immediately that you don't have any mighty sword, that in truth Executive Order 1124 6 is only as strong as your university is, in terms of its board of trustees, in terms of its president, who must consistently make it clear to the administration and to the academic side of the house that the policy that has been adopted by the board, and then, a person who has been appointed by the president to implement that policy, is one that everyone must adhere to. I must say that at this university, in terms of that level, there is a serious 117﻿commitment to affirmative action. However, when you take the university and put it in the context of the country, it doesn't mean much. And what I mean by that, is when you just reflect back on Bakke, reflect on Weber, reflect on the Kaiser, reflect now on the Sears case. All those things are coming back to haunt us. You also look nationally at the expansion of the affected class, but no money or resources are expanding to assist and to help you remedy these past effects of discrimination. So that your job, in a sense, you've got to really define, very calculating, and you must not take the title of affirmative action officer too seriously. Take the issue seriously, but don't take the title, and what you think you have as a support, you know, a prop, too seriously. Because more than often you'll find it doesn't exist. And a case in hand to that is the case of an affirmative action officer and a case, I think, it must be somewhere in the Southwest, where there was a number of minority students in medical school who brought a case of discrimination and racism against a particular professor at the medical school. And there was an inguiry which had been prompted by the affirmative action officer, who happened to be a very good affirmative action officer for this particular school. And he was in a sense sanctioned... He was in a sense, charged with the responsibility of investigating this situation, and ultimately the professor was removed, from the information that the affirmative action officer had been able to compile, and then handed over to the appropriate people at the university. The professor left the university, and everyone thought that things were back to normal, as normal could be at a place after such an incident happens or occurs. He went on to receive, to take an appointment at another school. Two years later, almost, he files against several of the plaintiffs, who were black students, and against the university, and similarly against the affirmative action officer. Now normally you would assume that the affirmative action would have been covered by the general counsel of the university. And in speaking to the responsibilities of the affirmative action officer, I think it is very important that they understand how far they can go, again, in not taking the title too seriously. We are not lawyers, in most instances, even though you will notice that many positions, descriptions for affirmative action officers, they are now asking for some kind of law background or paralegal background. But it is not absolutely essential. 118﻿It's important to know the laws. But again, the responsibility is that of the university to assure that all of its employees are covered. But when this case was brought back up, and the professor sued the university separately, he sued several of the plaintiffs, students, who brought the case against him, to the affirmative action, and sued the affirmative action officer...the affirmative action officer was not covered by the general counsel of the university. So he had to stand alone to face the charges, all right, that were brought by the professor. And they found against this affirmative action officer, and I don't want to be guoted at this time, but I can certainly find out for you, I can't recall whether or not... He either resigned from the university or eventually he was terminated from the university. But that meant that he had to provide financial resources for his own defense, all right? So I think that it is crucial that when one takes over this kind of position, that they really have a clear understanding as to the breadth and scope of their responsibility, and when, which most universities do have, the general counsel, which is retained by and large by the university for overall purposes, must be brought into the situation. So, myself, as I view all of those things, and I look at Northeastern, I think that it has, there is a hell of a potential. And I think that the handwriting is on the wall, in terms of the urban setting, in terms of being the largest urban university, sitting right in the back yard, or if you will, in a few years, in the front yard of the black community, that this university must become more representative of the community in which it resides, at all levels, student and employment, and of course, that includes faculty. And I think that strides, and they may be small strides, but significant strides are beginning to happen. Certainly I find the job challenging, but I smiled when you first asked the question about my new role, because in many ways it's new only because the setting is more structured. But the same old games people play are in effect. And we can apply them to any affirmative action goals, timetables, statements, projections, whatever...guidelines, regulations. It is just the games people play. The discipline is a different one from the community, but it's the same, you're doing the same types of things. It's also very interesting because I think that, I see myself as one entity. And many times people assume the affirmative action officer, and it's a wealth of misinformation, of what the affirmative action office does in the university context. I mean, it is, it should be viewed as another office which has a responsibility to 119﻿both students, to faculty, to the university on a whole, to make sure that it complies with certain regulations since we do receive federal funds from the federal government. And it applies to teaching assistants, research associates, any kinds of contracts, who are they going to serve, who's going to be involved in them, as project managers or principal investigators and all of those other things... All of that comes into play because we are receiving federal funds. Then you look at the job market, and why are we not, again, if we are talking about the real world, preparing people who, in a multipluralistic society that we live in, preparing more than one group of people to be able to cope with that kind of society, pluralistic society, that we are indeed going to have, and is becoming more and more, you know, increased, as we know, with all of the people that are coming to these shores. And on the other side of that coin is that the people who are more or less the majority people must learn how to understand, to be more sensitive, and to relate to what is possibly the majority of their clients, who are minorities. And so it's important that they have that exposure too. Our job is not just to review forms, to make sure that they have, in a sense, procedurally reached out to attempt to identify minorities and if you will, women, but that symbolically and morally, that they have taken another step, to bring them in, to talk with them, to interview them, if you will, and to really try their best to see if there is a way to fit them into the Northeastern community family. So there are, and one must recognize, the minimal qualifications, the minimal requirements an affirmative action officer, if you will, can, you know, apply to their university. And then there is the broad length and scope of moral commitment to really seriously employ, and in meaningful positions, if you will, minorities, and if you will, again, women. And I think that again when I see a form... It is no longer enough, in everything, you know, you learn— At first, I can recall having to spend hours just going over every little fine detail in terms of the paperwork, I wanted to see how many minorities or women were applying for the jobs. But then I began to develop my own scheme for going through that, so that the next step was not how many apply. How many really were interviewed? Okay. Then at the next step, you know, coming to evaluate and assess the qualifications, okay? And then, as you just heard, if there is an opportunity for a person within house to move up, you know...upward mobility is very important in affirmative action also. And through the regulations is now required to be seriously, a program to seriously improve the status of those members of the staff 120﻿or, who are in employment here, to develop programs that are upwardly mobile for them. That's correct. So what we have done in that vein is to, not immediately post our external, we post ten days internally for certain positions. So that some classifications are, people are able to look at a job, and say, it may not pay me much more money, but there is an opportunity for further professional growth and development if I go over here. Here I have more paper, I may have more duties, I may have more responsibilities, I may learn a little more. And you will find that that kind of opportunity is there. And we are very pleased with that. It's a little more difficult because of contracts, to do that with the faculty. However, one thing we are very aware of, is that the big game that they play, is to hire on a one-year basis, without ever accepting or acknowledging a tenure track position, or a part-time basis. I understand the political and financial gains in doing that. One, financially, it's certainly much easier to hire people on a part-time basis, and you're not wedded to them for the rest of the duration. Particularly with the declining enrollment. However, this particular school is not feeling that decline at this moment. And in fact, ironically, and we know it's true, too, because with the increase of tuition and the co-op opportunity, not only for minorities, but for first-generation white kids who are going to college, it helps to subsidize that tuition. Even here it's high. We now find in our law school that youngsters who have candidated for admissions into the Harvards and the Yales are turning down the Harvards and the Yales, because they can leave our co-op program, our legal co-op program, and go right into a company, and start off, right out of law school, $21,000, $22,000. And have had that experience with a law firm, or whatever discipline of law they are involved in. This year we're very proud of the numbers that are already deposited enrollees. And it's thirty. And I think if you know anything about the history of the Northeastern Law School, you know, five years ago that would have been unheard of. CG: In its early days that was absolutely unheard of. EJ: Of course. That's right. CG: People in our community feel that people were flatly, categorically rejected, refused admission to this university. EJ: Exactly. And not only that, not only from our com- munity, but women. 121﻿CG: It was a male... EJ: That's right. It was a male university. CG: When I first came here, we were carefully reminded of that. There were only a limited number of women. EJ: Exactly. So I think the university recognizes its responsibility and I think, with all the demographic changes, the geographical changes, or the future trends and patterns of, residential patterns, that they have no choice if they are going to succeed, as many urban universities have not succeeded, that they must be answerable to that community. And with the Southwest corridor, with the hopefully new Roxbury Community College, and then, the ORC at Madison Park, and of course, we almost have a university row right here on Huntington Avenue, which might include Wentworth, Boston State, Simmons over on the Fenway, the Museum, there's a cultural educational park that is developing and Northeastern is going to play a big role, and ought to play a big role. And that all is affirmative action, because you're talking about buildings that have to be built, you're talking about things that affect, again, contracts, subcontracts, purchasing, and sales. You're talking about, you know, really minority enterprise, and how much, along with employment, are we willing to give to, or to set aside, if you will, and I'll be so bold to say, set aside, in terms of the millions of dollars. When you think about snow removal itself, all right, for this campus. When you think about maintenance of uniforms for those who are buildings-and-grounds people, who have to wear certain types of uniforms for their duties. When you talk about just keeping the landscaping looking pretty and appropriate, what happens there. And the night cleaners, the maintenance help, you know, who gets contracted. And who knows better about cleaning, and particularly at night, as a second part of the job, than minorities, okay? And women who are one-parent families who are trying to hold their families together, and possibly putting a couple of kids through school. So I think that affirmative action's goals and objectives in many ways have been so limited into looking at employment, and understandably so. And we understand why we got to that point, all right, after the uprisings of the sixties, you know, and it was, you find administrators walking into the communities, asking people if they wanted jobs. Well, that day is over. I think that we have to recognize also that there is no national mandate. We have national mandates or priorities, but affirmative action is not a national priority. And it's not even been ever 122﻿identified on this level by any of our presidents, including Kennedy. Including Kennedy. The nearest to any kind of real national priority, if you will, in education, has now just surfaced with the possibility of the development of a Department of Education, which will be separate and away from, and removed from HEW, and of course through our judicial selection commission, the need through Senator Kennedy, sitting on the Judiciary Committee and chairing that committee, for affirmative action to be taken into account. I see affirmative action no longer a one-person show, I see it as a profession, and that we must begin to develop it as an ongoing profession, which means that we must look at what makes an affirmative action officer. What makes an affirmative action officer? One who has the ability to communicate to diverse communities, on campus and off campus. One who has the ability to mediate and facilitate, one who has the ability to understand and relate to, let's say, again, the laws that apply to equal opportunity, employment opportunity. One who may need to seriously plan, I think, to... the seventies' affirmative action officer was not required to have any kind of degree. But I think if we are going to become a profession, a business or a legal background, more than just community organizing, is going to be important if we're going to get the kind of respect and recognition as a profession that I think that is important to have. CG: You know, if it happens, you could be part of a new profession. EJ: Well, it's interesting. There's a challenge, and I think that even though I am a parvenu, that there has been some spade work done by some pioneers, before me, so at this stage, as I join the team, a lot of the breaking down of the shrubbery and the greenery has been more or less done. We're more or less trying to lay the cement, if you will. And that's difficult. I'm not saying it wasn't difficult for them. It's difficult. Again, I come back to my thesis that there is no priority and there is no mandate for this. So now, and what is bothersome, is the fact that the class of affected people continues to grow. You've got handicaps, you've got Vietnam era veterans, you've got women, you've got Hispanics, you've got Native Americans. And if it weren't for black people, there would not be an affirmative action order Executive 11246. And it seems historically, every time black people began to speak to their rights, and began to speak out against the injustices of this country, from civil rights days on, somebody has come along, some group of people has 123﻿come along...particularly white women, I'm sorry...who come along, and have deterred us from getting what we are supposed to have. And are, you know, in a sense, due. I mean, to put it, summarily, to put it, what we are due and have a right to. It is not a gift and it is not a privilege. We have a right. And it seems that there has been the suffragette movement that deterred, there has been the women's so-called ERA movement to deter, there have been other kinds of things in the past that have deterred black people as a whole, and have separated us in so many times from our real goal. Because we are not, we are a nation, whether we like it or not. But particularly on this soil. And there will be no upward mobility for this particular nation of people, in any small columns. We will all have to come together. You're talking about black people as a nation. In a sense, you've gone the full gamut of discovering how to make change, from starting at a community organization, and discovering how the school system worked, discovering, I mean, literally discovering social structure all the way along. And do you feel like you've moved to a new level of discovering, in the process of being an affirmative action officer working with academe. What new insights on the society that you want to change? Yes. I think it comes full circle, Cheryl, because what happens as you go back into the community. You talk about role models, you talk about the returns to the community, in terms of dollars and cents and revenue. We talk about the kinds of education that our kids should get and they're not getting, and who's teaching our children. And so, academe is, as I say, a microcosm of what the world is all about. So important is, one, economically, for people who are able to have the benefits of a decent education, through a university, to be able to return something, either through their skills or financially, through businesses, to the community, so that the community becomes a viable, stable community itself. And I'm talking about revenues and finances there. Secondly, if you talk about our moral and academic future, intellectual future of our children, then we've got to make sure that the right kinds of things are being offered on the college level, the university level, so that they too can come back and set a direction and a pace, and make our children, or to assist our children in becoming more curious about what's out there. I think that in fairness, it's no fault, in many of our young or older minority teachers, and even professors, in so many ways their lives have been so structured, their thinking 124﻿has been so channeled, and that has been by design, that what they have had to give back has not been enough. It's been good in terms of a strength and a resiliency that I think only black people have, but in terms of being able to cope with the real world, their own experiences have been too narrow, and... CG: Constricted. EJ: Restricted. So that we must break through from lib- eral arts to business administration to engineering and high technology areas, and to areas where we otherwise have assumed it's pure white and in many instances, other minorities except black. We need accountants, we need business managers, you know, we need people to understand transportation and technology. And you could go down the line. Because again, it all can revert back to a stable, viable community, healthy community economically... and also in terms of an environment in which one would be proud to live and to bring up their own children. So as I look at the youngsters, we brought them one step of the way. And we now pass them on, as we do in baptism, to the second set of parents, or responsible adult, who we would hope would guide them and nurture them to a place where they are able to go forth and to seek out...but with a treasure of wealth and options from which they can choose in a pragmatic and in a wise way, with knowledge and background of what there is in all of these disciplines... or at least exposure to these disciplines to understand how it, they could become part of them. So sure, I think that across, I've been lucky. I've kind of gone the breadth of it. And I've always wanted to kind of see if we took a control group of fifteen or twenty or say, fifty kids, and started from the preschool days, and just carried them with all the kinds of support services they need, psychological, academic, personal, financial resources, exposure to what we consider a way of life that we seem to be interested in, with a curriculum that speaks to what we think is important, what would happen, and what would they go into. It would be very interesting if you could nurture a small control group and set a black agenda that speaks to what we feel is necessary. Take from the greater community what is good and mold it, shape it, into the kinds of things that we think our youngsters, in their uniqueness, must have in order to make it in this society. CG: Let me ask you something. What you said raised some other questions in my mind. In the sixties, a whole lot of labels got tossed around. People got called assimilationists, integrationists, nationalists, sepa- 125﻿ratists. What are the place of those labels in where you see yourself, in the spectrum of ideas about how to change the situation of black people? I don't think I fit any of the labels, first of all. But I do know that I believe, if you know, the history of our project in the sixties, was not to integrate the kids into the Boston public schools. We were really about the business of upgrading the guality of education that our kids were getting, and we didn't give a damn where it took place. One thing we knew, it was not taking place in Rox-bury. We were able to assess that through the turnover and transition of teachers that our children were subjected to. We were able to assess that through the financial resources that were not coming in, except from federal grants to our community, and labelled for disadvantaged children. We were able to assess that by the political structure of the school committee that had no way of understanding the kinds of needs that we had because we were not represented on that committee. And then they felt that that constituency which was not theirs, and therefore you do not respond to a constituency which does not support you, and vice versa. We were able to assess that by the lack of, let's say, bricks and mortar, let's say structural things that we felt were needed in school. I mean, our schools were dating back to 1865, 1890. And they showed that in order to, even with Sputnik in '54, we weren't even able to receive labs for our kids to understand what was happening in that new era, when the whole society turned to math after the Sputnik, okay? We didn't even have such needs as to keep a sound body and a sound mind, gymnasiums for our children. And physical education was really a very minimal part of the curriculum. So that there were ways that we were able to assess what was happening in our schools. Books and pencils, I mean, small minor things as books and pencils, and homework, which was very important to us. At least we were told it was supposed to be important. To the extent that we felt that there was a difference, that the resources, the financial resources were being poured into the pockets of the community, of the greater Boston community, but certainly were not being poured into Roxbury, other than, again, federal grants which made the city look good, in terms of, you know, let's say, milking the coffers. But by and large, you'll find that they would hire more compensatory education teachers than they would hire, books to assist the children to read, or assist the children in counseling, 126﻿whatever, you know, the need of 776, special needs. All of those areas. So I would say that the resources were what we were after. At that point, the majority of the resources, the real, tangible resources, that we felt made at least a crack, or afforded an opportunity for a dent in the future, the quality of the future, the future quality of education, was not going to be found in Roxbury. All right? And the numbers of kids who were sitting in their seats was also very apparently different in Roxbury as opposed to Hyde Park, as opposed to North Roslindale, and as opposed to as short a distance as Mattapan. You didn't have to go that far. And that whole school system, you know, that we were subjected to, you could live on the same street and have a white neighbor, as I did, and you went to one junior high school and she went to another junior high school. So it was that dual pattern, and that... CG: It was de jure. Not de facto. EJ: It was not de facto at all. So in terms of labels, I don't think that labels, in terms of this group of parents, who were not professional...would be appropriate for them. But if you were to continue the history and the growth and development of that group of parents, as anyone once you are shown something, you know they say if you don't feed... They become docile, and they become quiet, and it's almost when you begin to feed people information, they become, they ask more questions, and when they ask them questions and the answers aren't appropriate, they want to know why, and they become a little louder, and a little more forceful. So it's a process, it's a social, but it's also a political process of dissemination of information, and information that is easy, as we've talked about, to understand and to comprehend. Which again, then, when you go to...especially the legality of the information, then the dissemination of it, which then means the organization, and which means mobilization. And in a sense, that's what we're talking about. You mobilize people through that process, or other patterns of, instruments of process, that will allow them an opportunity to see, once the sun is up, you know, is seen, or comes through, you see the pictures better, you see the walls better, you see everything and have a lot more insight. CG: The big picture. EJ: The big picture. 127﻿CG: Once you see the big picture. EJ: ...you want to go back... CG: But you can't. EJ: I think that the other part of it is that I watched "Hollow Image" the other night, and had an interesting discussion with my twenty-four-year-old daughter on the phone. And parts of it she loved and parts of it she didn't like. This was the television about the model... She wasn't a model, she was a buyer. And the parts that she didn't like, there was... When I looked at the list of producers, I really didn't recognize them and it's not my area, so I possibly wouldn't recognize any of them. I didn't recognize anybody even in an advisory capacity that might have been a minority. But I thought they did an interesting job with it. It was real to me, because I think that many black women get caught in that kind of syndrome. Where you are able to break out of, if you are, and you have, you know, been on the real lower economic strata, or ladder, as a child. And then something pushes, whatever it may be, your own ability and initiative, or your parents just working very hard, whatever it may be, and you break out. And particularly the black females. This little gal broke out, in that, and never looked back. But she had a cousin who did, who broke out also. But her field was such that anybody would have accepted her, as she put it, because she was an entertainer. She gave them a breath of fresh air, she provided a breath of fresh air, a moment of quiet where they could remove themselves from their day-to-day worries, and could think about something else that was good and positive. But then she tried, because she felt guilty about her role, and she tried to go back. And the way that she thought she could be helpful was rejected, because they had seen her...as we fell into a trap that anyone removed from the community, is no longer a part of the community. In the sixties, that was big. If you didn't live in the community, you didn't have any right to speak about the community. Now I think that we have...that film shows that we have moved. You know, they may not have in their way, they're after the same objective as we are after, in terms of the message. That we have agreed that the black community exists wherever black people are, and in many instances, as her last statement stated, we may not be able to go back and do it from that frame of reference. 128﻿But you certainly can do something from where you're at, at this point. And she felt that she could move, you know, some things, and possibly by breaking through the store, that was the... Looking at the film, they did not have as visible, for your view, any other black people, where she was the top buyer for the store. But possibly she had, in her own field, that she had become a professional person in, and she possibly felt that she could move them to break that barrier, one token, and possibly bring in some others. But for the black women, the point was not...her romantic relationships were very real, because she felt, in a sense, that she could take the man who was her childhood sweetheart, and whom she still felt she had deep feelings for, just because he really knew her, and he knew her, and she could do and say, and she felt relaxed. That she could bring him up with her, because he had certain types of talents. And she found out that she couldn't remake the man. And she settled for a man who, naturally, was more or less on the level that she had achieved, as she saw it. It was real, because I think that that happens, and it's the kind of unfortunate situation that a lot of black women find themselves in. And they're put in that category... I think our own people in too many instances, that once we have, in their estimation, made it, in our estimation, let's say, as black people, we've made it, we have to suffer the consequence of, a lot of times, making a decision as to whether our professions, or our achievements are more important than sharing with somebody who may not have, you know, come as far as you. Men don't have to make, I think, those kinds of decisions, and are not expected. So I don't know who's to blame, whether we as black women are responsible for that kind of thinking, or we help contribute, in a sense, to that continued thinking. But I think it's real. CG: I think part of it is more general than that, in the sense that we really, as we move out, white patterns become more visible, and there's a kind of anxiety about, and it became very clear in the black community's response to Moynihan, that anxiety over our women... EJ: But you see, the interesting thing is, as we all know, is that the Italian mother is no different, in many way, in terms of her... she may not have gone into a profession, but she certainly was in control. A Jewish mother, I mean, what's more known than a Jewish mother, the control of a Jewish mother. And they worked, they worked very hard. And, you know, again, it is not so much the cultural differences as we have to suffer in terms of the racial difference. Because no other people are judged solely by their race as we are. 129﻿CG: I was going to ask one other question. What do you see yourself doing ten years from now? EJ: I'll be right sitting here straight across from you in another interview. [Laughter] CG: Follow-up, for the Oral History Project! EJ: Revisited. CG: But you see yourself trying to stay here, and really... EJ: I do, yes. CG: I see the results. Every time I come in here, I have seen the results. Problem spots that couldn't be staffed before, are now staffed and running smoothly. I pick this up, and I realize that all of a sudden the dreams of '68 are finally coming true. EJ: Yes. Take your button... CG: Oh, yes, I have my button. EJ: We have Lerone Bennett coming in for that. It's a beautiful program. CG: I'm going to register for it. EJ: It's going to be a fantastic program. We have a minority council. I have intentions this year of bringing various renowned black scholars into Northeastern for the benefit of other scholars, similar scholars on campus. CG: I have some suggestions, if you need any. EJ: Great. We do need some suggestions. We are attempt- ing to professionally support, and make sure that that support is known. And I think that we're very serious about that small group. It's a very dedicated and committed group, to increase the number of minority faculty members, and again to break through, in our graduate school level, as you know, the alma mater, which is less than three per cent. CG: Less then three per cent. EJ: Less then three per cent. Overall it's bad, but in terms of minorities. And the majority of those are not Americans. They are mostly Africans and other foreign students, Asians, who come here to the business school, getting their MBAs, or engineering. 130﻿CG: You're counting them as minorities? EJ: No, I'm saying the majority... Yes, they're coloreds, minority but not as black. But I'm saying the majority of the minorities who are in even that category of three per cent, or less, are not black, Afro-Americans. They are, you know, of other cultures. And so I think that, well, just in the sense of real history for Northeastern, in assigning or appointing to the President's office our first black vice-president. And very shortly, at least by July 1980, we will have our first black associate provost. We have several deans, black deans, at this point. I think that in the support service staff, we have black people... I know when I first came in March, I never saw a black face up in the bursar's office, and I see them now. So I think there, as Northeastern goes, and as most universities go, that there, I think, that the president does have a commitment, and he has an opportunity to work out and not...at all sacrifice his own job, that he will do any of the things, for as I say again, the key is the ability... I watch him very closely. The Fenway is pleased with what we've made of the land. We've got to be careful now of our land being taken on that side. And they're aware of that. And the potential as an urban school, college, university, is there. And as you again look at the trends of the city, I would say that the school's got to reverse what has been more or less a school that has catered to suburban communities, bedroom communities, and realize that a lot of their enrollments are going to...a great deal of their future enrollments will be coming from the black and inner city communities. CG: In closing, let me just ask you one easy question. How do you think history will remember Ellen Jackson? How do you want history to remember Ellen Jackson? EJ: [Laughs] Oh, my. I guess it's not important to remember Ellen Jackson, the name, as it is to try and think about the changes. If you can take a span of time, and say, what happened in '65, a mobilization, and what changes occurred during the period because of, maybe, Ellen Jackson, not the name, but changes in patterns, traditional patterns and routines, treatment of blacks and minorities. And if you can take it and say, twenty years from now, that's no longer tolerated, that's no longer done, and that's no longer attempted, that there are changes. And if you can really say, you can look back, and say, this is what it was, and this is what it is now, that you can identify some things, some issues, some projects, and some means, and maybe some attitudes, that 131﻿possibly have changed during that period of time, that would be sufficient for me. CG: Anything else you wish to tell us? EJ: I don't mind saying...maybe I told you before, I have to tell you again. I don't like giving interviews anymore. I find that, in fact, but you are one of the most enjoyable people, and I find you fascinating to talk with. You bring out a good deal in myself, in terms of remembering some things that are sometimes better left not being remembered, okay? But when I share them with you, you know, they seem to fit into, be necessary, or having been necessary at the time when they occurred... I think that that helps me to understand. CG: Each little piece contributes... EJ: Lots of small pieces. CG: That whole picture. When you look back, it's that, like that spiritual... "... and wonder, how I got over it." And that's how we're able to keep going. EJ: That's right. That's right. CG: Well, I have enjoyed this immensely. END OF INTERVIEW 132﻿ELLEN SWEPSON JACKSON..