 Marcia Greenlee: Ardie Halyard: This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Ardie Clark Halyard. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Halyard's home at 4326 North 37th Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53216. The date is August 24. The interviewer is Marcia M. Greenlee. Mrs. Halyard, would you outline your professional career? Well, I had two principal careers. I came to Milwaukee in 1923 with my husband for the purpose of improving the housing for Negroes. Negroes were coming into Milwaukee in large numbers from the South, and they had nowhere to live. One of the examples of the seriousness of the situation in Milwaukee at that time was a large building in which fifteen families lived. It was large, but not large enough for fifteen families. It was labeled as Noah's Ark. The housing was very severe. We had worked in housing in Beloit, Wisconsin, for the Fairbanks, Morse & Company. And that had finished because the war was over. It was suggested that we use our talents in similar ways if possible, in a place where it was needed, so we decided to come to Milwaukee. And we had known of a project that was being done in which Caucasians were permitted to participate, and we thought that perhaps the city of Milwaukee would do the same thing for black people. We had a letter of introduction to the mayor, but that did not materialize. It was suggested then that we begin a savings and loan association in which we could not only try to improve the housing for Negroes, but teach them thrift as well as home ownership. To do this we had to have money, we had to have time to solicit the people, which was a requirement. And so I sought employment elsewhere while my husband made an effort to interest people in the savings and loan business by soliciting for shares. I found work at Milwaukee﻿2 AH: (cont.) Goodwill Industries, which was my first experience at work in Milwaukee. I began at the lowest level of the employment there. I was the first black person they had ever employed. I was advanced from one stage to another, to supervising the sewing room, teaching the women how to sew, as I had learned very well in my education and at home. From that I was advanced to employment secretary and finally to personnel director and director of rehabilitation in the industry. Of course,you know Goodwill is a place that employs handicapped and aged people. I worked for a good many years at Goodwill, which... I thought I had gone back to work as a very temporary thing until the savings and loan association could be well established, then I would come in the savings and loan office and take care of that office. But it so happened, because of many circumstances, that I continued to work at Goodwill for twenty years, spending most of the time as director of rehabilitation and much of the time as director of the entire plant, because my executive became the national executive of Goodwill Industries, and I was the next person in line to handle things during his absence from the plant. Within two years after I had begun working at Goodwill, the savings and loan was able to get a charter. This of course is a very long story, which perhaps one would not be too interested in this, except that it was tremendously difficult to secure a charter. The thought was that we were not qualified to run a financial institution. At any rate, we did secure a charter within two years. But this was not a money-making thing. There were no funds to be realized out of this new business. I continued to work on doing the clerical work for the savings and loan in the evening, and doing my work with Goodwill Industries during the day for eighteen years. So at any rate, this was the beginning of almost two careers: one at Goodwill Industries and the other with Columbia Savings and Loan Association. After twenty years at Goodwill, I came to the savings and loan business full time. I worked as assistant managing director, and did practically everything in the business. I became the managing officer of the savings and loan business after my husband passed in 1963. Later that year, I was appointed by Judge Michael Sullivan to do appraising for County Court Probate. This I did for six years, completing about 1970—well, a little over six years actually, not until around 1970. During the time that I worked with Goodwill Industries I was loaned for one year to work for the American Red Cross whose executive at that time was Margaret Sharp. I had a very interesting experience as a Red Cross worker. While I was doing rehabilitation also at Goodwill Industries, I had not had any social work, professional social work training, but it was felt that I had done a creditable sort of job, and some of the friends who were in the American Association of Social Work felt that I was doing enough creditable work to become a member of that organization. And my name was submitted, and I became a member and had the pleasant association of that group of people until I discontinued my work at Goodwill Industries, at which time I resigned. As far as the savings and loan association is concerned, it was a very slow growing association. We received our charter in 1924; in 1974 we had our﻿AH: (cont.) fiftieth anniversary. Very interesting celebration. We started the organization at a time when there was a great deal of race discrimination in Milwaukee. I can recall that when we reached our first million dollars in assets—I think that must have been 1950—we had difficulty finding a place to have a celebration. We finally did secure a hotel and had a very interesting celebration. Perhaps to some degree, the way we were started, with having the bookkeeper and clerical worker working two jobs, doing most of the work at night is the major reason for Columbia's slow growth. Also one difficulty was in educating the people that had come to this section of the country from the South, as to what a savings and loan association was and what it could do. Many of the early black settlers in the Milwaukee area had come from the rural sections of Mississippi and Arkansas, and the period of educating them to what a savings and loan association could do for them was difficult. Also, during the early years of the savings and loan association, we were allowed to make loans only in certain sections. And I can remember that in a section distant from where we make loans today, my husband had to make a survey of the white people in that community to see if they would be willing to sell an old house to a black man who was interested in buying it. Of course today, we have advanced to where we are making loans all over the state, anywhere that we are allowed to within a hundred miles of our association. And we have people buying homes and living in every suburb of Milwaukee and in every county surrounding this metropolitan city. At the present time the savings and loan association is still small, being just a little over seven million. I can remember when seven million, or a seven-million-dollar association was real, real, big money. Probably thought we'd never reach that stage. But now, of course there are many more associations that have been started by black people, which are now thirty million, forty million, and sixty million. But fortunately, Columbia was listed in the last hundred that was publicized by one of the black magazines; we felt very proud of that. Today, the savings and loan industry and Columbia Savings and Loan Association, which is the name of the one that we have organized, is the main project and the main career that I have been interested in. I've done many things outside of what I have been paid to do. This is the main organization we have nurtured and worked for. MG: Mrs. Halyard, you were born in Covington, Georgia. Who was your father? AH: My father was William Clark. ^G: And your mother? AH: Her name was Annie. I suppose she spelled Annie, A-N-N-I-E, L., Annie Louise. Her mother was Louise and she took her second name from her mother. What was her maiden name? AH: Her maiden name was Annie Louise Jeter. Her father was Jeter, although her mother had married again, and they went under the name of their stepfather, whose name was John Chapman.﻿4 MG: Now, could you tell me a little about the background of your father? AH: Well, my father was a member of a large family. His father had been sold as a slave to a family that took the name of Clark, wherein as we understood it when we were children coming up, that he was a Bentley. And his owner was a Clark so he took the name of Clark. He had, let's see, how many sons...he had five sons. My father was a member of a family of five other sons. My father's father was a Harrison Clark. His sons were Robert, Alfred, James, and William and Henry, I think that's five. There were two daughters, Hattie and Elizabeth. So Hattie and Elizabeth was the ones I lived with when I went to Atlanta University. MG,: Was your father from Georgia? AH: My father was born in Charleston, South Carolina. Not all of his brothers were, but he as one of the sons was born in Charleston. And my mother was born in Greensboro, Georgia. I don't have the stories of how they got to Covington. I was too young when my mother passed, and when I left my father, to ask those questions which have become very interesting to me as an adult. MG: What were your paternal grandparents' names? AH: Paternal grandparents was Amanda Clark and Harrison Clark. MG: And you don't know where they came from? Probably South Carolina? AH: Very likely. I'm not very sure. ^G: About when was your father born? AH: My mother died in 1909; she was thirty-two years old. And my father was six years older than my mother. So he would have been then thirty-eight in 1909. We have to figure from there. MG: How about your maternal grandparents. What were their names? AH: My grandmother was Louise. When she passed, she was a Fleming; she had married the third time. Louise Fleming. She's better known as Lula, as her friends all called her. Her husband then was a John Fleming, that was her third husband. My mother's father, he was Jeter as previously mentioned. ^G: i would like to know his background. AH: i only know that he was John Jeter. ^G: Did yOU say where your maternal grandmother was born? AH: I don't know that. Her grandmother I happen to have seen. That was a great-great-grandmother of ours. Her name, and I can't spell it for you. We called her Grandma Ware, and why we called her Ware I don't know. MG: W-A-R-E?﻿5 AH: It must have been Ware. MG: Do you know her first name? AH: Mary. She must have been, I think she was born in Virginia, as I remember that she talked about Virginia. I can't remember a great deal, in fact, just practically nothing about her, but she did live for a while with my grandmother and her mother, and her grandmother living in the same house. MG: Did you know any other great.-grandparents? AH: No. MG: Well, tell me, how did your parents make a living? AH: My father was a farmer, a sharecropper in Covington, Georgia. We did not own the plantation that he worked. We did own a home place, which consisted of two acres of land and a house and some equipment for the animals, barns, and so forth. That's all that he actually owned. Worked year in and year out, with all of the children working also on the farm, myself included, until he would come to the end of the season, to the fall, when they would be gathering the crops, and find that he still hadn't made enough to pay for what he had bought on credit during the year. So he decided to just pull up stakes and go to where another brother was living in Arkansas. MG: What time was that, do you remember? AH: About 1916. MG: Did the whole family move then? AH: Yes, the whole family. MG: And they went to Arkansas? AH: Yes. MG: What part, do you know? AH: Pine Bluff. MG: And this was to be with which of his brothers? AH: James. MG: Now, did your mother ever work outside the home or away from the family? AH: In the field, only with my father. MG: Tell me about your brothers and sisters—you have a large family. Could you start with the eldest and work downward? AH: My older brother went with my father to Pine Bluff, and lived and married in Pine Bluff until after my father had moved to California from that area.﻿6 AH: (cont.) Now he must have moved to California about, could have been about '72. And he moved there and lived with one of my sisters. My mother was the mother of ten children. Two died in infancy, the twin and one other. And eight of us were reared to adulthood and lived at home when my mother passed. Then my sister next to me would be the next oldest, went to Tuskegee, and was there for seven years. MG: Now what was your elder brother's name? AH: Louree. Very odd name. Louree Clark. MG: Now the sister that you've mentioned? AH: Charliemae. Now, believe it or not, when I had left my father's home— after my father married for the second time—to go to live with an aunt in Atlanta, leaving my sister Charliemae who was the one next to me in age, and in interests too, I wrote a letter to Tuskegee. It surprises me to note that I did it, but I did. And asked Booker Washington would he accept her without any money. And he wrote back and said that he would. So my father consented for her to go, and all he had to do was to get money together to get her there. She stayed there seven years, and was very popular at Tuskegee. She finished in 1919, and came to Atlanta where I was living with Aunt Hattie. MG: And your sister went to Tuskegee when? AH: Well, I went to live with my aunt when I was fourteen. And she must have gone to Tuskegee when I was fifteen, so that would have been whatever year... MG: She was there seven years, so I guess about 1922 she was finished at Tuskegee. AH: Yes. And she came and worked for the Standard Life Insurance Company of Atlanta until she was married. She had met a young man at Morehouse College and they became engaged. He decided he wanted to be a physician so he went to Meharry, finished, and they were married after his graduation from Meharry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee. Practiced in Winchester, Tennessee, and later on came to Milwaukee. We built them a house, the Columbia Savings and Loan Association built them a house here in the city on the corner next to us. They were happy there for some years, then my sister passed. Probably telling a lot of things you're not interested in. MG: No, I am. When did your sister pass? AH: She passed in '55. They had two children, a son and a daughter that had been born while they were...well, the daughter actually was born before he finished Meharry while he was interning. They came here and lived with me, she and this one daughter, until he was out of school. And then they established themselves in Winchester, Tennessee. Later on went to Nashville, Tennessee, to practice. And we interested them in coming to Milwaukee, because we felt it would be better, my husband and I. MG: What was your brother-in-law's name?﻿7 AH: Dr. John Maxwell. MG: Before we continue with your brothers and sisters, I wanted to ask you a couple more questions about your father. When he married the second time, what was his wife's name? AH: His wife's name was Elizabeth Leslie. She was a Leslie, her maiden name. MG: About what time was this? AH: Well, my father must have married within a year after my mother passed, about 1910. MG: During the time that these family moves were made, Arkansas, and then you said that your father finally went to California, about what time was it that he went to California? AH: It's very difficult for me to know. Now let me think. I had not seen my father and his new family, I hadn't seen some of them at all, because he had six children by his second wife. And I visited them in 1930, so they apparently had been in California then about three years. MG: Now, during the time that the family was making the moves, you did not accompany them? AH: No, I had never been to Arkansas. I still lived, you see, when after my father married again, and I remained there for a few months, then I was invited to come to Atlanta to live with an aunt. One of his sisters, whose name I have mentioned as being Elizabeth, she had married late, and had one son. She was a dressmaker, and she wanted to go to work again and in those days—and I don't think we do that too much any more—the dressmakers went out into the homes and did the sewing. And she wanted to continue to do that. And with my being there, I could, in addition to going to school, I could be home with this young son after school, and before school—it would relieve her and give her an opportunity to do what she wanted to do. MG: What was her married name? AH: Conn. Her name was Elizabeth Conn. MG: And her husband's name? AH: His name was John Boston Conn. He had been married before, and had three sons and one daughter that were grown. MG: You went to Atlanta then, about what time? AH: I must have gone to Atlanta about 1912. MG: All right. Now let's see which of your siblings came after Charliemae. AH: Verna. Now Verna was the one, the oldest one that went to Arkansas with my father. Verna, and the other, Christine, next to her, and Deoscie, a son, and Annie Brown Clark. Brown was the middle name. She was named for﻿8 AH: (cont.) my mother's friend, and my mother used her whole name, Brown, to keep from identifying, so the friend knows she wasn't named for her. Then Adele, Miriam Adele; that was the youngest one. She was only three months old when my mother passed. MG: How were your early years spent? This is before about 1912 when you moved to Atlanta. What do you remember of that early time, in Georgia? AH: Oh, in Georgia, I can remember going to the one-room school that had only benches to sit on—no backs. Just a seat. And having different teachers coming into the country school, one-room school; summers and a few months in the winter. And in the summertime the teacher would take the older ones' classes inside, and ask me to take the young ones on the outside in the yard to give them their lessons. So you can see again, that I've been a grown girl for a long time. MG: You must have also been a good student, right? AH: So when I left Covington, to go to Atlanta, I was put in the fifth grade in Atlanta public schools. Did very well. We had in the schools in those days what we called the honor seat. In the sixth, seventh, and eighth grade we would get our report cards once a month, and whoever had the highest marks would get the chance to sit on the honor seat. And I'm proud to say that I never let anybody else sit there. Not even the seventh, nor the eighth grade. When we finished the eighth grade, we had a very elaborate affair, a play that we had to give at Atlanta University, because we had no stage at our public school large enough to have this. And I was given the principal part there. MG: This was for eighth grade graduation? AH: Right. And of course you know that, speaking on about education and school, with us, then, as I often tell my nephews and young friends, that it wasn't a matter of were you going further to school—where were you going, which one. So naturally, arrangements were made by a great deal of effort to have me go to Atlanta University for the high school work. As you know, there were no high schools in Atlanta in those days for black people. And it was made possible for one of the teachers to pay my tuition. Which she did for the first five years that I was at A.U., not only for the high school classes, but for normal school. As you know that I am only a normal graduate—of Atlanta University Teachers College. Her name was Julia A. Ellis, from Natick, Massachusetts. She died before I was graduated. I was allowed to take all of her books and other possessions, but I did not take them because I had nowhere to keep them. My aunt had died the May after I finished. Then I went to live with Aunt Hattie. MG: when did your Aunt Elizabeth die? AH: She died in May 1920. MG: And then the aunt that you went to live with after that? AH: Her name was Hattie Bell, Mrs. Hattie Bell.﻿9 MG: What was her husband's name? AH: Her husband's name was William Bell. MG: And Julia Ellis, was she a white or a black woman? AH: She was white. An elderly lady that taught English and algebra at Atlanta University. MG: How did it come about that she assumed your tuition? AH: There was some controversy as to whether I would go to Spelman College or to Atlanta University. My one aunt felt that she had a daughter that had gone to Atlanta University, and she felt that that would be the place for me to go, but it cost more to go there than it did to go to Spelman. And so this one aunt who was so anxious for me to go, interceded in some way to reach the school to see if there was any opportunity of anyone giving any aid, and exactly how Miss Ellis was contacted I was never sure. MG: Now, you really spent a relatively short time with your family in Georgia, before you went on to be with your aunt in Atlanta. What was your role in the home during that time? AH: In Georgia? MG: Yes. AH: Well, after my mother passed, I was the role of the mother for that family. We did the cooking, and the cleaning, and going to school also when the time came, and if there was work to be done in the field, all of us went. So it was carrying on exactly the way we did when my mother lived. MG: Do you remember that time as hard? AH: Very hard. Oh yes, very hard. It was very hard then; it was just as hard when I went to live with my aunt. Because in living with her there was the washing, the ironing, the cooking. I took over. I did the whole thing. Besides going to school. MG: So you had two jobs? AH: That's right. I know how to work. And I suppose that's why I've been able to work as much as I have and as long as I have, is because I matured early; it was necessary. MG: How did your parents, during the time you spent with both of them, how did they convey their expectations for the children? AH: My mother, I have heard my mother say so many times, believe it or not, that she did not want to live in the country forever. She wanted her children to have an education, because she had had no opportunity for education. Now, my mother had friends like the one that she named Annie Brown for, that were teachers. This Ann Brown was teaching in Texas, and another friend, Leonora Fleming. In order not to insult Leonora who was her other friend, close friend,﻿10 AH: (cont.) who would visit us in the country and were very close, she named her Annie Brown Leonora. They had had an education. My mother hadn't, my mother had only gone to fourth grade. And my father had less than that. But they knew what it was to be prepared. To be educated meant you could take your place in life. Mother didn't have much of an idea how it was going to happen. But when she knew that she wasn't going to get well, she said, "Well, I hate to go and leave all of my little girls..." because there were six of us, she says... I can't say it...[Mrs. Halyard is near tears] Even now it's rather touching. That she would leave them in the hands of the Lord. And when you think of that, you just can't help but think that the Lord has taken care of them, because every single one... My sister, Charliemae, after I was married, we decided to send to Arkansas to get the other children, Annie Brown and Christine, and we got them and sent them to Fort Valley in Georgia. Then we decided that Fort Valley wasn't, in our opinion, as good as Tuskegee, so we moved them from Fort Valley to Tuskegee. And in the meantime, this young Adele that had been living with my grandmother, who was three months old when my mother died, as I have mentioned before—my grandmother passed, so I had to bring her here to Beloit, where we were then living, to live with me. And so there we had Christine, and Annie Brown in Tuskegee, and Adele here with me, and I'm working at Goodwill for twenty-five cents an hour, and my husband is canvassing the neighborhood just to get people to take out shares because we had to get $50,000 subscribed before we could get a charter. So we decided that maybe the thing to do was to have one of the girls from Tuskegee... Oh, in the meantime, this one that was here with me, since I had to go to work, I sent her to Tuskegee also. I thought it would not be a good idea to have her at home alone when I'm out working. So to Tuskegee we sent her. There were three youngsters in Tuskegee and it was getting to be quite a burden. So I took the middle girl to come here with me, and she went to school in Milwaukee—what we had then was the Girls' Trade and Technical High School. She studied to be a secretary. MG: Is this Christine? AH: That's Annie Brown. So Annie Brown came here,and then later on Adele was graduated from Tuskegee, and she went and spent a summer with Charliemae, who was still in Atlanta working for Standard Life. And then she came back home at the end of that time, was very desirous to go on to Spelman, but I couldn't afford it—I didn't have the money. And she came here; then later on they both got married, and established their own homes. MG: Now, what happened to Verna? AH: In the meantime, Verna, the reason we didn't bring her in from Arkansas to go to school,[was}she had married. She had married to a young man who was a cotton sampler. I don't know exactly what that means, but anyway, that's what he did, and did very well at it. And they were the first ones to move from Arkansas to California. Then my father and his new family followed. MG: What part of California did they go to? AH: Wilmington. MG: What happened to your brother?﻿11 AH: Well, Louree remained when my father moved to California. He stayed in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, and was married, until his wife passed. Now that could have been...he evidently was in California six years. He's now passed. He didn't go to California for a good many years after my father. He died two years ago; he had lived with my sister, Verna, whose husband had passed about five years. MG: And the other brother? AH: He also passed. MG: When you think of your parents and these two aunts that you lived with, and perhaps other members of your family, what would you say were the most important influences that they had upon you? AH: Well, of course the aunt that I lived with, the most important influence that she had was to give me the type of things that you get at home, that you don't get in college, like a little bit of culture, and learning to speak well, and to do other things well that you should learn by having been with people who had opportunity. More than my mother could have given me. She had not had any experience as a farmer's wife. So I would say that both of the aunts... My other Aunt Hattie was a very dear aunt, was very interested in what I did. As you know, she was the one who made the arrangements to go to A.U., and was very dear, and proud of any accomplishments that I had made at Atlanta University. I had a fairly good record there. I worked very hard. I had to get up, get the breakfast and wash the dishes and get J.B. off to school—that was my aunt's little son. And sometimes, most of the time, I ran all the way to school, because I was late. And of course, at A.U., if you were late, you couldn't go to class. You had to sit in the assembly room. And that would never do for me. So anyway, to answer your questions, my aunt that I lived with had had some opportunities. She had taught sewing in Alabama, Texas, and had made many good contacts and a lot of friends who had had opportunity also. And this was a help to me. MG: Now you were a good student while you were in school. What courses do you remember that you particularly enjoyed? AH: Well, I enjoyed mathematics, except perhaps geometry. I didn't particularly enjoy it, but I'd do it. Enjoyed algebra, certainly arithmetic. I did well in English, very well in Latin. MG: Were there any of the teachers tikat you had that stand out in your memory? AH: Well, yes. I was very fond of Miss Clara Emerson who made her home in Beloit, Wisconsin, that I never thought that I'd ever see her again. She taught English and after she heard that I was there, in Beloit, she came over, wanted to know all about the wedding. Of course, we did not have a wedding, couldn't afford a wedding. We just got married. But she was a very dear friend. And then of course, Miss Ellis, the one that paid the tuition. And at that time there were only two black teachers at Atlanta University. George Towns and Anita King. She taught Latin; she never taught me Latin, though. I had Latin under Miss Emerson. And George Towns taught teacher's psychology and physiology﻿12 AH: (cont.) also. He's a good teacher, a good friend. Afterwards, I taught his daughter, Grace Towns Hamilton. You ought to have that name down among the women, I'm sure. Grace has been a...I don't know whether she's a senator or representative at Atlanta, state of Georgia, for a good many years. I like to watch her career. I taught one year at Atlanta University practice school. MG: After you graduated? AH: After I graduated. MG: And she was one of your students? AH: Right. MG: How about fellow students. Were there any that you created long friendships with? AH: Not especially. I believe I married the next year after I left A.U., and when I go back there's hardly anyone left in Atlanta that was a classmate of mine. I visited, I represented my class at our fiftieth anniversary, which was, what, '69? I can't think of anyone that I was close to, that I kept up with, that I kept a correspondence with—no, not one. MG: Were there any events that occurred during the time you were in school that stand out in your memory? AH: Well, when we—the juniors always had to entertain the seniors at Atlanta University. When I was a junior, we gave a play, and I don't see how that was a...well, it was social entertainment, I guess; it wasn't a play as such. It was more of a musical. Anyway, we did it outside. And again, I had the opportunity to have the leading role which surprised me, and surprised all the rest of the classmates, [laughs] I felt there were others who had done better. And we had one girl in our class, Rosaland Perkins, from Albany, Georgia, who always participated in the oratorical contest. And the teacher there was very fond of her—the head of the English department, her name was Edwards, she was from England and was always with Rosaland. Rosaland did beautifully at all of her participations. And I always was timid, very timid, didn't do anything unless I was asked to volunteer. I never volunteered. I hardly raised my hand in class when I really knew what was being discussed; I'd wait till I was called on. Unfortunately, I was denied so much. If I had children, I'd try my best to bring them up not to be timid. Because it can spoil your life. The night that I had to give my commencement speech at A.U., I really thought that I was going to pass out. MG: So frightened? AH: So frightened. And I was like that for many years, many years. I think I've overcome that now, because while I was at Goodwill, I had to go to churches and clubs and various places to tell the story of Goodwill Industries and interest people in what we were doing. And I became rather at ease in doing it. All through the years, and of course I had been very active with NAACP—I'll go on to tell the story of NAACP in a minute. MG: How would you characterize the value of your formal education?﻿13 AH: I think that Atlanta University prepared me for all the things that I have done. When I came here, I realized that we had no money; we had $500. We had tried in so many ways to get someone to get a charter for us for our savings and loan, after we decided to do this. We started studying, went to the libraries, got everything we could find to study— I even enrolled in one of the high schools, to brush up on what I had in business education. At Atlanta University, as in the normal school, at least we had bookkeeping, and sewing, and cooking. I felt that I was prepared for anything that came. And I was really willing to do anything as the means to an end. Because I was away from all of my friends in Atlanta. I couldn't do in Atlanta what I could do here, because they would say, "Oh, look at Ardie Clark, look what she's doing." So I was going to do anything...that's how I happened to go to Goodwill, because I would never have gone to Goodwill if I had been in Atlanta. That would have been sort of beneath me having had Atlanta University education. But here we were, determined to do something in this situation. So I, coming back again to my training at A.U., I thought that I was well prepared, well rounded for all sorts of things that I could do and was willing to try anything. If necessary, I was going to go out and be a dressmaker. Because I had made everything that I wore until I came here, and had sewed for my cousins. My Aunt Hattie had two daughters, and I made their clothes, even their wedding dresses. So I really had done a variety of things and felt like I couldn't do that now, because I haven't made anything for a long time. After I had worked night and day—sometimes we worked all night long with the savings and loan. After we had worked during the day at Goodwill... there, for instance, you had to be examined by the state, and later on when we became members of the federal loan bank in Chicago, you had the federal government to examine your organization. And if they would come in, my husband would have to call me from Goodwill to come—the examiners were here. That always was a tremendous strain. We just had to be strong and able to do these things. And we did very well so far. MG: Mrs. Halyard, what has been the role of religion in your life? AH: Well, I have been very active in the Baptist church. I was the youngest Sunday school teacher in Atlanta when I was there. Went to Friendship Baptist Church and still feel that that's the model church—the church that I've been trying to develop here in Milwaukee without success. Since I've been in Milwaukee, I've been a member of Calvary Baptist Church. I am a trustee. I have been chairman of the music department. And I have done many special things for the church, like chairman of the Woman's Day program. If not chairman of the whole program, I've taken care of some division of the Woman's Day plans, like being chairman of the luncheon committee or whatnot. So I feel that I have been a main part of Calvary Baptist Church. As one other thing that I could probably mention, that is we have a new church now. Our church is about five years old. We had some difficulty getting financed. Due to my connections—after we had given up in many ways that we would be able to build a church in that particular year—I was able to arrange the financing for this new church which cost us something like $600,000. Beautiful new church that we like to show off, and be proud of. So I have been very active.﻿14 AH: (cont.) We have now, connected with our church, housing for the elderly. We've just finished it. It's a seventy-two-unit for the elderly and the handicapped. The last tenant was entered in September of this year. The project was finished about July of 1978. And I have served, first of all, as the treasurer of this board in preparing for this housing unit, and gave up the treasury to serve just as a member of the board and chairman of the personnel committee of this project. Beautiful three-story building—elevators, air-conditioned—in every sense of the word a beautiful place for the elderly to live. MG: When did you marry? AH: I married September the 1st, 1920. MG: And what was your husband's name? AH: My husband was Wilbur Halyard. MG: Where did you and Mr. Halyard marry? AH: We married in Atlanta, Georgia, in my Aunt Hattie's house. You remember my aunt that I lived with had passed. And we married on that date and came the following day to Beloit, Wisconsin. MG: Could you tell me something about your husband? AH: My husband had started his education in Morris College in Sumter, South Carolina, a few miles from Bamberg where he was born. He tells the story of having heard that Booker Washington was going to be in a city not too far from his home town, and he got permission from his mother to go and hear him, and after he heard him, he was determined that he wanted to get an education. So the next year he was able to go to Morris College in South Carolina. At this college, the president was Mr. Benjamin Brawley, Senior. Anyway, it was Benjamin Brawley's father, and while he was there in college, Benjamin Brawley came to visit his father and saw Wilbur Halyard and became interested in him, and took him back to Morehouse with him, where he was teaching. And at Morehouse he started in the grades, I suppose, seventh or eighth. Finished there and then went through the academy. He had to stop out of school because he had trouble with his optic nerve in his eyes. He did not finish college. But in the meantime, Mr. Brawley considered Halyard to be his foster son. He was a writer, as you know— Dr. Brawley has given Halyard a good many of his first editions. He always signed them Father, and as I have looked at this at different times, I wonder why he didn't sign Benjamin Brawley, which would have meant so much more to us. At any rate, he left Morehouse in 1917. Came to Beloit and worked with the Fairbanks, Morse & Company, supervising housing for their men who were coming in from all over everywhere, all over the country to work in this industry doing war preparations. Now I don't know what they manufactured, but the only thing I know is that they were making scales. That was their main industry. But there must have been some special thing for the war effort. And so when this war was over men returned to their homes. That was how we were able to come to Milwaukee.﻿15 MG: Now how did you and Mr. Halyard meet? AH: Mr. Halyard was going to Morehouse and my cousin, my aunt's oldest daughter that had gone to Atlanta University, that I mentioned earlier today, had a friend at Morehouse. And when this friend would come to call on her, Halyard would come along with him, and that's how I met him. And we were, I can't say how many years it was, but he would go away to Connecticut summers, to work in the tobacco fields, as many of the Morehouse fellows did. From then on, through correspondence and through seeing him during the time he was at school, we became very close friends and decided to get married. In the meantime, he was offered this position in Beloit, and he had worked there a year before we were married in September. MG: How did you feel about the move to Wisconsin, and how did your family feel about it? AH: Well, you see, my one aunt had died. And I felt fine. I felt this was an ideal thing for me., because in the first place, I was not... I weighed ninety-six pounds, and all the years I had taught at A.U., I was out each month; I had to do something to get myself together if I were going to work, or what I was going to do. This was an opportunity for me, because I was only getting fifty dollars a month at A.U.. And you couldn't do very much with that. So then, getting married seemed to be the thing. I don't know how I managed as well as I did, but I didn't start out this way; I worked very hard at my aunt's house. And she was a very strict woman, very strict. She's strict about her housekeeping and about everything that you did. My uncle had a grocery business. And his grocery store was in the downstairs from___we lived upstairs. There were these big, heavy trunks that my aunt used to use when she would be traveling around from state to state teaching. And she kept them. She had all sorts of fancy little things that were given her as a teacher and so forth in these trunks. They were very heavy, but she would insist that they would be pulled around, and cleaned behind them. And in that way, I got to the place where I sort of did something that I shouldn't have done, during a weak period, and I wasn't ever...was always in bad shape ever since then. Had to have a doctor every month. So all in all, it was a good thing for me to get married and get away from there, and I did. And I have said so many times since, learning was not so difficult for me. It would have been very nice staying, to continue on to get a college degree and even to get a master's degree, which would have been fun. MG: You and your husband never had any children? AH: No. MG: How did your husband feel about you working? AH: At first, he thought it was very necessary. But afterwards, when he became able to support us, it was day in and day out, "When are you going to quit? When are you going to quit?" In the meantime, my employer, who was Oliver A. Freedman, he was executive secretary of the Goodwill Industries, he just thought he owned me. He would not...he just begged and pleaded, "Don't leave now, stay another year, stay another six months," and so on. I have all the﻿16 AH: (cont.) evidences of their desire to keep me in my scrapbook, the letters that he had written, and at the time that I left Goodwill, what they did by way of showing appreciation. As to how my husband felt, he didn't care what Mr. Freedman thought. "Please come home," and I finally did. MG: That's what I was going to ask you next. How did you reconcile these difficulties? AH: His frustration was that I was working too hard, not only that I was needed at Columbia. MG: So you gave up really one type of employment for another type. AH: Right. Right. MG: And how did you feel about it yourself? Did you ever want to just come home and be a housewife? AH: Well, I enjoy housework. There isn't anything about a house that I don't enjoy doing. And sitting back and looking and seeing what I've done to make it look pretty. Washing, ironing, I know how to do it and I can do it well, and I don't mind it. Now it's a little hard, and I do have some help, but it wasn't that I objected to being a housewife, but I knew there was no opportunity. Because during those eighteen years that I worked for Goodwill Industries, I worked for Columbia at night. I was uncompensated for work at Columbia Savings and Loan Association. I was not paid anything because we were trying to establish this organization, so that it could never fail. You don't know this, but I know it. In those years, not only other people, but our own people didn't think you could do anything that would last, and that would be permanent. And we were determined that here was something that is going to be forever. And I, now even as chairman of the board, when they say to me that we have reached another million in assets, I'm the happiest one in the world, because this is something that we started and worked with for so long. And even my husband, after we had been organized for ten years, he had received only sixty-four dollars. We have that in the records. MG: This is part two of an interview with Mrs. Ardie Halyard. The interview is continuing at Mrs. Halyard's home. The interviewer is Marcia Greenlee. The date is August 25, 1978. Mrs. Halyard, do you have any preference among the terms colored, Negro, and black? AH: Well, frankly it has been difficult for me to use black. Because so long we'd used the word colored. And I frankly prefer colored even now, and yet I am often corrected when I say colored and told to say black. I would prefer colored actually, or Negro. MG: Do you have any particular reasons for that? AH: I believe...not necessarily. It's just perhaps more or less what I've been﻿17 AH: (cont.) more accustomed to. I think black seems to indicate black, the color black. And I don't think that everyone is black. MG: You don't see it as representing a racial group? AH: I did not. MG: Did your parents discuss matters concerning race with you when you were growing up? AH: The only thing that I can remember that my parents talked about, when it came to race, is that they never wanted a girl of theirs to have to work in the home of a white person. Otherwise, of course we lived in a very segregated community in the rural South, where you just very seldom saw white people unless you go in the shopping sections. And, frankly when I... I had been so unaccustomed to seeing so many, that when I went to Atlanta to live with my aunt and would be on the streets in Atlanta where the streets are filled with people all the time, I couldn't really imagine how you could tell one person from another—they all looked exactly alike. So I understand now, when white people say that we all look alike. If they hadn't been accustomed to seeing us, any more than I had of seeing them at that time, I can understand it. MG: Did your parents explain what their reluctance was to have a daughter working in a white home? AH: Well, they felt that the white man would take advantage. That was the principal idea. MG: And that, in fact, commonly happens. Is that right? AH: Did happen. MG: Were there any other incidents or occurrences of a racial nature that you recall as you were growing up? AH: Yes. I recall one very serious one. One of the girls that was going to this one-room school where I went—her mother was lynched while we were all there. And I never knew what the problem was, but it appeared that she had been caught doing something they objected to. MG: What kind of impression did that leave with you? AH: Well, it was very frightful to all of the students who knew the girl in school. But of course it was a great secret among the parents. MG: It wasn't very openly discussed and explained? AH: No, not at all. MG: Were you aware of how white people regarded colored people when you were growing up? AH: Yes, I'm sure I was.﻿18 MG: Did their viewpoints in any way affect your racial attitudes? AH: No. Because you had no contact with them. The only thing that you would be thinking of, that they were the ones that had everything. And all of the stores, and... supplied the farmers with everything that they needed for their farm—the fertilizer, their farm equipment, and so forth. I have said to you before, my father was a sharecropper. You felt all the time that they were taking advantage—you could see that. So what your reaction would be toward that sort of situation is the way it was with us as a family. MG: What impact did other colored people have on your racial thinking? AH: Well, I can't think of any. MG: Did you hear them talk about race or racial matters at any time? AH: I don't recall any particular conversations that I had heard. MG: What is your definition of racial integration? What do you feel it means? AH: Well, as far as I can see, integration means to have the privilege of being a part of whatever—you have contact with other people at work, at school, in the... Well, work would mean various shops. It would include the financial institutions; it would include everything in which there is a matter of economy. But as far as social clubs, it would include anything which—and I think of this because this is something we've had an experience with here in Milwaukee—clubs that are tax-exempt. I don't feel that that sort of thing would be allowed to discriminate because we all pay taxes. But any other small, private thing, like I don't believe that one would necessarily have to invite me to be a member of their bridge club or such a thing. And as far as the churches are concerned, I know there has been a great deal of talk about segregation, the biggest segregation is at 11 obl©ck on Sunday mornings and so on. I feel that if a person wants to have their own private church, I don't particularly feel discriminated against because they don't want me to join the same church that they're in. I know that they would be considered segregated churches, and I know we talk about that a lot. That has never. ..I've never felt that I wanted to join any of the churches, for instance, here in my neighborhood; I feel very comfortable going to my church that's in the inner city. MG: Do you think that there's some value in trying to preserve certain all-black institutions from integration—such as the church, such as the black family? AH: I never thought too much of trying to see that these were preserved especially. It does, however, when you have something like the church, and people learn to do a good many things by having the responsibility. If you have the opportunity, if there is true integration in the church, this would be fine—where everyone has as much right as everyone else to take the lead, to be the chairman of the trustee board, or the deacon board, or whatever committee there may be. But if it gets overwhelmed, where we don't have an opportunity for leadership and learning to lead, then I believe that that would be obj ectionable. MG: Do you see that as a particular possibility, danger in communities where the colored population is very small compared to the white?﻿19 AH: I do. That is happening here in some of the churches where we have joined. They are just members, and that is all. And I don't think that helps the young people to have an opportunity for leadership. MG: Do you perceive any generational differences in racial attitudes among younger colored people and older ones? AH: Well, I think the younger ones are less tolerant. They want to see something done now. It appears that so many of the young people are feeling that the thing to do is to demonstrate, to show their disapproval of any sort of a semblance of segregation. They're wanting to get something done now. That is one of the differences that you see clearly. This, as you know, is happening all over the country. MG: Do you think that creates any problem in reaching goals, to have that variance of opinion about method? AH: Well, as far as I can see, 1 am not too willing to take the demonstration method, although I know that much has been accomplished. On the other hand, I feel that a good deal more has been accomplished by organizations, through the courts and through taking the regular courses, trying to see that the law is carried out, getting laws on the books in the first place, working in that direction. Getting people, young people included, instead of marching to demonstrate, to march to the polls, march to where they can get registered to vote, and vote. And if we could persuade them to do that sort of thing instead of just demonstrating, I think we would make much more progress. MG: To what extent would you say that race has been a factor in shaping your life? AH: Well, personally, I've had no racial difficulties myself. I've worked more with'white people than I have with black, and I have been accepted everywhere, as far as I'm personally concerned. The first year that I taught, there were no other colored teachers at Oglethorpe. Then I came to Wisconsin, and whatever I have done, I have done it in a position of leadership. And it has made it easier as far as race is concerned. MG: Has race affected the public response or reception to your work? AH: Not that I have known. MG: But now it was a factor in the establishment of the savings and loan? AH: Oh yes. We found it difficult to get a charter. And of course, there was competition when Columbia Savings and Loan Association was first organized. People were not loaning money to black people because they did not trust them to repay loans. There was a limit to how far north they could go. A very narrow space in which they could buy a home, and in that area, no loans were made. But after Columbia came into existence and began to find a way to spread a little further northwest and in various directions, then we had great competitors. I would say that we taught the people that black people, if I must use that term black—I'm using that more and more—have as much chance to repay a loan as the average mortgagor.﻿20 MG: You don't have to use it. AH: We taught them that they are a good financial risk. That they can be trusted, that they will repay the loans. So in that way, we had competition, and we've had no difficulty since then. MG: What is your evaluation of the racial situation in the United States today? AH: Well, at times, I feel, from the things that I can hear, that there's what I might call backlash on everything. All the progress that we have been able to make in the sixties is being held against us. That seems to be... in the case of unemployment. I don't believe that it's necessary to have so many young people walking the streets here in Milwaukee with no jobs. I believe that there seems to be a sort of a plan, not to give them an opportunity. You don't have anything that you would put your hands on to prove, except it doesn't seem that there would be all of these youngsters who have gone to high school and finished high school—just as those have who are working—and yet they cannot find work. This is worse this year than it has ever been, which makes you think that there is something happening that we really don't know just what it is, except white people are afraid that we are making too much progress. MG: Would you say then, so far as the racial situation is concerned, that things are getting better or worse? AH: Well, sometimes you would think that things are not getting any better. And in other ways you would say...what I'm trying to say is, in a way you can see people working in various places, where there are black people working where they never worked before—in the financial institutions, insurance companies, and many clerks in the department stores. On the other hand, there's a great unemployment situation, especially here in Milwaukee. So it's very difficult to know what to say, whether it's a great deal better, or not as good, or worse. I believe that the average layman would find it difficult to say it's better or worse. Perhaps organizations that have the statistics and can measure the present from the past, would have more of an idea as to whether it is better or worse. MG: What is women's work, in your opinion? AH: Women's work? I don't think that there's what you'd call women's work, as far as I'm concerned. Women's work is any work that they are qualified to do. MG: What are your feelings regarding the equality or inequality of men and women? AH: In my opinion, from my experience, women, except for physical abilities, are able to do anything that the men can do. MG: What's your opinion of the term "Ms."? AH: I don't like that. I have never liked it. I don't see the necessity for it. That again might be due to age. [laughter] But it seems to me that you could either be Mary Jane, Miss Mary Jane, as you have been taught that it﻿21 AH: (Cont.) should be, Mrs. John Jones if you are married or widowed, and so forth; the Ms., I never use it. MG: I think maybe there's some feeling with its use that it's a neutral term and that it doesn't indicate marital status, just as Mr. does not indicate marital status. AH: Well, it's just,what? Custom? A correct custom, where you've been taught that it should be done. MG: And you'd go along with that? AH: Right. I feel that it is to me like saying, chairperson. Now I don't go along with that. I ask, when the people elect me as chairman, to call me the chairman. I sit in the chair, and direct the meeting, so I'm the chairman of this. I'm not the chairperson. This is used in so many instances. It's just as bad as saying alderwoman—like some people will call the alderman an alderwoman, if it's a woman there. To me, well, I prefer it the way that it has always been. If you have the position as an alderman, you're an alderman. This is the name of that position. Not the name of the sex. MG: What would you say the women's movement is? AH: What it is? What is the movement? That it would make the women equal to men in many ways, in every way that she's qualified to do. MG: What's your opinion of the movement? AH: I approve of it heartily. The whole thing. Not just employment as you hear people say, "Well, I think you should have equal pay." Sure they should have equal pay, and they should have equal all the way around if they're qualified. I sincerely believe that. MG: Do you think that the women's movement is relevant to black people, and to black women in particular? AH: Why not? I don't know why it should be to black women in particular. I don't exactly understand that question. MG: Well, there are those that argue that somehow this women's movement is a movement that really concerns the white power structure, white men and white women, and that the concerns of black women might be more importantly geared towards race as a whole than sex. AH: Well, I know a young lady who was appointed to a position of great responsibility, and she said that she had no difficulty with race—the biggest difficulty was sex. MG: This is a black woman? AH: Black woman, yes. MG: To what extent has being a woman affected your career?﻿22 AH: Well, I don't think, as far as any persons connected with my career, possibly except my husband, who at times thought that I was a little aggressive and I suppose he was right. I would almost take over the savings and loan business, instead of giving him an opportunity to do his share of what there was to be done. It was just my nature to do that. But as far as anything that I have ever done that affected the public, I've had no discrimination as far as sex. MG: So that's just been a neutral factor, as far as your career is concerned. AH: Right. Right. MG: Now, I'd like to ask you a couple of general things about aging. We talked about this off the tape, and you indicated that you don't really care to discuss your specific age for the record. Could you give me your reasons why you feel that way? AH: Well, you know, I feel that I am capable of doing almost anything that any other woman can do, according to my limitations in other ways—like limited education, limited opportunity, limited experiences, and so forth. And that age does not handicap me actually. And in most people's minds if you're over a certain age, then you are supposed to, say, "act your age."[laughter] Act old, be old. And I don't intend to do that. So I just don't allow myself to think of age, or to talk about age, or to acknowledge age. MG: Do you think, however, that growing older has given you insights or wisdom, that you did not possess as a younger woman? AH: Well, I'm certain that my experience and my contacts, which is a part of the experience, and all the numerous things that I have done, and the people that I have met in doing the things that I have done, have placed me in a position to be able to see things clearer, to be able to understand things better perhaps. So in that sense, I suppose you can say, it makes you a little wiser, to have a better judgment of how to handle a situation that arises. MG: You've had a number of memberships and involvements in various organizations. Could you discuss briefly some of the community organizations and civil rights groups with which you've been involved? AH: Well, of course, most of my involvement has been with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. When I first came to Wisconsin, to Beloit, Wisconsin, I was invited to be a member of the board of the NAACP. And therefore, when we came to Milwaukee, and found the NAACP was not active, my husband and I began to make efforts to reactivate the Milwaukee branch. And my husband became president, and I have always worked along with him in whatever he has done. Then for many years, the association was inactive after that, because after it was started there were those who felt that others should be the ones to participate. Anyway, that's another long story. But I became president of the Milwaukee branch in 1950; before that time I﻿23 AH: (cont.) was program director for the last president. I had, under his administration, organized the first youth council that had ever been organized in the state of Wisconsin. Then when I became president, and had gone to the various national conventions, I noticed that some states that had a few branches had state conferences; so I figured that Wisconsin should have a state conference of branches. And I wrote to Gloster B. Current of the national office, who then was the director of branches and field services, and asked him to come out and help us organize a state conference. Prior to that time, however, I had reactivated the branch in Racine, Wisconsin, that had not been active for ten years, and organized a branch in Kenosha, Wisconsin. Then we had Beloit, and Milwaukee, Kenosha, and Racine, and Madison. Madison branch had been organized for some time before. We organized the state conference, and I became the first president. This was about 1952, I would say. And we still have the state conference, which is really the most alive organization that we have, as far as civil rights is concerned. We have a young man in Racine, Wisconsin, who is the president at the present time. We've had a number of state presidents, and Lloyd Barbee, who worked to get the schools—the start of the school integration in Milwaukee—was inspired by his opportunity that he had as president of the Wisconsin State Conference of Branches, NAACP. So at any rate, I have done most of my work with NAACP. I was also the first person of Milwaukee that worked with the state college presidents to organize the Negro College Fund in Milwaukee. In the early years of the Negro College Fund, they sent the college presidents into the different cities to organize the committees to raise money for the colleges. And Mr. James P. Brawley of Clark College was the one that came into Milwaukee. I worked with him to get a fund started here in Milwaukee. We did very well. From such efforts, I received a small citation from the National Negro College Fund. That, as many other awards—one from the Milwaukee Urban League, because I had worked a little bit with them, but not so much because I had worked with them, but because of other things that I had done in the community. I have a plaque from the Urban League also that is with the people who are doing the book that I mentioned to you. I have been an active member of the Zonta Club for some time, and I am a member of the board of the Zonta Foundation. I have been head of their committee for women—they don't call it that—at times, but I'm not doing that any more. I was nominated, and served for two years, on the Governor's Commission on the Status of Women, which was organized during the governorship of Governor Reynolds. I served with them for two years. MG: Before you get too far from the Zonta Club, could you say just a little about their activities? AH: The Zonta Club, at the present time, works with the visually handicapped. And it's a club of professional women, and you have to represent a particular organization in order to be a member of the Zonta Club, as you no doubt know. And I have been a member over ten years, and when you have been a member over ten years, you then become a merited member—which I am. At the present time, we have...this year for the first time, a black woman is president of Milwaukee Zonta Club. Her name is Arlene Jordan. A very capable young woman, has had a great deal of experience in YWCA work and so forth. And I have been a member of the board of the Zonta Foundation, which is a part of the Zonta Club, for﻿24 AH: (cont.) a number of years. MG: Tell me about your work with the Wisconsin Vocational Technical and Adult College. AH: I was appointed to this position by Governor Patrick Lucey. Seven years I have been on the board. I thought, at the time that I was appointed, and I said to the executive director, that I felt the appointment was for six years, that I didn't expect to last the six years, but I was willing to start. During the entire time of my membership on the board, I was chairman of the education committee. This committee receives all the programs from seventeen districts in Wisconsin, seventeen different schools throughout the state; each one of these schools has to present its proposed programs to the state board for approval. If they wanted to start a class in nursing or police science or whatnot, they would send it to the state board. And after it had been looked over by the person who was in charge of that particular work in the staff, it would have to come to my committee to be approved. We had a committee of seven people, I guess. And I have done that for this entire time until this past July. I was elected vice-president of the board, which means that I will serve on all of the committees, and do not have any special responsibility for the education. And in addition to that, I was appointed to represent the board on the Physicians Assistance Council. This was a new health division that was organized in Wisconsin for the last two years, could be three. I think it's about three that I've served on this. This committee was to test and make up the rules and regulations by which these physicians' assistants could be allowed to serve. That was a part of my work as a board member. MG: You worked too with the Women of Milwaukee Area. Is that an organization? AH: Church women. MG: Church women? AH: Yes. I was vice-president, and am a life member of the Milwaukee Church Women of the Milwaukee Area. I'm not very regular in attendance, but I am a life member and do get all of their literature. At one time, when I was vice-president, I did work actively with it, but after a while, you know, you get too many things. MG: Are there other groups that you'd like to mention that you've been involved with? AH: Let's see, we mentioned the Court Probate yesterday, we have the NAACP, we talked about the church, and now the Zonta Club. I've been very active in the Town and Country Garden Club; that, we've just had our twentieth anniversary. That club was organized here in my home. We are now members of the Milwaukee district, the state district, and the national. And one of our members has studied to be a judge. All the various committees that go with the flower show. I was the first president of the club, and was president one time since then, which I shouldn't have been, because I had gotten so many activities I didn't do a very good job. At any rate, that's﻿25 AH: (cont.) something that does a service in the community. We planted trees and a whole two blocks on one street, one year. We did tree planting at the Goodwill Industries at one time. And we have taken girls far up north to participate in other club work. So it's been an active club. MG: Mrs. Halyard, could you cover some of the awards and honors that you've received? There are so many of them, I'm sure we'll probably miss one or two of them, but could you outline those so far as you remember them? AH: Well, when I retired from active management of the Columbia Savings and Loan Association, which my husband and I had organized, as I have mentioned to you before, the community participated in a retirement party for me at the Art Center. And I received many plaques on that occasion. Plaques from the county, the city, the Savings and Loan Council of Milwaukee and of the state, from the insurance company which I had written insurance for. And by the way, after my husband passed, it became necessary for me, at that age—and age is one of the things we don't talk about a great deal—to have to take an examination to become an insurance broker, for life and for fire and casualty, which I did. So among the plaques was one from one of the insurance companies. Also from my church; and I was made an honorary member of the Lambda Kappa Mu sorority about ten years ago, I would say. And I have that plaque from that. I believe that I did mention probably the Milwaukee Urban League had given me an honorarium. I also have one from the E.B. Phillips Day Care Center which I served as a board member, and in its organization to help it become a good day care center. The Martin Luther King Award was given me recently, from one of the schools here in the city, and one of the awards that I cherish a great deal is the one for distinguished service given to me by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. That was awarded at one of the national conferences, the one that was held at Indianapolis. I happened not to have been at this conference and there were, as I understand it, nine people in the United States who received this award. Dr. McClenden of Detroit, who has given perhaps more time to NAACP than I have, and I, were the only two people outside of the branch office who received this distinction. And I have been very proud of that. I can't think of anything else at the moment. I'll probably think of something later. MG: There's a street and a park in Milwaukee with your name. AH: That is...that's the name of Halyard. It's a section of the city that has a small park connected with it, where there's also set aside, in which homes can be built. And it has been agreed with the city of Milwaukee, that no home in this section should be built that had a valuation of less than $40,000. So we anticipate that this is going to be a very lovely place in which to live. MG: Mrs. Halyard, do you have any hobbies? AH: Not especially, no. My hobby mostly is work. MG: How about travel? Have you had time...﻿26 AH: Yes, I traveled, had a trip that I almost consider unfortunate—it was my first trip to Europe. Went with a group that was planned by my favorite organization, the NAACP, but I was of the opinion that on this trip I would be with people who—not the people that I knew—but the people who had the same ideas that I had about many things. Unfortunately, that didn't turn out to be exactly that way, and while I did see a good many things...we went on a housing tour. The idea was to look at the housing to see such things that they were doing in many parts of Europe: Milan, Italy; Stockholm, Sweden; and even England and Paris. Building prefabricated housing,[to see] if that could be done here in the United States. That trip I had was the first time I had gone to Europe. In 1975, when the World Baptist Alliance was held in Stockholm, Sweden, I went with a group of people from my church, four of us, young people, young women I should say went, and other people from Wisconsin, from the Baptist movement. And had a beautiful trip in Europe that year, which was wonderful. I have not done a great deal of traveling otherwise. I have gone to many state conventions of the National Association and have been in the West Coast a good many times, because that's where my family is living. My parents, my father. So that's probably the extent of my travel. I hope to live long enough to get to Alaska. I have never been in Canada. These are some of the things that I feel that I have missed, and may have an opportunity yet. MG: Tell me now, one last question: At this point, as you're looking back over your life, what are the things that give you the most satisfaction? AH: Well, the thing that gives me the most satisfaction is that Columbia Savings and Loan Association is still existing, is still living and active and fine and growing, and is destined to be here for many, many years to come—giving service, helping people to finance their homes, and to move into neighborhoods that no other association would finance them for. And this is to me my biggest contribution, and the things of which I am most proud. MG: That brings us to the end of the questions I had prepared for you. Is there anything that we have not covered that you'd like to add? AH: Is there...seems like we covered a great deal, [laughter] MG: Thank you very much, Mrs. Halyard.﻿ARDIE HALYARD..