 Felicia Bowens: This is an interview with Mrs. Abna Aggrey Lancaster at her home in Salisbury, North Carolina, for the Black Women Oral History Project of the Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe College, May 24, 1978. Miss Bowens, it's been a pleasure to meet you, and I sense from your conversation and your pleasing personality that you must have a very wonderful mother. You come into our home just like a member of the family, and you accepted what little hospitality we had to give, and its just a pleasure knowing you. Unfortunately, I don't have a young son, but if I had one, I think I'd like to have him meet you. I think I'd like to meet him too. [Laughter] Could you tell me something about your parents—who your mother and your father were? Abna Lancaster: My father was James Emman Kwegyir Aggrey. He was born in the Gold Coast, which is now called Ghana, in 1875. He had an interesting early life--in fact, his biography, written by a distinguished Englishman, is called Aggrev of Africa. However, after finishing secondary school in Africa and teaching for a while, he came to the United States and entered Livingstone College, where he graduated with honors and taught for over twenty years. His teachers and his friends say that he was a very brilliant person. He continued his education at Columbia University, where he finished his master's degree and worked on his thesis and completed most of the work for his Ph.D. at a time when not many Blacks were pursuing postgraduate work . After teaching at Livingstone for the years that I mentioned, and attending Columbia, he was recommended to become a member of a commission to study the educational conditions in Africa. He was the only Black on this commission, which was made up of several persons, and during a period of Abna Lancaster: Felicia Bowens: 1﻿AL: (cont.) approximately four years, he went all over Africa. And as he was an African, he was able to interpret the desires of the Africans to colonial governments, and also he was able to be something of a mediator between the government and the natives> to the extent that many people say that he inspired the Africans to pursue education as far as they could. He also was able to interest some of the governments in increasing the opportunities for African people. Now, people in Africa revere his name, and we understand that in almost every country, particularly West and East, and even South, there are schools and hospitals named in his honor. After the commission was over, a part of which was sponsored by the Phelps Stokes Fund--he went back to the Gold Coast, and was cofounder of a college known as Achimota College that is in Accra, Ghana. And this school, Achimota, began to grow and grow. It was something like a seed to what has become a university system in Ghana. The first president of the Republic of Ghana was a former student of my father's, and throughout Ghana and other places in West Africa, the people seem to feel that my father made a tremendous influence so far as stimulating persons to further education. There is a story which he tells, which I will give you to read, because it would take too long probably for your tape. But one of the things for which he was remembered was pictured in what is a shield, and on this shield, there are piano keys, and the thought is, that you can play a tune of sorts on the black keys of the piano, and a tune of sorts on the white keys of a piano, but for harmony you must play both the black and the white keys. This has been something of a symbol for integration, harmony, and good will. Now my mother was an American; she was Rose Douglass Aggrey. She was born in Portsmouth, Virginia, as I believe, the fifth child of twelve children, ten of whom lived. She completed high school and finished college at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina. She took graduate courses at Hampton Institute and at Columbia University. She married my father—and this is an interesting story to tell--I'll tell you sometime how she met and how they courted. Well, she married my father in 1905, and there were three children born in the years that followed. In the early years of our childhood she did not work, but as we grew to be teenagers, she began to teach at Livingstone College, where she taught in what was then the high school department for ten years. She taught English. 2﻿AL : (cont.) Incidentally, my father was an English teacher, but he knew German, French, and so forth. But anyhow, back to my mother. She taught at Livingstone for ten years, and then she became what is know as a Jeanes supervisor, and I'm sure you can find out what that is from your research — the Anna Jeanes Foundation — something like an education supervisor in Black rural schools. She was a rural supervisor in Rowan County for twenty years. She also, when the Jeanes work stopped, became principal of two high schools here in the county and, after that time, she retired, but she worked five or six years after retirement age because she was asked to do so. Now as I spoke of the first three children, but there's a difference between the ages of my sister and my younger brother. There are four children of us—I'm the oldest, my brother Kwegyir is next, my sister Rosebud is the third, then I have a brother Rudolph, and if you want to know something about them, I'll tell you that later. But back to my mother. My father died when not one of us had finished college, and my mother saw all of us through school, and was a very remarkable person, very intelligent, very articulate, a lover of literature, and a very competent public speaker. She worked hard in the communities where she taught, and worked hard with any organization to which she belonged, and consequently she became president of the North Carolina Teachers' Association. She was the second woman to hold that position, the first woman being a Dr. Charlotte Hawkins Brown; Mrs. Brown was founder of Palmer Memorial Institute. My mother also became president of the state Parent-Teacher Association. She was also chairman of the board of directors for the Negro schools of correction. She traveled widely, going to Africa four times, and she was interested in the Student Volunteer Association, I think it was called. She belonged, as all the rest of us did and do, to the A.M.E. Zion Church. Incidentally, I should have told you that my father was an A.M.E. Zion minister; also, he was pastor of two rural churches for a while. Back to my mother. My mother composed some poetry—in fact, the hymn, I believe it is, of Shaw University was written by her. And I suppose probably the thing that I can remember about her more than her teaching and speaking, all of this, was her Christian commitment. We were not affluent by any means. Teachers' salaries were not very much for Blacks—but she always was able to take whatever she had and give us what we needed; sharing 3﻿AL : (cont.) sometimes with students of the college or the students with whom she came in contact. For instance, if they were going to have a program at one of her schools, and maybe a little girl or little boy needed a dress or needed some shoes, or something like that, if the teacher asked us what we could do, the next thing I know is that child would have the dress. And frequently it would be material in those days, because people made clothes more than they bought them ready-made for children. FB: How did your mother and father meet? AL: Well, my father had a very dear friend whose name was William J. Trent. He eventually became president of Livingstone College. They were schoolmates at Livingstone College. My mother had a very dear friend at Shaw, where she was going to school. Mr. Trent was in love with my mother's friend, and my mother and Annabelle Mitchell were such close friends that they decided that the first one to get married would be the other one's maid of honor. Now it happpened that President Trent proposed to Miss Mitchell, so my mother had to become her maid of honor at the wedding. President — he wasn't president then—but Mr. Trent asked my father to be his best man, and my mother and father met as they were practicing for the wedding and my mother was the maid of honor and my father was the best man. My mother tells this story. She says that my father was a very dignified person. She, of course, was the same way. But when they were coming back down the aisle, he whispered to her and said, "We may be the maid of honor and the best man, but in a year's time we'll be going down the aisle as husband and wife." My mother became almost insulted that anyone should propose to her at this time when she had not met him very long. But sure enough, he began to correspond with her. He was asked to speak at Hampton, which was not too far from where she was teaching, and she went to hear him, took him to meet her parents, began to talk with him and to correspond, and sure enough, within a year's time, they were married. FB: How did your mother work...was she going to school at Shaw at the time she got married? AL : No... Well, yes and no. She went to Shaw, I would say about three years and then stopped to teach and... I don't know about Miss Mitchell, what happened, whether she was in school or whether she had finished or not, but anyhow my mother was teaching when she met my father. But you see, the girls had continued to be friends, although they were not in school at that time together. FB; Where was your mother teaching? H﻿AL : She was teaching at Portsmouth, Virginia. FB: In public school? AL : In public school. But she got her degree from Shaw, afterwards. Of course, she went to summer school and her credits were transferred. And incidentally she was given an honorary degree from Shaw, and was given the honor of being one of their most distinguished alumnae. FB: When did your mother die? AL : She died in September 1961. Now there's a building on Livingstone campus called the Aggrey Student Union, which is named for both my mother and father. FB: So your mother and father got married in 1905? AL : That's right. FB: How long did they court? AL : I don't know. I really don't know. But it wasn't a long time, it wasn't a long time, because he finished college in 1902. FB: Why did your father come here? AL : To America? Well, I think there were probably two reasons. He met a bishop from the A.M.E. Zion Church, a Bishop Small, and this Bishop Small talked to him and influenced him to come. My father had thought of finishing his education in England, but this bishop interested him in coming to the United States and going to Livingstone, and he decided to do that. However, the school did not sponsor his education; he paid for his education himself, and worked too. FB: You said there were two reasons... AL : I think he wanted to further his education. He had taught before he came here. And of course, going to America was in the plan of furthering his education. And after he came here, he liked it and stayed, and he began to teach as soon as he graduated. He taught English, he taught in the Theological Seminary, Hood. But he was always studying, always studying...whether it was pursuant to his degree or not, he would study. He studied languages, and other subjects. He just loved to study. And he did his Ph.D., I think, in sociology. FB: So he was interested in sociology? 5﻿AL : That's right. FB; Did you know anything about your grandparents? AL : Yes. My grandmother on my mother's side was a Martha Anne Bell Douglass. She was a Bell before she was a Douglass. She was not highly educated. I can't tell you how far she went in school. Well, she was a great church worker and belonged to a great many organizations of the Mount Zion Baptist Church in Portsmouth, Virginia—so much so, that they have a circle in that church--and the circle is called Martha Douglass Circle. She was the mother of twelve children. I'm not quite sure where she was born. There's one record says she was born in Portsmouth, and one of the others says she was born in Boston. I'll have to find that out. But anyhow, she was a remarkable woman, and when the Mount Zion Baptist Church celebrated its centennial, they had a picture of her and a statement of the work that she did in the church. She sang in the choir, did missionary work... FB: Did you know her? AL: Just briefly. I think I remember her, and I can't remember how old I was when she died, but I think I remember her. I could not have been school age when she died . My grandfather was Walter Edward Douglass. By trade, he was a barber. In those days they had white barber shops and colored barber shops. Well, my grandfther owned a white barber shop and worked in Portsmouth, Virginia; but he also would run on the boats from Norfolk to Boston and other places as a barber. And he was very active also in the church; he was a deacon and a trustee of Mount Zion Baptist Church. I don't know the extent of his education. I know this, that he wrote a good letter--I mean, a correct letter—and he spoke without getting his grammar mistaken. Now whether this came of his education, or from his contact with the white men he came into contact with all the time, I don't know. But I do know that he was interested in his girls—he had five girls and five boys who lived. And he was interested that his girls should get an education. He wanted his boys to get one too, but he felt that they should help themselves if they wanted one. 6﻿AL : (cont.) He could do a number of things. My mother said that he opened up a little school in their home for people who couldn't read and write. He also had a little laundry where people did their washing. So he was industrious, and I suppose he had to be for the ten children. Now, we had heard that he was a slave until he was twelve years old, but we were so young when he died that we didn't get an opportunity to talk to him very much about it. What we know about him, as well as about my grandmother, is what our parents told us. My mother told us about her mother and her grandmother, and my mother told us also about her grandmother on her father's side, and her great-grandmother, and one of the two of them was an Indian--I don't know which one it was. But from the complexion of my grandmother and several of her daughters, as well as that of my grandfather, I judge that there was some mixture of maybe three races. FB; Did you mean it as a joke, that your grandfather was interested in the girls' getting an education, and the boys... AL : No, I didn't really mean it that way. What I meant was this, that he wanted all of them to get an education, but with ten children, and- he was the main support, he wanted the boys to help themselves. You see, my grandmother didn't work, so he would encourage the girls and try to see that they helped themselves. For instance, my mother helped two of her sisters; another sister helped another one...I guess whatever they could do, they did. But he felt that the boys should just be industrious, you know; he was industrious, and they should be the same. They should help themselves as much as they could. FB: So did your grandfather help your mother to get into school or did she help herself? AL : Well, I don't know how to answer that question, except to say that she received some sort of scholarship, and girls who went to school in those days could work off some of their schooling by doing jobs at school. So I don't know how much my grandfather helped my mother. I do know that she did whatever she could to help herself. There were limited resources in the family. She went to Shaw; her sister went to Shaw. One finished normal at Livingstone. Another finished at Hartshorn. FB; What about the education in your father's family? 7﻿AL: Well now, that's difficult for me to explain in this short interview. No, I can't, because the African system is so different. If you were to read the story of his life, you would understand. But you see, my grandfather on my father's side was married three times, but each time the other wife was dead; you know, people in many places in Africa have more than one wife. Well, my grandfather was a Christian and he had three wives, but my father was the son of his last wife. And my father was just interested in getting an education after all. I do not know of the others of his immediate family--you see, there were the children of the first wife, the children of the second wife, and the children of the third. Well, my father had brothers who were old enough to have been his father. My grandfather lived to be ninety-six years old. I'm not sure about the education of my father's brothers and sisters. This information is in my father's biography, Aggrey of Africa. FB; Did you ever meet any of them? AL : Any of his brothers and sisters? No. I met some of his nieces and nephews, and several of my cousins. FB: Do you know many of the brothers and sisters? It's in the book, but there's so many--I don't know--I'd rather look that up to be sure, because how many his mother had, I'm not quite sure whether it's six or five or what. FB: Tell me about his mother. AL : Oh, his mother was a remarkable woman. FB; Did you know her? AL : No, she died before I went to Africa. I'm named for her. FB: Which one of your names? AL : My first name is Abna, A-B-N-A, that's for my father's mother. Her name was Abna, and she was a very remarkable person. I can't tell you all of that because it would take too much time. FB; I have time. Talk about it some. AL: No...[laughs] FB: Please do. 8﻿AL: It's too long, it's too long. FB: Well, tell me just something. AL : Well, they say that my grandmother was a very remarkable person, and she belonged to an African royal line, and through her, my father would have become a chief, but he didn't choose to. But she was a very lively person; she liked to sing, and she was a very proficient storyteller. She just loved to tell stories. And she liked to dance and play with the children, but she was very concerned that all of the children should do what was right, and she didn't tolerate any misdoings. Now my grandfather on my father's side was comparable to--I guess, how shall I say that to you? Well, he was not a chief; but the chief has a person, an African chief has a person who speaks for him, very much like a prime minister would be for a king. And then my grandfather also weighed gold--that, of course, I would have to explain to you also. FB: Explain it to me. Weigh gold? AL: You see in the Gold Coast, there was gold. All right, now you have a certain amount of gold and you maybe pan it, or get it, and then you bring it to the weigher, who has the weights and tells you how much it's worth. He was a very honest person, everybody said. Now if you had time, I would read some of the things that friends told me about him. Anyhow, he was very highly respected, and the chief depended upon him because he knew different tribal languages, and when people came, he could listen to what they had to say and translate it. And if it were not a different language, then, if they had something to say, he would speak to the chief about it, and the chief would speak to him, and he would speak to the people. So he was a very dependable person. But anyhow, when my father was born, he was very happy. They had these religious ceremonies ... like giving someone their name ...[Voice inaudible]. FB: Speaking about your father's name, did your father change his name when he came to America? AL: Well, when he was baptized, the Anglicans gave him the name James. The missionaries felt that all Christians should have Christian names, so they gave him the name of James. He had eight names, but he went by James Emman Kwegyir--I'11 write all this down--Aggrey. FB: What about your name, and your brothers' and sister's names?﻿AL : All right. My name, Abna; my middle name, Azalea, A-Z-A-L-E-A, just like the flower; then Aggrey, A-G-G-R-E-Y. FB: Your middle name, how did you come to have your middle name? AL: I came by my middle name in memory of my father's and mother's meeting, because when the Trents were married, each of the bridesmaids carried a rooted azalea. That's right. So when I got married I wanted to keep my maiden name, but I have a daughter... FB: What's your daughter's name? AL: One of them has Azalea for her middle name. FB: How about your brothers? Your older brother? The one after you. AL That's right, exactly. His name is Kwegyir, K-W-E-G-Y-I- R. So he's named for my father. My sister... FB: Your father's name? AL : My father's name, Kwegyir Aggrey. My sister, Rosebud, R-O-S-E-B-U-D, Douglass, D-O-U-G-L-A-S-S, Aggrey; she's named for my mother. And then my youngest brother is Orison, O-R-I-S-O-N, Rudolph, R-U-D-O-L-P-H, Aggrey. Now I'm named for my grandmother; my older brother's named for my father; my sister's named for my mother; and my younger brother is named for my mother because her middle name was Rudolph. His first name is Orison, which means "in prayer." FB: How did he get that name? AL : He was born late in my mother's life, and prior to his birth she had some complications which she felt were relieved through prayer. She was so grateful to God that she named him Orison. He does not use that name. Everyone knows him as 0. Rudolph Aggrey. FB: Tell me something about you, when, where were you born... AL : I was born in Salisbury, North Carolina, January 16, 1907 . And my mother taught me until I was in fifth grade. Then I went to school, and I attended Livingstone for a while, then I went to Shaw, finished high school at Shaw, finished college at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina. I taught one year in the Winston-Salem public schools, and was a teacher for twenty-eight years in the public high schools in Salisbury, North Carolina. I also 10﻿AL: (cont.) taught at Livingstone for fourteen years. I did graduate work at Columbia. I received my master's degree from the University of Connecticut. FB: Was this in English? AL : Everything was in English. I also did work at North Carolina Central University, the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, and the University of Connecticut at Storrs. I have taught English for most of my life. I taught French for four or five years, and I taught Negro history and sociology as a second subject. Sometimes I would have four classes in English, and one in Negro history and sociology, but most of the classes were in English. FB: Tell me something about your childhood. You were the oldest, what did that mean? AL : You know, I can't help but [remember it as] a lot of fun. I was the oldest child and I was supposed to show the others what was right to do. Of course, the first three of us were close together, but we got along well together. FB: Did you feel like the food in your home was like that in your neighbors' homes? That maybe through your father's background it was different? AL : Oh no, you see my father had lived in the home of an Englishman before he came to America, and there wasn't that much difference. He was so devoted to my mother that, really, he agreed to whatever she wanted to do. And we never ate foreign food because there was none to eat. And then, so many things that are in America are in Africa too--rice, corn, fruit, meat, etc. But my father ate everything we ate--he would not eat pork, and we never had any strong drinks in the house. We had balanced meals. We ate three times a day. We had breakfast, and then my father came home for lunch from college, and dinner, and we ate as well as most people. We always had plenty to eat, and a variety. And our mother insisted that we eat certain things; that is to say, we used to eat asparagus--maybe we didn't care much for asparagus, but she felt that we should eat it. I don't remember anything that my father did not eat except pork. I know he did not drink coffee, he did not drink tea, but he drank cocoa and grape juice... There were some things he didn't like very well, but he was at home anywhere he went. He was affable, personable, well-liked. He was a preacher, of course, and he was a Mason. 1 1﻿AL: (cont.) I suppose you would think of him as somewhat of an Englishman, because, you see, he was trained in an English school; he went to an English school, and he belonged to an Anglican church before he came to America. So he had the best of education that the English were given at that time. So much so that when he came to Livingstone, they didn't know where to put him. And when one of the teachers died during his college career, they asked him to take one of the teacher's courses. So for a while he was just teaching and going to school at the same time. When he told us the Gold Coast stories, he'd sing a song in his native Fanti language. But you see, he was teaching and preaching at school so much, that we just were more or less studying and going to school and working here in the home. Everyone had a job. We worked — learned to wash and iron and clean. So, it was, I suppose, a Black family that was not too much different from other Black families, with the exception, of course, as it is probably in your family, where the parents were educated. We experienced the same prejudices that anybody else did experience; you know, we went in segregated schools, segregated trains, churches, etc. All of this was a part of Black life in the South. So I never felt that I was an African American, I just felt like I was an American with an African father. My father was just a gentleman. [Voice inaudible for a long stretch.] I remember I started to read Sherlock Holmes stories, and I somehow think he bought the whole set. FB: Did you read a lot? AL: Yes...and all kinds of things. I liked poetry. I was always reading, always reading. Did your father travel very much? PB AL: if somebody asked him to go to Washington to speak, or somewhere for things of interest to the college, he would go. My father had two churches in Rowan County. First and third Sundays, he'd go to one; second and fourth Sundays, he'd go to another. FB AL FB Did you feel any problems about being a preacher's daughter? No more than any other children. No more than any other children. No particular pressures... 12﻿AL: No, no because his churches were in the country, and we went there on Sundays, and he'd preach to the people, and then at nights sometimes...people lived miles apart. So one night we'd be visiting one family; the other neighbors could be two or three miles away if they lived on a farm. Now my father did have some rules and regulations and some restraints. There were restraints. One was that he didn't let us play cards. Now we could play cards like Pit and Rook and Old Maid... But the regular cards, like those used in gambling, we didn't have those in the house. But he would let us play Parcheesi. FB: Did you have jazz? AL: We had a Victrola--he just couldn't stand what we called then ragtime music, and there were pieces that we could play that were somewhat syncopated. He liked all classical music, but not jazz. FB: Did your mother go to Africa while you all were children? AL : No, she went to Africa when we were in our teens. FB; Well, what happened to you all, did she stay long... AL: Well, the first time she went to Africa was before my youngest brother was born. She left and put us in school. I was in Shaw, and my brother went to Hampton. My sister was at Winston-Salem. We stayed in school the whole time until mother came back in the summer. And the plans were not certain whether we were going to move to Africa where he [my father] was teaching, or whether we would come back to the States. While my mother was there, she found out that she was expecting a child, and so she came back and the baby was born. While she was gone, we went to school, and we had friends that lived in Virginia, so all of us went there for Christmas. And other times, we stayed at school. We didn't have any problem at all because we had an allowance, and if we didn't have enough to get what we wanted out of that allowance, all we had to do was write and our parents saw to our needs. Mama gave us enough clothes that would last until she came back. And it was no problem. If we needed shoes, we had an allowance. Food was sufficient at the school; we didn't have to buy food, and books we could buy at school, and for our schooling, they sent checks. Father arranged that money was sent from his salary to each one of the schools. And then we had an aunt, my mother's sister, and she was nice to us. And if we needed anything extra, she would help 13﻿AL : (cont.) us. But we didn't need so much, because we had an allowance--I've forgotten how much it was--but I know that I didn't have to buy a dress the whole time my mother was gone from September till my mother came home in May. [Voice becomes inaudible again.] FB: Did your mother like living in Africa? AL: Well, while she was there, her health was not good. But she liked it. She made many friends. [Voice inaudible for a long stretch.] FB: Tell me about your high school teaching. How has it changed over the years? AL : I think that students were more mature during my earlier years. There was probably far more of an interchange between students and teachers. The level of instruction was higher, requirements were more extensive, and the students didn't come to class every day--they came maybe Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. The hours were longer. More lecturing and for me, there were probably more essay questions, which meant students had to give a good deal of thought to what they were writing. FB: What difference did you notice between the high school and college students? AL : Some of the college students felt that they were more sophisticated; I think that though some persons felt that they were grown and they should be treated that way, I felt that some of them were a long way from home, and that they'd never been away from home before. Along with teaching them how to write a good outline, how to write a research paper, I wanted to give them a sense of security and a sense that somebody was being interested in them. And when I found that I could meet their needs aside from spelling, or rhetoric, or what-have-you, it showed that the whole matter of life as it was determined could be meaningful for them. I didn't have many problems... I had had much experience when I began to teach in college ... but I still had to teach students how to write a paragraph, to write a composition. There were still problems with spelling and grammar... I remember one young man who had failed freshman English twice. He had passed some other subjects, but he had not done very well, and so he came to me. He said, "Well, what shall I do?" 14﻿AL : (cont.) I said, "If you will come to me three times a week for the next semester. I will teach you everything that you need; you will get no credit, but I will give you some direction in grammar." After I helped him master the basics, he took the course under the head of the department and passed. So that was a challenge to me. But you see, the thing that helped me solve that problem was his willingness to do what I told him. FB; Did you find the students, do you think that their attitudes have changed? AL : Most of the students were cooperative and polite. I think that was necessary, to me. FB; Do you think that there was a big difference between the students of the 1960s... AL : They had different ways of showing it. I'd start off by telling my name, and that I was married and had three children, give them...and that in one time in my life, I had some sixteen- to eighteen-year-old children. I would tell them about the course. And would tell them some of the things needed besides paper and pencils... "We're going to be respectful of each other. You are not going to sit in my classroom... with your hats on... This is not a class of just ordinary people. We are scholars. Try to find some dignity." I had one young man who tried to challenge me. FB: Tell me about your children. AL : I have three daughters. Raemi Rosemarie Lancaster Evans is a graduate of Bennett College and teaches English in the local high school. She married her high school sweetheart. My second, Carol Aggrey Lancaster Meeks, has a Ph.D. and is director of placement and career planning at Lincolnland Community College in Springfield, Illinois. She is a graduate of Otterbein. Harriet Azalea Lancaster Graves also went to Bennett College. She teaches at Street Academy in Charlotte, North Carolina. They have all done graduate work. Raemi followed me in teaching English; Carol is in French and English; and Harriet is in social studies. 15﻿FB: We are here on May 25, 1978, at the home of Mrs. Abna Aggrey Lancaster in Salisbury, North Carolina. AL: Good morning. How're you doing this morning, Miss Bowens? FB: I'm doing pretty well, thank you. How are you? AL: Well, I think it's a bright and beautiful day, and I think I'm feeling fairly well. I don't know what the end of this interview is going to do. I may be feeling better afterwards, or I might be feeling worse. FB: We'll see. Mrs. Lancaster, would you tell me about the time when your mother returned from Africa? AL: Well, my mother knew that she would be confined in a few months' time, so she came to be sure that the medical situation would be conducive to her good health. She got a boat from Liverpool to come to the United States, and it was a Dutch boat, we understand. After she had been on the boat for a short while and her passport was reviewed, they found out that she was not an Indian as she sometimes appeared to be, and that she was a Negro. Therefore, they called for a conveyance--a smaller boat of some kind--and took her off the larger boat and took her back to Liverpool. Imagine her condition when she was expecting a new child in approximately two months' time. She was put off the boat all alone, and she was trying to get home to her three children, and trying to get there to prepare for the coming of another. It was a very traumatic experience. But her friends in London arranged for her passage. They tried to influence my mother to allow them to do something about the company that had done this to her, but she said, "No, let it go." The main thing she wanted to do was to get home to her children and to prepare for the coming of the new baby. FB; Would you tell me something about how you felt being Black coming up as a child? : Well, being Black, being a Negro, we liked to say in those days because in my family we preferred that word to colored. But being Black or being colored to me was not a very unpleasant thing so far as my own feelings about myself, because I had been trained in my family that I was just as good as anybody else--white, red, any other color. As long as I conducted myself in an acceptable manner that there was nothing about me that wasn't just as good as that of anyone else. I recall on one or two occasions 16﻿AL: (cont.) where people had compared my hair to the hair of my mother, and they said. "Oh, you don't have good hair like your mother." And my father said, "Oh, all hair is good. All hair is good, and if it isn't good, it's just not there. But all hair is good." And he didn't like anyone to say that because my hair was not the length nor the texture of my mother's that it wasn't good. So to answer your question, I had no qualms about being as good as anyone else. I did not feel inferior to the whites and as I walked...wherever I went, I was told to hold my head up and walk with dignity anywhere. However, I knew that water fountains... there was white water and there was colored water, and I would have to drink at the colored water fountain. So my mother didn't permit us to drink water at any of the fountains. "You don't have to drink that water. Come home. We've got water at home." However, we did have to ride in the, what was then called, the Jim Crow car. And we had to abide by some other regulations. But there were certain things that we just did not accept. For instance, my mother would not buy things from a store in which they called her by her first name. And that was a rather unusual thing, because the clerks would say, "Well now, I hope you're satisfied, Mary." Or, "How you doing, Sally?" Something of that kind. But my mother would tell them that she was honorably married, and they would either call her Mrs. Aggrey or would not say anything at all. So, I didn't have the feeling of inferiority and occasionally my parents would tell us things that would make us feel happy about some circumstances, and we were told to try to do whatever we did the best that we could to keep from feeling inferior. If we had a speech to say on Children's Day? Take time and say it well, with expression, so that we wouldn't feel that we hadn't done as well as someone else. We were just taught that we must do whatever we do to the best of our ability. And when we had done that, then we had no reason to feel inferior. FB; Tell me about the lynchings and any possible racial danger you might have had. You mentioned a possible incident, a rumor that had gotten out, but that had not proved to be true. You want to tell me about that? AL : Now, I do not recall any lynching in Salisbury. I do recall my mother saying that there was a lynching when she first came to Salisbury, not really within the city limits. This fact can be supported, I think, by research. But during my lifetime there was no lynching within Salisbury that I can remember. 17﻿AL : (cont.) I do recall that there was an incident in which a Black man apparently had propositioned a white girl, and she became incensed. And consequently, this was the cause of some threats. One of the threats was that some whites would probably come and burn the college. However, we had no fear really that this would happen, but we did get the rumor. We were told to go on to sleep, as chidren, and there was not much discussion at that time. However, the next day when tempers had cooled and something had been done about it, I rather think maybe the young man was either taken away from town, or something happened. I know he was not lynched. The next day we found that students had been placed around the house, and that they were on the campus, prepared to defend the college in case something had happened. Now there is no written statement of this so I cannot say that this really happened. It was more or less a rumor that they were going to defend the school in case there was any problem. FB: All right, you were an English teacher, like your mother. Tell me something about what influenced you to make your decision and also about the people who were very important to you. AL: I suppose that the very fact that I learned to read early in life meant that one of my chief joys is in writing. I love to read. I don't love to read everything, but when I find something that is superb in thought and in diction, and the way in which it's written is a joy, I enjoy it very much. And as a young child, I enjoyed reading, and my parents were liberal in letting us read the St . Nicholas magazine and the books which were available at the stores. Whenever we wanted to, we could get a book. Public libraries were not as well supplied as they are now, and I don't ever remember going to the public library for a book. But there were books at Livingstone, and books that my father would buy for us. So I enjoyed reading, and I liked to write letters to my aunt, and to the other members of the family. They taught us early to write letters. Since I liked to read, and I did not object to writing, I think that, as I went to school, my better grades were in this area. Therefore, when I went to college, I decided that I would major in English, and be an English teacher. FB: Would you tell me about some of the people who were very important in your life in terms of influencing you? AL: in college, the person who probably influenced me so far as my chosen profession was a Dr. Benjamin Brawley. He 18﻿AL: (cont.) was my English professor for four years, and when I decided to major in English, I knew that I would be under a very demanding and a very inspiring professor. He took an interest in me--I suppose as he did in all of his students — but I liked the way in which he taught. I enjoyed the challenges that he gave, and I had some degree of success. And then, aside from teaching, he made us feel that as Black people, we had a responsibility to know about ourselves. And, of course, as a competent English professor, as a poet, and as a historian, Mr. Brawley was widely known, and influenced me tremendously. I was also influenced by a Dr. Turner, who was the dean of Shaw University. He taught economics, and there was something about his manner and his gentility, and his sincerity, and yet occasionally he was brisk in what he had to say. But something about the man inspired me very much. The third person that inspired me was a Miss Florence Walter. She was a Canadian white woman who took a very personal interest in me. She was interested in my social life, she was interested in how I was getting along—in every respect. And she would sometimes call me and ask me if I didn't want to take a walk with her. We'd go for a walk, and she'd talk to me, and frequently would compliment me on something that I had done. And I felt that I could confide most anything in her, and she was a tremendous influence in my life, to the extent that my second interest in college was history. She was the head of that department, and I became interested in history under her. FB : All right. You... AL : May I add one other... I would like to add also, my education teacher, who was a Mr. Brooks Dickens. He influenced me also. He was a very fine teacher. He was head of the department of education, and he allowed us to be critical—not only to be critical of ourselves, but to criticize the books that we read and the methods that people would suggest for certain situations. And on one occasion, I made a correction that I thought was logical, and this pleased him very, very much, and occasionally he would ask me to do extra work. He encouraged me on many occasions to go into the profession of teaching. However, along with that, when he corrected my papers, he would always put some remark on there, either that was critical or that was complimentary. FB: You were a teacher, and tell us something about the professions that were open to Black women when you came out of college. 19﻿AL: Very few professions that I can recall were open to Black women. I suppose they would have been open if many of them had been able to continue their education beyond college. But it was unknown—well, I won't say unknown, but I knew of no women doctors in my early years, certainly not in the city that I lived in, nor the county in which I lived. The chief occupation of women in the twenties and thirties, I should say, even through the forties, would be teaching. And when one got a college education, or even a high school education, then he or she would go into teaching if there was a position open. Many women who finished college taught. Now, women who were untrained, who did not have an education, who probably... some couldn't even read or write, were domestics. They worked in the homes of white people, washing, ironing, cooking. Then there were other women who were dressmakers, and who made a living sewing for people, either in their homes or in the homes of the white persons. There were others who were maids and did work that was somewhat janitorial. Now, women who were fortunate enough to be married to very good wage earners, men who were very good wage earners, sometimes remained in the home. A doctor's wife did not have to work, and frequently the wife of a teacher, or the wife of a preacher, did not leave the home to work...would stay home and take care of the children. Sometimes if the wife of a minister could play the piano, she would give music lessons. If she could sew, then she would sew for people in the community, Black or white. In the town in which I lived, the chief occupation for some men was to work in the Spencer shops — that was the railroad terminal where engines were repaired, were cleaned, were furnished with whatever was needed, and trains were cared for. The Southern Railway gave work to many Blacks—men. Now these men had wages that were higher than just what the ordinary laborer, Black laborer, would get...or the farmer or the janitor or the street worker—people who did ordinary labor. And sometimes the wives of these persons who worked for the Southern Railway did not leave the home to work, because their husbands made a salary that was sufficient to take care of the wife and the home and the children. But so many persons did not have jobs of this kind, and consequently it was necessary for the wife to supplement the salary of the husband, if she wanted to help with the home and provide for the needs of the children. pB; You talked about the situation when you were coming up. What about when you were married? You worked much of your 20﻿FB: (cont.) married life. How did you feel about being a working wife, a mother, and how were other people in your day handling the situation of being a wife, a mother, and also working? AL : That's so difficult for me to answer, about the other people. When I began to teach, the salaries for Blacks were low. As I recall, in my first job, I got about, oh, probably forty-five dollars or fifty dollars a month, and of course, I was not married when I first started teaching. My father had died, my mother had two children in school, and a young baby at home. She had a two-story house to maintain, which meant, of course, keeping the utilities and repairs and furnishings in order. So it was necessary for me to work, not only to take care of myself, but to help her in whatever way that I could. So, as soon as I finished school, I was able to get work, and continue. I had been working at the high school when I decided to get married. Therefore, I continued to work, to help myself, and to help in the home. The salary had increased to some degree, but I was paid for nine months, and it still wasn't anything like a hundred dollars--I think it was about sixty-five dollars a month—which meant that one had to save enough or provide enough resources from the nine months to live twelve months. And then the teachers were required also to maintain their certificates, which meant also that if it was time for your certificate to be renewed, then you had to go to summer school. Well, it was necessary then to work, because no man could take care of all that. My husband wasn't making enough to take care of all of the needs that I had, and as a teacher, I just felt that I had to improve myself, and still be helpful whatever way that I could. And I enjoyed teaching, and aside from the fact that the salary gave me a sense of security, I just enjoyed being with the people and being with the young people, contributing something to the lives of the young people in my community. The work of a teacher was not only the work in the classroom. You had to do other things aside from teach. You had a homeroom, and if you had any skills or talents, the principals would expect you to use them. Anyone who could play the piano had to take care of music. If you had any ability in public speaking, you had to teach the children to give speeches and to act in plays; whatever you could do, you were called upon to do it. And there was a sense of joy in seeing that the young people developed under whatever talents or skills that you had. Most of the Black teachers had a personal interest in the students and 21﻿AL: (cont.) wanted them to excel, wanted them to learn, wanted them to be able to be worthy members of society. FB: What about after your children came along? Did you have second thoughts or hesitate about being a working mother? Did you have any kind of feelings or thoughts about that? AL: I don't recall that I had any unhappy thoughts about working, although my children were young. In the first place, I was fortunate in having persons who would help me. Just as there were persons who would go into the homes of white persons and take care of their children, if there were a friend that you knew who needed help, you could sometimes employ them. I was fortunate in being able to get some help with my own children. However, I was with them in the afternoon, after school--and at night. And my mother and my sister (when she had finished college) was available also to help in the rearing of the children. So there was not much of a problem. My husband would play with them, would take them for walks, and we took them to games. We took them to recitals at Livingstone College, which was just across the street. There was not a serious problem, so far as my working away from home. FB: What about your husband? Now did he have any objections, or once you began to have children, perhaps, begin to question the need for you to be working? AL: I had no problem in that respect, because we were helping each other. We wanted a car, then there was a need for both of us to get the car; we wanted to provide things for the children, one would do it or the other. And he did not object at all, because his salary was not so large that he could afford to do some of the things that we wanted done; he could not afford to do them by himself. So, of course, he did not object to my working. And fortunately, we worked together, in the same school, which meant we went to work together, and we came back home together. Now my husband not only taught science, but he was a football and basketball coach, which meant, of course, that he was away in the evenings for a good bit of the time. But I was at home, and though he was not at home sometimes until seven or eight o'clock in the evening, the children were not by themselves. And as a result of his coaching, they learned to like sports, and they enjoyed going to the games, and were very happy to join in the cheering of the teams, and found pleasure when Daddy's team had won. So it was a rather happy situation. 22﻿AL: (cont.) At the present time, though my daughters are grown and out working themselves, they know more about these different sports technically than I do, much more, because they can tell what rule has been broken...what rule applies, why this happened, why this person was put out of the game, what this person in football was doing. I just observe the game, but they know it rather scientifically. [Laughter] FB; Today people say that women have to choose, have an opportunity to choose between being a career woman, as it were, or being a woman who's a housewife and stays at home. What do you feel about this current concern or discussion about the roles that women should have in our society? AL : That's rather hard to say, because to me, it's difficult to say what women should do. I see women, of course, as a whole, but I see them as individuals, and I think individuals should have the ability to choose what they want to do. If a woman wants to be a lawyer, very good. Let her go and be the lawyer. I think there should be nothing in her. way to allow her to do that which she is trained for or has a skill and talent to do. So I see it in that way, but I don't just lump them all together and say that a woman should do this or a woman should do that. I think that a woman may do what she feels she's trained to do and has the ability to do. I don't think anything should be placed as a stumbling block in her path because of her sex. On the other hand, I feel that she should maintain some of the qualities of homemaking if she marries. I think that she should make the home a happy place for the husband... it should be a place in which they could relax, in which they could share peace and beauty and fellowship, and a place where other people can come and enjoy themselves. And then, if children come, I do feel that the woman has a very definite responsibility as a mother in the training of the children, as well as the father. I suppose I'm a little old-fashioned about that, but from my own experience, I do feel that time should be given to the children--that not everything should be relegated to the school, or to the nursery. I feel like it's the mother's duty in the home to take care of the children and the home, as far as it's possible. Now, we do have nursery schools and day centers, things of that kind. All these are very good, but I can't see how they can take the place of a good mother. Certainly young mothers nowadays will have to use these, because they 23﻿AL : (cont.) cannot depend on their mothers and grandmothers to take their place in caring for the children. But I don't think they can abdicate all of the responsibility to organizations or to places, because so much of the mother's attention and love and concern should be a part of the home. FB: All right. Tell me what you think about the women's movement, and what role you think Black women have to play in it. AL : I cannot speak very much about the women's movement. I have not read widely about it. I read sometimes what's in the papers. I like to feel that women, intellectually, and in almost every way that I can think of, are equal to men--in many respects I think they're superior—and because of this I think that their opportunities should be equal. And yet, I'm hesitant to say that I want to see a woman become masculine. I want her to maintain her womanly qualities, and I want the man to feel that the woman should be respected not only as a woman, but as a potential mother, as a potential wife. And I like to feel that a man is going to be courteous, and he's going to give this woman who has a capability of being the mother of children... that this woman is going to be given certain courtesies that may be different from what he would give to another man. If he is going to be concerned about her comfort, so that she probably doesn't stand as long as men are standing; or in certain places, if she's to be given a seat; or if she's to be helped and shown certain courtesies, I think that this is what she should have. I don't think that because she might have a similar job to the work of a man, that she necessarily has to abdicate the need for attention and for protection. I think that she should require—if not require, should accept--the courtesies, the concerns, that are physical. Because although intellectually and some other ways, she is the man's superior, certainly there are physical changes and physical needs that should be considered. And a few women are as strong physically as men, and certainly the man cannot do some of the things that a woman can do physically--and we should respect the differences. FB: What do you mean when you say "womanly qualities" and a "woman becoming masculine"? AL : I just have a feeling that two persons — a man working in an office, and a woman working in an office—may be doing the very same work, and getting the same salary, but because the man is physically stronger than the woman... 24﻿AL : (cont.) If it becomes necessary for a bag or a bundle to be taken from one desk to the other, I don't think that the man should object to taking that responsibility. Because he knows that he is physically better equipped to do it than a woman, and he must realize too that the woman has the ability to do some things that he can't do. and consequently... FB: For instance... AL : For instance? Well, she can be the mother of children. and that's important, that the children should come into the world. Then, if she is beyond childbearing age, then she still is just not as strong as the man...and he should respect that and want to see that she lives as long as she can. There's a certain physical difference that I think has to be recognized and taken care of. FB: What ways do you think the woman... You said a woman is intellectually and some other ways superior to the man. In what ways? AL : No, no, no. No, I don't say that the woman is, but I say, individuals. A woman who is a scientist, and has ability as a scientist, then she's equal to a man who has the same ability as a scientist. Now, she may not be able to change a tire as quickly as he does, but certainly they can work on projects the same way, and they deserve the same salary...and if she writes a book, then she writes it as a scientist, and not as a woman. And therefore I think that in most areas, she is his equal; in some areas, in different areas, she may be his superior. She may have a sensitivity that is superior to his. Her contacts with people may be more keen, I mean she may be more sensitive to their needs and to what they're saying. She may realize that some persons with whom she comes in contact are echoing what others have said, or what others are thinking, and she may recognize that echo a little bit sooner than the man. FB: You've worked as a teacher, both in the public schools and at college. You can correct me, but perhaps especially at college, you probably worked with a majority of men rather than women, whereas maybe in public schools, there may have been more predominance of women. Do you feel like, especially in a college situation, that you were smothered or discriminated against in any way by the men because you were a woman? Do you think that perhaps you didn't receive some credit that you should have for something, 25﻿FB: (cont.) anything of that nature that might have been discriminatory? AL: I cannot remember any situation in my teaching career in which I felt that I was discriminated against because I was a woman. I cannot remember any situation in the high school that I taught, and of course I may have... I should have mentioned that my first teaching position was in an elementary school. Well, in this elementary school, there were more women than there were men teachers. When I went to college... high school teaching, there were still more women than men. The men were the coaches, and the men probably taught math and science, but as time went on, the women were teaching some of the same things that the men were teaching. And in the teaching profession, in the Black schools, there were either as many women as men, and in some cases, more women than men. So there was no chance for them to discriminate against us, because we were in the majority, or else we could do things that were necessary to help them. And I had no problem. We were...in the public schools we had classes, record classes. Well, if there were two divisions, sometimes a man had one division, perhaps a woman had the other. FB: What's a record class? AL: A record class was a class in which one had to keep the grades, the record of the grades of all the students, and you had to keep the attendance records, and their disciplinary records. And all this had to be written down, and it was filed in the office, in those early days. So, for instance, if I were a senior teacher, as a teacher of a senior class, then I had to keep the daily record, attendance records, and then a record of all their grades. And then I had to make statements with reference to their conduct and pass this in each month. Now that was in the early days. Now, of course, in college, why we only had to keep records of the different classes that we had...we passed in the records to the dean. But I did not feel any discrimination. Very few persons, I think, that taught in the high school or in the college felt any discrimination because they were women. Of course, women were not football coaches, but then they didn't want to be. But they were basketball coaches. So there was no discrimination. 26﻿FB: What about the principals? Weren't most of the principals men? Did that disturb you, that women weren't in leadership type positions like that? AL: As a young woman teaching in my twenties, thirties, and I would say, probably forties, there...I did notice that there were fewer women principals than men. But in the city in which I taught for several years there was a woman, white woman, who was principal of the white high school. This was rather unusual, but she was a very capable person. At no time was there a Black woman who was principal of a high school, but there were Black women who were principals of the elementary schools. And my own mother was principal of a high school, and very successful as one. She was also a supervisor. So you did have women in administrative positions. Those who wanted this responsibility, they accepted it and did very well with it. But, for the most part, in the Black high schools, the principals were men. This didn't give us any problem. We let them go right on and do what they wanted to do. If they enjoyed it, why, that was their pleasure. FB: You mentioned to me about your students and how good they were and some of the incidents. I'd like you to repeat the incident about the young man who you helped with his English, and also about how the students helped you out when you went to Kenya. AL : Well, this, of course, was in my college teaching. I wish I could say something, however, with reference to the students that I taught in high school, because there was a feeling of cooperation, for the most part, because the teachers and the students, and the students worked very well with them in high school. Of course, you would have an occasional discipinary problem, but there were very few, so far as I was concerned. Now when I got to college, I didn't find very much difference with reference to the cooperation which I received. If there was any difference, of course, it would be probably in helping a student to adjust to some of the problems which he faced. They would have problems that would sometimes cause them not to study as much, as well as they could. But most of the students who came to college, I think, had the idea of graduating and they were willing to do what was required so that they could pass the course and graduate. But I did find that in teaching English, many of the students needed additional help. The help that was needed was basically in writing, in composing, in spelling—grammar, we'll say--they needed much help. 27﻿AL: (cont.) There was one young man who came to me, and he had failed a course twice. The second time he failed was a course that I taught. And he came and said he had failed the same course twice, and he knew that if he failed it again, he wouldn't be permitted to continue. So he wanted to know what in the world could he do. And I evaluated his weaknesses and told him that he was not making improvement because he was making the same mistake several times. I told him that I thought that what he needed really was to have a review of the fundamentals... And he asked me if I would help him, and I told him, "Yes, I would." So he came to me at least three times every week for help. He stopped taking that course, and went on with his other work, and I gave him lessons in a large composition book, so that he could see his progress. One day it might be rules in spelling; another day it might be work with his verbs, irregular verbs; another day it could be a composition and difference in sentence structure. We went through the fundamentals that whole semester. He would always have to write his compositions a second time, sometimes a third time. But he was conscientious--he came to my office, and sometimes more than I required, if I had the time. If I didn't have the time to see him during my office hours, he would ask me when he could come, and I would tell him. I worked with the young man for a whole semester, not on a college level, but just teaching him the fundamentals and correcting his speech, and having him punctuate properly, having him organize his work properly. He worked very hard. And that summer he took the course with another teacher, and passed successfully. And I think this shows that if the student is willing to cooperate with an interested teacher, there's no telling how he can improve, in whatever areas he has to. FB: Now in—was it 1975?--you were a delegate to the World Council of Churches in Kenya. Tell me about that trip and how the students were cooperative with you in that effort. AL: I was elected a delegate to the World Council of Churches, but I was still teaching, so I had to get permission from the president, from the dean, and from the head of my department to be away from my classes. There was no problem with any one of the administrators, but they did depend on me to make some arrangements for my classes. I was going to be away from my classes for about, oh, I should say, almost three weeks, and this would be the last weeks in the semester. So I had to make a choice as to what I was going to do, how I was going to arrange my work. So I talked to the classes, and asked them, if I gave them a study guide, would they be willing to study, 28﻿AL: (cont.) either in groups, or with some supervision; and when I returned, to take the examination from the course and have their work evaluated in terms of what we had done previously and the work they would do in the study guide. And they said that they would. Then I talked to the head of my department and the dean, and told them what plans I had in mind. They agreed to it. I worked out a study guide and gave it to each member of the class. The classes accepted it, and I went on to Kenya. The classes did not meet formally--I mean by that that no other teacher took the class and conducted the lessons. They met in groups, sometimes one of the students would go over some of the questions with them. Some of the boys met with friends in their dormitories... and the girls. When I returned, I did not have an opportunity to meet the classes. My first meeting with the class was to give them their final examination. They cooperated so beautifully with me that I gave the examination, I gave the grades... and not one student came back to disagree with the grade which he received. I thought that was wonderful cooperation. And not everyone passed—of course, more did than didn't--but I thought that this was extremely cooperative, so far as the students were concerned, and I was pleased with the work which they had done. I did have to work out a very carefully planned study guide, and it was approved by the head of my department. FB: Mrs. Lancaster, you talked about how, in your father's house you were brought up with certain rules and regulations, and you understood those, and you abided by them, and you knew that if those were kept, everything would go well. Tell me something about the rules and regulations that you had in your classroom. AL: Now, you are taking me from my home to the class. You want to know about the rules, the regulations. Well, in my class I always stressed to the students giving them a handle—Mr. Jones, Miss Smith--and when I would enter the classroom in the morning, I would aways speak to them, "Good morning, class." And they would speak to me. I would have some few words of greetings before I went on with the lesson. But before I introduced the course outline, or before I gave them the introduction, on the very first day that a class met, or probably the second day, I explained some of the rules and regulations that I had about work that was to be passed in to me--it was to be done neatly, what kind of paper we were to use, what kind of ink we would use. There would be no red ink--I would use the red ink. There would be no green ink. What kind of work...there would be no numerous erasures, and 29﻿AL: (cont.) certainly no scratched out work. All right, we had rules and regulations with reference to the written work . Then we had some rules with reference to our recitations. I wanted them to be free in what they had to say; they could answer questions, they could ask questions, we could have discussions, but we kept the discussion on a level of dignity. For instance, in world literature, Agamemnon or Job or Joseph could not be a "dude." We had to give him a word that was more commensurate with his position in whatever story the character was in. Then I would ask the young men to respect all there by removing their hats. I had been reared in a society in which men did not wear their hats on the inside of a building. So I asked the young men in my classes if they would not wear their hats, and they didn't. I said in the summertime, if we had summer school classes, that I thought it might be a little bit more dignified if we did not come to school barefooted. I would certainly wear my shoes, and I expected them to wear theirs. Little things of this kind. And very seldom was I challenged, because I felt that the classroom was a place in which we were becoming educated for life, for situations that would be very challenging, and we wanted to develop habits that would maintain... habits that would go with us throughout life. I had very little trouble with that. But students would say, "Well, now, if you go in Mrs. Lancaster's class, be sure you don't wear that hat. She's not going to have anybody sitting in the class up there with a toothpick in his mouth. She's going to tell you, 'Young man, you'd better take the toothpick out so I can understand exactly what you're saying.'" And after we talked about that for once or twice, there was no problem. FB: Tell me about the young man who challenged you on your classroom system. AL: Well, one young man said to me after I had said this, he came to my office and said, "It seem to me, Mrs. Lancaster, you be more concerned about what's on the head than what's in the head. I notice you say you don't like the boys to come in with plaits, you wanted them to comb their hair, and I notice that you didn't want them to wear their hats. You ought to be more concerned about what's in the head than what's on top of the head." "Oh," I said, "This is certainly true. I am more concerned about what's in the head than what's on top of the head, but I'm trying to help you prepare for a situation that you're 30﻿AL: (cont.) going to be in when you leave this college. And you're certainly not going to sit up at your desk and entertain people with your hat on, and you're not going into churches or going into other people's offices--so let's get into the habit of doing the thing correctly all the way. And consequently. I think it would be easier for us." He mumbled a little and went on. And I said. "Of course, you know, there are other classes and you don't have to take this one. You can go into... You have a choice of going into another class. But this is just one of the few little idiosyncracies that I have, and we'll go along with it, or else maybe you can find something else." He accepted it, and in about two weeks or more, I gave the young man a report. Now, in my classes, when you give a report, you come to the front of the class and take a seat next to the teacher, so that after you've read your report or discussed it, you may answer questions. This young man gave his report, he not only was well dressed, but he was dressed in a suit, not in the usual casual manner — shoes shined, suit, everything. He was going to prove to me and to the class too that he could do exactly what Mrs. Lancaster expected. [Laughs] And I didn't expect the suit, and I didn't expect all that he did, but he did what I asked him, showing that he was really willing to cooperate. We enjoyed his report. FB: You came to Livingstone College in the sixties amidst the civil rights demonstrations, the boycotts, the King and Kennedy assassinations, the problems on college campuses with boards of trustees and other protests because of conditions. Would you say something about how this was handled at Livingstone and how you felt about the way students were going during this period? AL: I could sympathize with the students because I had some of the same feelings that they had. I was not as militant, and I never believed in any kind of destruction, burning, or things of that kind. But we had strong leadership at Livingstone under the two presidents that I worked with...under whom I worked, and they had the feeling that it was not necessary to be destructive in demonstration. On one occasion, under the administration of Dr. Duncan, the students organized... they marched from the school to the city courthouse; they had a pray-in and a sing-in, and spoke about some of the things that they thought should be changed, and came back orderly to the campus. Pictures were taken, it was a very remarkable experience, because teachers--some of them marched with the students--but the students organized themselves so that they had leaders in each group walking with them. They did not block the 31﻿(cont.) streets, they did not destroy any property. And that singing that they did. and the praying that they did in front of the city courthouse will never be forgotten. Now that was one way in which they did it. Now in the different classes, of course, I'm sure that they must have voiced their resentment at some things... And there was a feeling among many of the students that probably some of our rules should be changed. So we did give the students more opportunities to help in the administration of the college. They were allowed to have representatives on different committees--on every committee. I think, with the exception of probably one or two--they had a voice, they had a representative. This helped. Now, when President Kennedy was assassinated, this was a very sad time on our campus. I remember that the students... some of them wept when they heard that Kennedy was assassinated. And I remember one of the white teachers came to the office where I was and said, "You know, President Kennedy has been assassinated. The radio, television seems to think that he's dying or either dead, and if he dies, I don't know what's going to happen to your people." And I quickly responded to him, "Well, I certainly hope that he doesn't die, but if he does, God isn't dead, and we'll make it." Now, of course, the death of Martin Luther King was an exceedingly traumatic experience, and the students reacted in various ways, but they did not destroy any property in the city, nor on the campus. Now. in one year, there was a problem, I don't recall exactly what stimulated it right now, but there were some demonstrations. And it seemed as though they were getting a little bit out of hand, and the leadership which they had was not always logical. So it was necessary for the president to close school, probably eight or ten days earlier than we would have done it ordinarily. And this was the thing which he should have done; however, he did not close the school without meeting with the faculty, and we all agreed that rather than see things get out of hand--not in the city, but in the school--we would close down the school. So the students were given a certain number of hours to leave the campus, and they did. School was closed. The next year we had no problem whatever. All right. You mentioned your response to this person that God was not dead... What about your own involvement with the church, your own Christian commitment, and also your own opinion, if there was any influence on campus at 32﻿FB: (cont.) this time from groups such as the Black Muslims and others who were perhaps a little bit more prevalent in the sixties, early seventies, than they are now. AL: I cannot recall any influence of the Black Muslims on that campus at any time. Livingstone College is a college that is under the A.M.E. Zion Church, and as a denominational school, it may be in some ways different from state colleges. States operate under different administrations. I think the religion of the teachers and the administrators probably had a type of influence that did prevent some things. Of course, it couldn't prevent everything, but I think our total commitment to what was right from what was wrong, our ethical commitment, our religious commitment were helpful. Commitments were a part of the influence which ran into whatever we did and helped prevent some things that may have happened on other campuses. FB: Tell me about what difference it made to you to be a Christian and to work in your church. AL: What difference it was to be a Christian... I don't know how to answer that. I was brought up in a Christian home where we had prayer, where they had devotions, prayer at the meals, prayer on Sunday mornings, Bible stories. We went to church every Sunday, we had sermons, and we went to Sunday school--we went to other little schools, sometimes catechism schools. One strange thing, although I was brought up in the A.M.E. Zion Church, there was this little mission school that was in my community under the Presbyterians, white Presbyterians, and we attended that. My father didn't object to that any...and we could go to Baptist Daily Vacation Bible School if we wanted to, or we could go to our own... And so the great influence that I had was religious, and it did keep me from doing some things because I felt like that was just absolutely wrong—that was just wrong. The Bible told you not to do that, and your mother and father told you not to do that. And so it did make a difference in my life, since my religious training, particularly from the home, was strong. I have not worked in the church as an administrator, I've never been a trustee, never been a deaconess. I have worked as a stewardess, I've worked as chairman of several committees and in boards, and have enjoyed it. I worked under some ministers more than I did under others, but for years and years and years, I did take an active part in some areas of the church. I never sang in the choir, and I suppose that the reason that I didn't teach 33﻿(cont.) in the Sunday school was that I had taught every day in public school or in the private school, and that was as much as I felt that I could do. Many years, I taught six days a week, and to teach on the seventh, I just didn't do it. And nobody urged me to do it. They had one superintendent say, "Mrs. Lancaster, one of these days I'm going to get you in the Sunday school, but I know you're tired." So it made a difference in the way in which I looked at things, and some of it was a little hard to accept. Some of the injustices racially were hard to accept, but I still had faith that there would be change, and I tried to forgive those who had not been kind to me or to others. It was difficult, but I had been taught to pray, and I think through praying, and believing, and trusting, I was able to try not to give up. That's been my philosophy throughout my life — that regardless of circumstances and regardless of situations, regardless of things which people might do, I was not to let these things overcome me. But I was trained and tried to believe that I was to try and overcome them. And not by being angry, by cursing, by trying not to become too emotional about it, but just to leave it in the hands of the Lord as far as I could. Sometimes I'd leave it in His hands, the others I'd try to pick it up myself. But I did not feel that I could accept things without speaking about it. And if I were in a faculty meeting and something happened which I didn't approve, I'd just have to state it. And they accepted it [Laughs] and I would— if I found out that I was wrong, I had to change. But I always liked to express myself in any situation—church, church meeting, faculty meeting, elsewhere—I don't think I was disrespectful at any time, but I would express myself. And then, after I had done that, and had thought through the situation, I would preferably let it go, and see what would happen. If I couldn't do anything about it, then I knew the only person who could would be God. And sometimes I'd find that time would cure things much better than I could. Of all the things that you've done and been involved in, what has been the most important thing in your life to you? Now, I cannot pick out any one most important thing, but I can tell you some of the things that have made me very happy. I have been happy to see students that I taught finish school and accept responsible positions and become 34﻿(cont.) outstanding in what they did. It might be as I know of a child that came from a large family who didn't see any way of excelling beyond grammar school--beyond high school) I could say--and to see that student take advantage of a college scholarship, work his way through, study, and then go on and become principal of a school, say, in a city like Washington, become outstanding one way or the other, successful, has been a great joy to me. And they come back, and they show me their cars, or they show me their homes, and they tell me how well they're getting along. And they say, "Oh, Mrs. Lancaster, I can recite so-and-so that you taught me at such-and-such a time." "Oh, I never forgot such-and-such a thing." Or, "When you and Miss So-and-so," and talking about another teacher, "told us this..." That has been a great joy to me. And of my students, which were, of course, students of other teachers, too, I have presidents of colleges, presidents of two colleges--my former students--heads of departments, deans of colleges, one is an assistant superintendent of schools, Elizabeth Koontz. And lawyers, doctors, nurses, and some coming from very humble situations that through the inspiration of their teachers, and others, have gone on to excel. Coaches--I have one former student who has the best record as the leader of a defensive football team in the United States, and I'm proud of that. I have another student who is president of Bennett College, and I'm proud that I had a part of his training. My dentist is one of my former students; a policeman in the town is one of my former students, and sometimes I've said very facetiously, "Maybe you'd better not bother me because my former students are policemen. I have doctors, they take care of me; the policemen'll take care of me." And almost in every area of life, there has been some student that I taught. But, of course, I cannot give the credit for their success to myself, because there were many teachers that influenced them. But it is a tremendous joy to me to see them excel, to see them come back into the home and say how I tried to help them, and how other teachers helped them, and how they're getting along. Christmas cards and birthday cards and Mother's Day cards—these things just make me very, very happy. All right, that's my students. Then, I've been married, happily, for over forty years. To have had a happy home life, and this has meant very much to me, because no matter what happens in the world, if I can come home and be understood, and be sympathized with, this is the support that I need. Companionship--that makes me very, 35﻿(cont.) very happy. The support of my family has been a joy to me. If I need them one way or the other, one of them was there. In the rearing of my children, if I found that there were certain limits that I had, perhaps my sister would say, "Don't worry about that. I'll help you out such-and-such a way." And sometimes it was good; sometimes I thought that maybe my own children were spoiled a little bit. I remember my two daughters attended a school that required excuses to come home, and they could come home when I would write an excuse for them to come. Well, one daughter, this one wanted to come home almost every weekend, and I said, "Listen, you stay up there, don't worry. Stay there. No need to come home." And sometimes she'd stay, then she'd want to come home for something. I'd say, "You've got to grow up. Just stay. Don't come home." But watch, next month, my mother would say, "I'll write your excuse. They'll send you, they'll let you come if your... Won't they let you come if your grandmother writes?" She'd say, "Oh, yes." She'd say, "Well, I'll go write your excuse. Your mother may be a little busy. I'll write your excuse." [Laughs] So all of this was a joy, in a way, because the love that we had from parents and aunts, sister or brothers, all of this meant quite a lot to me. Another joy was to see my children participate in school in different areas. One girl sang in the school choir. Another girl was a marshal, became chief of the marshals. And another one was privileged to work in the French cottage — she was a French major, and she was allowed to live in the cottage with other girls where they spoke nothing but French, and that was a joy. And whatever they did that was complimentary, if I'd go to the campus, was quite a joy to me. When they finished school, this was a joy. I had the privilege of attending their college graduations, attending the commencement exercise in which one girl received her master's degree, and then attending the commencement exercise in which she received her Ph.D. degree--all of this was a joy. It was a joy to see them all, all of them married. I felt that they got married rather young, but still that was a joy to see them honorably married. And I have enjoyed seeing activities in which I was a part of...I have enjoyed seeing them succeed--clubs or activities in which I was asked to be a member of a committee or chairman of the committee, I've enjoyed the work. And then, when the work was accomplished, to see that it was satisfactory. And it has also, I must humbly 36﻿AL : (cont.) admit, that I have been happy at some of the honors which have come my way, because it said to me that, "Your efforts were appreciated." So I've received, oh, a few honors, that have made me happy. I don't know that I deserved them, but enough people thought I did to give them to me. So I suppose that expresses the way I have felt. I was honored by having high school and college yearbooks dedicated to me as well as two other college publications. This, of course, was a joy. Now, the accomplishments of students and the good life that they are living--and I'll have to add, that the love that some of them have for me, even though they have not accomplished great things--this is a joy. I have one student that likes to fish, and when he finishes fishing, he's just going to bring Mrs. Lancaster a lot of fish, and this, this is an expression of love. It's not so much the fish, which I enjoy very, very much, 'cause I like fish, but his expression of appreciation. And then the cards that they'll send... All these things bring joy. When I can look back and see one boy that seemingly had no future, and we said, "Oh, yes, we'll see that you have a chance." So as his senior advisor, I'd get the school to see if we couldn't give him a scholarship. And. my husband would see if he could play baseball, football, that he'd get a football scholarship, and the principal ... well, we were all working together. And then to see him finish school, finish college, get his master's degree, move on up, become principal of one of the biggest high schools in the country, and be entertained in his home. It just was a joy, because he just was a little humble boy, with almost no chances of excelling. These things have been constant joys to me. FB: In terms of activities that you've been involved in, tell me about International Day, and any special relationship or understanding that you might have had with African students or with any other foreign students. AL: Well, because my father was an African, we had great appreciation for anything that concerned Africa. In our family, when foreign students, particularly Africans or West Indian students came to college, we invited them to our home, and told them that they were welcome to come whenever they wanted to. That if they had any problems, we'd try to help them with them, and if we were busy when they came, why, they could sit and study or read the paper and read magazines, or if we were not busy, why, then we'd entertain them, and provide whatever was necessary that we 37﻿(cont.) could for them. And this was a joy to us> and in some cases, it was a pleasant experience for them. This happened all the way from my infancy until I finished school. Then when I came back, it would remain, because my mother would open the doors of the house to the students--and not only to foreign students. But we did have a sensitivity to the needs of the foreign students because we were sympathtic with them because they were far away from home. Many of them didn't understand some of the customs, and many of them had different ways of doing things, and they had no friends--they had to make friends. And so we tried to give them a sense of security, and which they, most of them appreciated — not a hundred percent, but most of them appreciated, and have shown it. Well, many persons would come to visit in my home. After my father died, some of the things that he stood for became known, and people would come to America, they would come and visit the home—one of whom was Kwame Nkrumah, who came and visited us, and was instrumental in providing a tombstone for my father's grave, which was presented by the West African Students Union. Well, then, when I went to teach at Livingstone, this interest that I had grew, and the president of the college knew of this. Now, I was not put over the foreign students--I wouldn't accept that--and I wasn't asked to do it. But a few years after I began to teach, one of the educational trust funds--the Howard Thurman Educational Trust Fund—became interested in promoting International Day. The Thurmans decided to give the college an amount of money for the observance of International Day. And, because of some contacts which I had with Africans, African students, African people of some prominence, I was asked at the very beginning to get the speaker. I did get a speaker and helped some with the program. The head of my department insisted that I should be mistress of ceremony and work on the program, which I did the first year. And, after that, I served as chairman of the committee for International Day, and with the help of the other teachers in my department, we were able to sponsor a very fine program, which came once a year. As chairman of the committee, I generally secured the speaker, and, of course, the other members of the committee worked with me and we developed an interest in international outreach. Now, on International Day, we have an outstanding or a prominent person visit the college, and he gives a speech in the assembly. The speech is recorded, and we have publicity. On one or two occasions, we've had the 38﻿(cont.) television come. The mayor of the town welcomes the speaker, the different organizations have representatives who--not all of them, but the student government association of both the seminary and the college—welcome the speaker, and we have a very fine program. And the music department furnishes the music--the band and the choir--so we have student participation. And, of course, the president introduces the speaker. Each year it has been one of the highlights of the year; the program is well attended and highly appreciated. We have had six foreign ambassadors to speak on the occasions, and Dr. Eliot Skinner, who at one time was the head of the Department of Anthropology and who had traveled widely throughout the world, was one of our speakers. At our last convocation, we had a Mr. James Parker, from the State Department, the director of program planning for inter-American political programs. The speakers come, they address the total school faculty, students, staff; then there is a dinner in which members of the faculty and members of the community, businessmen, come, and the meal, luncheon is in the honor of the speaker. Then after that, the speaker may address small groups and tell about his country or the work that he is doing. The speaker, of course, is entertained by the president. And it's about a day and a half of experience, in which faculty, staff, people of the community have an opportunity to meet a person who is well versed in the knowledge of his county, or the knowledge of the job, the position which he holds. It's been a very, very meaningful experience, to the point where the Howard Thurman Foundation has doubled our budget, and we're very proud of that. Ambassadors from Liberia, Ghana, from Botswana, Nigeria, Senegal, to Mali, to Egypt, and other places, have been here. Our first emphasis was trying to acquaint the students with Africa, and it was quite an experience for them to have a speaker from the United Nations--their first speaker was from the United Nations, Ghana. And then to have African ambassadors to speak to them, and then to have Americans who had been ambassadors to places in Africa speak to them was an educational experience. This year, we gave some emphasis to the Caribbean, and the South American, because our speaker was concerned with South America and the Caribbean islands. Generally, each speaker brings us his flag, tells us about his country, tells us about the relationship between America and his country. 39﻿AL: (cont.) Now each speaker has been accepted by the community—the mayor has given the key to the city, the speaker has been escorted from the city limit to his place of residence, he has received all the honors that the city can give. And this is another lesson we see that the students have learned, how a city can work with a college in promoting good international relationships. One thing that I thought was very, very significant was that one of our ambassadors had lived in one of the countries that David Livingstone had stayed in and where he had developed missionaries. Our school, Livingstone College, is named, of course, for the great missionary to Africa, David Livingstone, and he was able to tell us not only about his country, but the influence of Livingstone on that country. And it was very significant that our college colors and the colors of that country were the same. FB: Tell me about your trip to Ghana--that for the first time in your life you were able to see some of your father's people. AL: Now, I don't mind telling you this, but am I getting away from Black women? Do you want to know something about women? And sometimes I think I'm telling you things that maybe...may not be interesting for what Black women have done. But I'll tell you a little. Well, we went to Ghana at the invitation of the government to help in the celebration of the 100th anniversary of our father's birth--my sister, my two brothers, and I went there for almost a week. The exercises, the speeches, the singing, the meeting of the dignitaries, and so forth, were experiences which I shall never forget. But then we knew we were going to the small village in which my father was born, and this was a very unique experience for us. We had met a few of our relatives: one was, as I've said, secretary in the permanent mission of Ghana to the United Nations; and some others, one or two others that we had met who came to America. But we had never seen, aside from those two or three people, any relative of ours from Africa. And when I say we, I mean my older brother and my sister and I, because our brother, our younger brother, had worked in Africa, and at this time he was ambassador to Senegal, so had been to Ghana several times. The government in Ghana had provided us with transportation. So early one morning, we got in these cars and went from Accra to Anamabu, and then from Anamabu we went to Cape Coast. Anamabu was the village in which my father was born. A few miles before we got to the village, probably a mile, we saw a large congregation of people standing by the road, and as the cars approached, we heard 40﻿AL: (cont.) the shooting of guns up into the air. We were told not to be afraid, that this was just to say, "Welcome." So the cars were stopped at an intersection where all these people had congregated with these large umbrellas, and they took my sister and me and my two brothers and escorted us across the road to where these people were. They came and welcomed us with speeches. Of course, there was a gentleman who was a cousin of ours who was in charge of this welcome ceremony. They welcomed us, each one of us was welcomed individually and was introduced . There was an elderly lady there who was a cousin. And she said, "Abna? Abna?" She looked at me. "Abna?" She came and just hugged me as tight as she could, and then she started crying and just danced. But her joy was just--well, penetrating. So afterwards I learned that she was a child in the home of an aunt of mine who had taken care of my father's mother. Now, my father's mother lived after my father died — she did not die until she was eight-six years old. My father died when he was fifty-one. And my father had visited his mother and his sister in the home where this elderly cousin lived, and he had told my grandmother that he had a daughter named for her whose name was Abna. And he had told this cousin of mine something about me, something about what I had and all this, you know...I had had a relationship between my grandmother and his child and this other person, who was older than I, but still, she developed a love for me and the tie of the family. And when she saw me, she just was overcome. And we laughed and we joked and asked questions, and there was just no end of the joy that we received . FB: You spoke about your accomplishments. Tell me about any regrets that you might have. AL: Well, I haven't had very many accomplishments, but I do regret several things--two or three. Number one, I did not continue my music. Oh, I told my mother I... I didn't say opportunity. I didn't have the time to practice. I just gave up practicing, and so I don't play the piano well at all. I can play a few hymns, and not very many of them. And I regret that because there are times when I believe that if I had the ability, I might be able to be creative. And I know if I had continued, I could have entertained other people or been of service to others by playing for different groups. Isn't that strange to say? I was able to write the words and have the music recorded for the high school alma mater where I taught. I just picked out the music at the piano, and a 41﻿AL: (cont.) friend of mine wrote the music, and said that she arranged the music, and I wrote the words for the alma mater of the school where I taught for twenty-nine years. That was a joy. The second thing that I regret is that I did not have the opportunity to learn to type, along with my college education. It wasn't in business administration, or majoring in anything, but the typing course I could have taken...but I didn't do it. I just thought that I needed more time for my English and my Latin and my French, and I didn't have the time to learn to type. Now I don't type, and this has been a tremendous holdback, because whatever I write, I have to write by hand and have somebody else to type it. So those two things, I regret. Then, I suppose, I could say that I did learn to drive a car, but I didn't continue. I had an accident, and this is the only thing I can remember that really got the best of me, because I didn't continue to drive. So I can't drive. I must depend on husband, students, friends, to drive me wherever I go; I have to depend on husband, students, secretary to type whatever I need. I can't play the piano or any instrument. Now I do have some other things I can do--I like to crochet, and I enjoy cooking. Oh, I like to cook. That's a hobby. And I compose sometimes verse—I won't say that it is poetry--it is an expression of my feelings. I should have gone into music. I should have learned to type, and I should have continued to drive. I taught students, that whatever they have that they can do, if they can continue, they'll be so glad when they're old, or when they're in the years of retirement. So those are things I haven't done. Not only do I regret the fact that I did not keep up my music, but I think it was not a good example for my children. It wasn't a good example for my children, because though all of them play a little bit, I have not one daughter that plays the piano publicly. And one plays the flute very well, but not as a soloist. She played in bands in high school... But, if I could have said, "Well, now, Mama continued with her music. See? And Mama's playing for the church," or, "Your your Mama's playing for so-and-so-and-so," that could have inspired them to continue. So I regret these errors in my life. FB: Things have changed a lot in your lifetime, especially in the Black community--Black women. What do you see as the most important thing that's come about, and what do you think is the worst thing that has happened to Black women and Black people? 42﻿The best thing I think, or among the better things that have happened to Black women, are their interest in education and the ways that they can secure grants and scholarships so that they can go on to school even if they have limited personal resources. I think that's very fine for Black women, as well as Black men. I think also that the provision that the government has made so that factories and businesses feel that they must have Blacks as a part of their wage earners, I think that's very fine. I think that the ability of Black women and Black men to enter the armed forces is good; I think that's a good avenue for them to get security. And although the government has not done everything that Black people want done, I still am proud to be an American, and I still see many good things that are beginning to happen through our government — many opportunities. I think that some of the things that have harmed our society are the breaking away of the strength of the family. Now, Black women have always worked, as a whole. Many, as I said, did not have to leave the home if their husbands could provide for them. But more Black women worked than didn't work. But somehow or another, there's come about a type of change that I can't quite explain because I have not studied it as scientifically as I should. I feel that Black women—or I might say, women, not only Black--have somehow or another given up some of their hold on youth. I don't know how to explain this, but I think that we have lessened the family discipline, and I think it has hurt. There was a time when a parent would say, "Well, there'll be no drinking in this house." Or, "There'll be no smoking in this house." "You're just not going to do that." We have probably stopped saying things of this nature to our children, and we've become more permissive. And I think the children are not capable at all times of making the right choices, and I think this has been harmful. I think in some instances, children are permitted to mature too fast. We've made adults out of them when mentally and socially they're still infants, babies. They're just not adults. And they're just not able to cope with certain situations. And I think as a consequence, many--not all, but many--young people have been driven to deteriorate physically, mentally, and morally. I also think that many of us have become so materially concerned that we do not accept sacrifice, nor do we accept industry as a means to acquiring our desires; and as a consequence, we get things which we could do without. And sometimes we get things which become our toys, and are not really very meaningful to us, 43﻿AL: (cont.) intellectually or morally. Now maybe the pendulum will swing, as it generally does. So I'm not discouraged by this, but I do feel these things which I wish... FB: Finally, you talk about morally... There have been a lot of changes in the morals of Americans, and of Black Americans also. Specifically, there was a report recently that the teenage pregnancy rate had really gone up among Blacks, that it was very high. What do you think about the whole issue of illegitimacy and people's changing ideas about when and how sexual relationships should occur, and living together, and that kind of situation the people are involved in today? AL : Well, there again, my religous training is the influence which supports my beliefs about these things, and in my church, I think as well as in some other churches, we still believe in the Ten Commandments. They may not be preached as Ten Commandments as much as they once were, but we still believe in them. And so far as illegitimacy is concerned, I do not believe in the illegitimate child; I believe in the illegitimate parents. I don't think there's any such thing as an illegitimate child--illegitimate parents... And sometimes the parents who accept their responsibilities so lightly that the child has to suffer. Now I think this is very unfortunate, and I've seen' the children of unwed parents really suffer. They've come to me and they've said that they've got two strikes against them. And I've had to remind them of great men in our history who did not know who their fathers were, and yet they rose above that. It's been sometimes difficult when they said, "But I know who my father was, and he doesn't do this and he doesn't do that and the other." But just the same, I said, "Well, that doesn't mean that you can't do." Other teachers have told them the same thing. But I think that there is a great responsibility that the church has to inform youth about what is right and what is wrong—what young people should accept and what they should not do, and what is best for them. In some schools, there are different opinions about sex. And not only in schools, but television and radio, and newspapers, and magazines have become so interested in sex that I think the young people, many young people, have failed to realize that premarital experiences can be very harmful, and very detrimental, and have lasting, longlasting consequences that may bring unhappiness. I could wish that television would not show so many situations in which young people see intimate relationships, and talk about it 44﻿AL: (cont.) so accessibly, until hearers think that this is the only way that one can find joy. And I have the same feeling about drinking. I just think that we play up taking a drink and stimulating ourselves through this so that people think this is the only way to be happy. And as I see it, the Black college, as well as the Black church, has a great responsibility in the moral guidance of Black youth. And I think the responsibility has increased, because the home to a very great degree has lost its influence in some of these areas. FB: One more area that I think is important in terms of women and the way Black women are developing today, and I think would be in connection with the area of legitimacy--illegitimacy, excuse me—and that would be abortions. In our communities, I think it would be fair to say that many children, children of unwed parents, have been brought up successfully in families, and that abortion has not been an option that we have been able to take until very recently on a large scale. These days people are saying that this is an option that should be considered, not only in the case of illegitimacy, but also in the case of married women who do not want their potential children. AL: Now, what is my question? Do I believe in... Is my question, do I believe in abortion? FB: Well, I want to know that, and also, what do you think about the idea that a woman, this should be a choice that a woman should take and that should be available to her. AL : Well, I'll just answer that this way, that I don't believe in abortion except for the saving of the mother's life. If a person's life depends upon an abortion, then I think it's all right. But I just don't believe in taking a life. I think abortion is just preventing a life. And I can see, if a person has been raped, that the child that will come as the result of that could be a very unhappy situation. But I don't believe in abortion. I don't... Well, I mean with certain reservations, I don't. Now, you say it should be an option. Well, I can't say what should be and what shouldn't be, because there are so many different reasons that people give. But from the main, as I see it, I just hate to think that the potential for a good life should be taken away... that's incredible. But now, I have not given a lot of study to the situation, I just don't like the whole idea of abortion, just 45﻿AL: (cont.) abortion, just preventing the life of a nice little baby. And I just would rather see that there was no need for it to be. FB: That brings me to the end of my questions. Thank you very much, Mrs. Lancaster. END OF INTERVIEW 46﻿ABNA LANCASTER..