 Marcia Greenlee: Pleasant Harrison: Marcia Greenlee: Pleasant Harrison: Marcia Greenlee: Pleasant Harrison: Marcia Greenlee: Pleasant Harrison: Marcia Greenlee: Pleasant Harrison: Marcia Greenlee: Pleasant Harrison: This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Pleasant Harrison. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Harrison's home, Third Avenue, Chesilhurst, New Jersey, 08089. The date is November 7, 1979. The interviewer is Marcia Greenlee. Mrs. Harrison, would you talk a little bit about the various ways you've earned a living through your lifetime, starting with your earliest employment, and then coming up until the time of your retirement? Well, the earliest employment was back in my childhood days—I worked as a baby sitter, and farm work, and factory work, domestic work; I took care of the sick as a nurse. That's... Covers it? At what time did you stop, you know, full-time, regular employment? I stopped full-time employment in 1952. And how did you make your living, then, after that time? I lived on a small pension from the civil service. And of course, I had children and I was given welfare. Now, when you did the baby sitting and farm work, was that in South Carolina? In South Carolina. And when you worked in a factory, where was that? In Philadelphia. I used to work in a canning factory in South Carolina. I snapped beans and peeled potatoes, and what-have-you. Now where was the factory in South Carolina? Was this near your home? In Orangeburg, South Carolina. I lived there at that time.﻿2 MG: I see. And then when you came to Philadelphia, what was the work, factory work, you did there? PH: Press, operate...odd jobs, trim. And I worked at one time—not long — in a jute factory that made threads and yarns and... twine, they call it. MG: The pressing and trim and all was in some kind of clothing manufacturing. .. PH: Clothing manufacturing—pressing dresses, and trimming, and whatnot. That was the factory work. MG: And then, how did you become employed as a domestic? Did you just quit the factory employment? PH: Oh, no. MG: Did you do it simultaneously? PH: The domestic part was only done, like, in between. Like, if I was too ill to do anything other, and someone wanted someone to...just stay with them to keep them from being alone, I would go and sit with them and take care of them, even though I was sick myself. MG: I see. That was in between regular salaried employment? PH: That's right. MG: And then, when did you work as a nurse? PH: All through my life—my grandfather was a doctor, and I used to assist him. When I trained... Professional training I had for nursing was under Dr. Johnson in Philadelphia, at 1338 Parish Street. And then I had a nurse that was interested in me. She taught me how to read the thermometer and the stethoscope and take blood pressure, and what-have-you. MG: So with Dr. Johnson and his nurse, you learned through a kind of apprenticeship arrangement? PH: That's right. MG: And with your grandfather, you've mentioned earlier... PH: ...with the training that my grandfather gave me, by him being the neighborhood doctor... Because in those days, it was one thing to be black, and another thing to get a doctor if you was ill. And he would get the worst kind of patients. Whenever the regular medical doctor couldn't do them any good, they would put 'em on a mattress and bring them to my grandfather. He would care for them, and as far as I know, the most of them survived. MG: I want to come back to this aspect and talk to you more about it later﻿3 MG: (cont.) on. With the various kinds of employment that you had throughout your life, was there any type of work that particularly appealed to you, that you enjoyed doing especially, more than other... PH: Well, this was one that I left out. I taught dressmaking and power sewing machine operating. That was in Philadelphia, and I think it was around '51, in '51, in Philadelphia. MG: Well, was that your... PH: That was a sideline, because I wanted to do something to help my race when they were doing scrubbing; and of course, at that time, I was employed at the United States Marine Corps, and I saved my money for a year, to buy machines. And I bought machines, and I got lined up, and after...from four in the afternoon until ten at night, I would teach. MG: After your regular job? PH: After my regular job—it was a nonprofit process. I only wanted to do it because I wanted to help. MG: Did you feel that this would enable the women you were teaching to seek other kinds of employment? PH: That's right. I told them I would take them off their knees and put them on their seat. [laughter] MG: What was the work that you did for the U.S. Marine Corps? PH: I was what you call a special operator, because due to the fact that I was not well myself, I lost a lot of time. I had an accident there, and it gave me a lot of problems—like I would stay out, so they couldn't hold a regular operation for me. And by me applying myself, I learned how to use all of the machines; and so it was no problem to place me whenever I went back to work, 'cause I could operate all the machines. MG: These were sewing machines... PH: Sewing machines, bar tacker, double needle, single needle, blind stitch, mirror... MG: So there was some clothing manufacture construction for the marines, as well? PH: The clothing and equipment. And there I learned to do upholstery, to cover... I worked in clothing and equipment, and I learned how to cover seats—that's in the department of upholstery—and to make the tarpaulins and the knapsacks and the haversacks, and whatever. MG: Now, what did all of your salaried employment mean to you—was it just mainly a way to make a living, to survive? Did you have another interest in it as well?﻿4 PH: My salary, the money that I earned? Did I have an interest in it? MG: No. The work that you were involved in—did you do it mainly for the salary you would receive, or did you have some other interest in it? PH: Oh, it was because I felt that at the time when I was at the Marine Corps, I was a conscientious American, and I felt my country needed me. And I wanted to help; and I wasn't doing it for the salary, because the salary was minimum. But I gave it all I had—I was sincere. MG: So was this during the Second World War? PH: The Second World War. Yes. I didn't do it for the money, because the money wasn't that... And I had this ego to go; I couldn't... in other words, I was a workaholic, and I couldn't sit and see, and hear them crying for help. And at that time, I went to school and became qualified. I studied, practiced for 400 hours—I could sew, but I had to go to school for qualification. MG: In this skill, in this... PH: ...in this skill. But I could do it before, but I had to go for qualification. MG: Was there any other aspect of your work that you particularly enjoyed during your career? PH: I enjoyed all of it. I'll tell you, some people say, "I don't like work," but I'm different. I guess that's what set me apart from the average person. I was always a person that enjoyed what I did, or I didn't do it. And I passed up nothing—I would do anything that I thought I was helping someone or someone wanted me to do it. Some people, they have a lot of pride and they say, "Well, I wouldn't do that if I were you; I wouldn't work on the farm; I wouldn't pick up potatoes; I wouldn't pick strawberries." But a lot of times, I didn't actually go in the field to pick the strawberries, or to pick up the potatoes, I gave the man a day's work, if I was able. And if I wasn't able to work, I told him I didn't feel well, and I walked the field and picked up rocks. MG: Now, let's just talk a little briefly, inserted here, some mention of your health and your health problems, because I think that's important for researchers to understand—the odds against which you worked. You had to be employed, and a lot of times, you would have probably been better just resting and recuperating. PH: No. That's a myth...it's in a person's mind. And if the researchers or the medical staff would only realize that he should listen to a patient whenever the patient approaches him, regardless of how minor you may think the problem is. Because, being an active person—even knowing that I was sick, and that I was seriously ill—I believed in﻿5 PH: (cont.) God, and I didn't believe that God was going to take me until my time came. And I wanted health, and all I wanted to do was to be left alone, and let me do what I was able to do... I didn't walk until I was about six. MG: Why was that? PH: I don't know why it was, but I just didn't walk until I was six years old. I remember well...I went to school before I walked, because my aunts used to come and take me and my uncle, and they would go to the house. The schoolhouse wasn't far, and they would take me and carry me to school. When they had the maypole exercises outside, they would sit me on the step, and I cried and had these long legs. My aunts used to take me and walk through the maypole parade, and it was really fun. That was the fun that I had, the enjoyment... To see my uncle go in the forest and get these long vines and cut them, and they'd come back and jump rope. My aunt used to get her brother's pants and put them on, and they would jump, and this was really fun. It was, like, work they used to get in the field...work together. And as I said, if people would listen and stop being a know-it-all... They know everything and everything is scientific. I have my belief, and there's things that I only believe what I can prove to myself. But people could be more helpful to one another, and they could have more than they do have, if they wouldn't waste so much. MG: So you don't feel really, then, that any health problems that you had were a liability, that they made things more difficult for you, or not? PH: In some ways, yes, and then in some... Another that stands out, due to my religious background and knowing the words of David, he said it was good for me that I was afflicted, because it made me a person, a real person. It gave me a chance to think, and I realize...and I was taught at an early age that even if I was afflicted, I was still blessed because I was alive. And I could feed myself, and I had my right mind. MG: Well, let's go on now and talk something about your family background and the influences of all your early life and experiences on you and the kind of person you became. Let's begin with your father. What was his name? PH: My father's name was Richard Haynes. MG: Do you know when he was born? PH: No, I don't, right offhand. He died in '75. MG: And how old was he then? PH: He was 88.﻿6 MG: Okay. Well, we can figure it out. [1887J Where was he born? PH: He was born in South Carolina. MG: Could you tell us something about your father? What kind of person he was, how you perceived him, what your relationship was with him? PH: Well, at first, when I was young, as I told you, that when I first remembered my father is that—the first words I ever heard him utter—he came in from work one day, and he told my mother... They called my mother Lizzie, but her name was Elizabeth, and he said, "Lizzie, you can throw more out of the window on a fork than I can bring in on a pitchfork in the front door." She could throw more out the back window on a table fork than he could bring in on a pitchfork. That was the first words I remember my father uttering. And the next thing I remember... Because I couldn't walk, I imagined that he had more of a feeling or sympathy for me, and he used to hold me and cuddle. And one morning, one Sunday morning, something, I think we had a little mule that—I think his name was Dan—and Dan died, and my father wanted to go to church. And of course, he was a logman—and his father used to go into the woods and get the crossties and wood that made furniture, and the lumber in general. And my father wanted to go to church, and I saw him out. I couldn't walk, but I went to the back door and I saw my father hitching up the ox to the oxcart. And I was dressed and he picked me up in his arms and he put me in the oxcart, and we went over the rocks and rills, we went to the little wooden church out on the hill. And when I hear them singing that song, I sit and laugh...I say, "You just picture me in an oxcart." And then he would go out in the woods [because] he don't want people to see that he had this ox... he would go down in the woods and tie the ox. And then he would take me in his arms, carry me up to the church. And then the old preacher, he'd be in there preaching, and I remember just as well the song, and it's so true in my life. I still remember his old-fashioned clothes, and I remember the choir—they didn't have no choir robes. There was no central heating—we had an old woodburning, potbellied stove. It was in the little old wooden church out on the hill. MG: Now, we've mentioned South Carolina, but I think we should say for the record the area. PH: Well, Branchville is about eleven miles from Bamberg. I don't remember exactly—I think it's somewhere, midwheres, eleven miles. Bamberg was probably twenty-two miles from Branchville, and the section that I was born was called the Crossroad. MG: Now, was your father born in this same area, or... PH: Yes, my father was born around that area, in Smoaks—the section called Smoaks, South Carolina. MG; Did your father work for a company, or did he work for himself?﻿7 PH: They did work, I think, like on contract. They would sell lumber. So I imagine it was more like for himself, because he was with his father. The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, I think, bought their... MG: Their lumber? PH: Their lumber. MG: Why didn't he want folks to know he had that ox? PH: Well, people were beginning then to have horses and buggies, and it was like a primitive thing. MG: What else can you tell us about your father and the kind of man he was and your relationship? PH: That's a heartbreaking story, but if you really want to hear it. MG: Well, it depends, I think, really on whether or not you want to tell it. PH: My father—I loved him dearly—but he became involved in a love affair with a Caucasian. He was exposed to this woman through her husband [who] was not able to work—he had paralysis. And they owned a little neighborhood store. Of course, when all of the functions in the neighborhood, like the quilting parties, and the chain grinding, and what-have-you, or the candy pulls, his wife wanted to attend. And he couldn't go, so he got my father...he had a buggy and a horse, and my father would carry her. He was like the chauffeur for this particular affair. Through the years, my father became intimate, and there was a child born, and naturally, in that area and that era, this was not permitted. So I remember this night, and I remember the day—it was the twenty-first of September, 1921—the moon was shining very bright; and where we lived was a sand region, like was down at the bottom, where the rain would wash the sand, and it was white. And to the left of the house, there was a cane brake where the water ran down, and it was nothing but a rattlesnake haven. You could lay in the house and hear them singing; throw stones in the bushes and you could tell that they were there because they would sing and rattle. And this night, the moon was...full moon, and the moon was shining bright, and you could look out the door and see like you could pick up a pin, because that's how bright the moon was shining, and the sand was white. I noticed my father wasn't home; and that day earlier, this white woman came in the buggy, and told my mother to get in the buggy and go with her. So they took the reef hook* and they went out, and she told my mother she wanted her to go with her to cut broom straw— broom sage, they call it. And my mother went, and this woman—I won't mention her name; if you want it, I'll give it to you—told my mother that she wanted to talk to her. So she carried her out, and they went and cut this broom straw. When my mother came back, she had a box of shells. Being a child, you know, she was careful not to let *sickle﻿8 PH: (cont.) us get them, and she used to keep them on a rack over the door. So she'd put them on a rack over the door, and she gave us our dinner, and bathed us in the old wooden tub in front of the fireplace—even though at night it was cool, she didn't expose us. She would give us a bath and put us to bed. And shortly after that, I heard something around the house. I guess my mother did, too, but I heard it and I told my mother someone was knocking. And then, about that time, we heard this noise. It said, "Dick, Dick! Come on out of there, you so-and-so. We got you now, we got you now. We going to lynch you. We're going to lynch you. We're going to kill you. Come on out of there." And they was blowing around—the noise that I was hearing [was] they had a hammer and nails, and they had nailed up the house all the way around from the front door, all the way around the house. They had this barbed wire over the windows, and my father couldn't have got out, if he tried. And when they came to the front door to kick it in, my mother opened the door—she had a 12-gauge shotgun, and she had it all the way loaded—and when she opened the door, she opened the door and fired. And they...of course, they ran away. This house was built with a porch across the front, and in time, at this ridge, it was... the house was low because of the sand...the rain would wash the sand down. And they were on these horses, the biggest horses I ever saw in my life—white horses, red horses, black horses—and it was a sight to see. And they kept saying, "Come on out, come on out." But when my mother fired the gun, they fled. The next day, then my... My mother had hidden my father already, and they were angry because my mother wouldn't let them in to search to see was he in there. But this woman had warned my mother, told her that they were coming, and gave her the shells so she could protect us. She told my mother it was no need in her trying to get away, because we were being watched, under surveillance. There was time to cut cane. They were out in the... It wasn't really time—they wanted juice, extra juice, and they cut some cane—and they put my father in this wagon, and covered him up with cane, and carried him to the cane mill. And that's how he got away. And the next day, because my mother got him away... My mother was pregnant—this was in September*—and my baby brother was born the twenty-eighth of February. This was the twenty-first of September; the twenty-eighth of February, my youngest brother was born. And the twenty-second of September, this man—I could call his name, but I'd rather not. If you want it, I will. MG: it's all right. It's up to you. PH: And he took this buggy whip and my mother was in the garden pulling weeds, and he beat my mother with this buggy whip. My mother cried, and I remember the song she sang. She knew that she had done nothing, and she cried, she said, [singing] "Lord, Lord, I know I've been redeemed,/Because my garment is so white and clean,/But I just keep, keep from crying, sometime." She said, "When my burden get heavy,/﻿9 PH: (cont.) More than I can carry,/I just stand, and wring my hands, and cry." I didn't see my father from the twenty-first of September until June of 1945. My baby brother was twenty-four years old. So I didn't know much about my father. And I remember another time before he left, his cousin died, and I cried because I loved her. I didn't want to die, and my mother told me, "Don't cry, because everybody that was living had to die." And I remember my father telling me, he picked me up in his arms, and he said, "Don't cry." He said, "Because my father told me when I was a little boy that death was the gate to endless joy, and everybody that was living had to die." And that's the last thing I remember my father telling me as a child. MG: Who were the white men who came to the house and were boarding it up? PH: These were the Klansmen. MG: Were they in... PH: Robes. MG: ...robes and hoods? PH: Sheets, hoods. They had sheets all down over the horses. MG: How many children were you at that time? PH: We were five at that time, and my mother was pregnant with my brother. MG: And how old were you? PH: Six. This was September, and I was going to be seven. I was born in 1915, and this was 1921, so I was six years old. MG: What did you do inside the house while this... PH: MG PH MG Cried and screamed. We all cried and screamed. My mother was pregnant, and she couldn't reach up and she lift me up, and I pulled and took the gun out of the rack. Who aided your father's escape? pH: My mother and this white woman. MG: The woman that he had the affair with? No, the woman that came and warned my mother. That was not the woman, then, that he had been involved with?﻿10 PH: The woman that he was involved with—this was her brother that beat my mother. MG: And obviously, they were involved with the Klansmen. PH: They were Klan. MG: It was not she who came to warn your mother? PH: Oh, no. This was one of the men that was in the Klan that was going to come and kill my father. And she came and warned my mother, and told her how to get him out. MG: So your mother was pregnant at the time that this man came and beat her? PHs That's right. MG: What happened to fctie woman he'd been involved with, and with the child? PH: This was 1921. In 1929, just before I came to Philadelphia, I met this woman, and she explained to me then that she was sorry, that she realized that she had caused great suffering on us. And that she suffered also because she bore a child from my father, and that this doctor in the community at that time—when her child was born, when she delivered the child—he picked it up and asked her where did she get this nigger, and he wouldn't...he snapped it and broke its neck, and threw it on the floor in the corner. MG: This was in South Carolina that you saw her before... PH: This was in Branchville, South Carolina, where previous church...at the Crossroad, the little store at the Crossroad was called—do you want the name? Allie Bird Store—a little store that sold everything; peanuts and eggs, and what-have-you. MG: Did she continue to live in the community thereafter? PH: No, I think she moved away, because black people moved in the house after she moved away. MG: What did you think of your father during all those years of growing up without him? PH: You know, I'm gonna tell you. It's just...I couldn't believe it, and see, my father's people always blamed my mother for...and thought that my mother was the one that told what my father did. But my father was caught embracing this woman, and someone saw him, and my mother wasn't guilty. And I imagine that's why she cried and tried to sing. I tried to sing it, but now with laryngitis... What I think of my father is the fact that—I try to be fair, and the flesh is weak, and as you know, we're all mixed up anyway, and I felt that this was like some kind of repeat. In other words, you are what you are, and it'll follow as many as the Lord﻿11 PH: (cont.) shall call. As you know, we're mixed up with white people, right? And this is the way I sort of analyzed it, and the conclusion that I reached. Look, the man is a mixed-up man, he's a human being, he's subject to error, and he made his mistake through love and affection. And he was a victim of...and I was a victim of the circumstance. And I still loved him, even though he admitted he didn't love me. I loved my father, and I love my mother. MG: Well, now, how did this come about, that he let you know his feelings about you? When did this take place? PH: I was living right here in this house. He told his wife___ He came to Philadelphia in 1945, and he visited me. And he came and he spent the night with me—and his feet were all swollen—and I got out of my bed, and my oldest son, Richard, slept in the bed with my father. And his feet were swollen—he couldn't get his shoes on—so he told me that, don't worry about it, he knew what to do. I don't know...when he woke up the next morning, his shoes were full of water; I saw that it was urine, that he had put in his shoes. But for some reason, I don't know whether he was senile or what, he told his wife that I tried to poison him...that he went to sleep and the bed he slept on was yellow—he perspired—and the bed he slept on was yellow, and the stuff that I put on him was yellow. When this woman told me what he said—when I called Florida to find out how he was before he died—this is what this woman told me. And I told her that I was too sick to make the trip, but please, go catch him by his hand and tell him that I loved him, and to pray because, according to the Bible, and if he believed in God, he could never make heaven to accuse me of doing something like that. Because I don't believe in nothing that I can't prove... And I told this woman, she mentioned that, "Oh, yes, they can do it. They can do it whether you believe it or not." I said, "Well, you know, we've had such a hard time, and we came so far, the long way." I said, "If he could do so much with this hoodoo, and with this power that you have—there's so many of these white folks all around, why don't you do something to them. Why do you want to pick on me?" MG: Well, now, she was accusing you of doing something of a supernatural nature? pH: That's right. This, what they call hoodoo, and I don't believe, not one word. I've experienced and experimented enough with science, with chemistry, to prove that they're a bunch of phonies. MG: But this was the accusation made against you? PH: This was the accusation made against me by my father. MG: And you didn't hear anything of this until several years after the incident itself, is that right? pH; That's right.﻿12 MG: So this reunion was not a happy occasion, really? PH: No, because, I'll tell you another thing about my father, how he felt toward me. I had a brother, my brother Henry, died in...he was in the service, and of course he never... He was taken ill, and he lived in the hospital for sixteen years before he passed. And naturally, when Henry passed, they didn't know where my father was because no one knew where he was—his family kept it a secret. And I received a letter one day from the government, and they asked me, did I know his whereabouts, or did I know someone that could tell them where my father was. And I gave them my aunt's address; they wouldn't give it to me, but they gave it to the government. MG: To the government? PH: For the government. They paid him $10,000—or $5,000, whatever they paid 'em. And if he gave me a nickel, you did. MG: This is, your father received some government... PH: Government pension from my brother Henry. MG: When he died? PH: When he died— see, he had a $10,000 policy, and I think my mother got half and he got half. And regardless to what kind of father he was, the government makes no distinction. He was entitled to it just for being my brother's father. And it was my brother's request, because just like I am, so was my brother—we all loved him. But I'm just merely giving you this for the record. Now, between 1921 and 1945, when you saw your father on this occasion, did he make any contact with the family at all? Well, when he visited me, he wanted me to go to Florida with him. And I told him no, because I had established residence in Philadelphia; and if I couldn't make it in Philadelphia with all the doctors, that I wouldn't make it in Florida because it was too hot. And that was the only reason that I wouldn't go. MG: Was it to Florida that he went when he made his escape from South Carolina? Did you ever learn what actually transpired after he was taken to the cane mill? MG: PH: PH: MG: PH: MG: Well, this is just rumors—that he took with another woman, and they lived in Florida, but it was another part of Florida than where he lived. When he died, he lived in Tallahassee, Florida. But he made...he lived somewhere else prior to that? He lived somewhere else...prior to that, in some other place in Florida. When did he remarry, did you ever know that?﻿13 PH: Well, truthfully, he didn't remarry; he was living common law with this woman. MG: Now, did you know your father's parents? PH: Yes. MG: What were their names? PH: My father's father was Paul Haynes. MG: And your father's mother? PH: Her name was Charity Harrison.. MG: Were they also from South Carolina? PH: Yes. MG: And from that area. PH: Yes. How old were you when your grandparents, these grandparents, died? MG PH MG: PH: MG PH PH I was three years old when my father's father died, and I was twenty-six when my grandmother died. What do you remember of your grandmother, mainly, I guess? Do you remember your grandfather? I remember my grandfather when we went to visit him when he was sick. And of course, at that time, I wasn't walking, but I wet myself, and I remembered him telling my mother, "Here, dry this baby." That was the only thing, you know, he would caress me. And another thing I remember—this particular grandfather—I couldn't walk, and one day he came and dug a hole and put me in it up to my waist, and put toys around me so I could play. And this was therapy—you could dig a hole out in the front yard in the sand, and he'd dig it up to my waist, and he'd put me in it. And that I remember. What do you remember of your grandmother? A lot. I remember because we were very close. MG: Tell me about her. Well, she had her way...she believed in voodoo or whatever, to a certain... the seance and what—have—you, and I didn't, and that was the only way we differed. And she leveled with me in later years, before my father came to Philadelph ia in '45. I should say, before he went to Philadelphia in 1945. She came to visit me, and she said that she had found she was gonna...she was ready to die, and she didn't want to die saying that she didn't know where my father was. She loved him, and she wanted to﻿14 PH: (cont.) protect him, and that was it. And she knew where he was, and she was going to visit him. And I told her what to tell him, and he gave her some money, and she bought some material to make my two daughters a dress. And we had our disagreements because when I first went to Philadelphia, I was too old to go to school here, in my regular grade, so I wouldn't go. I went to night school. I went to school two or three days in the daytime and the children poked fun at me, and I couldn't tolerate it because I'm... I felt—I've always had this in mind—don't try to physically outfight nobody. Try to outsmart them. And if you use psychology on them, and stay away from them, in other words, as the old people say, "feed the devil with a long-handled spoon," you'll make it. MG: Well, now, your grandmother, then, had continued contact with the family during the time that you remained in South Carolina? Is that right? PH: No, my grandmother... My mother, after my father left, my mother moved into a house. It was a neighborhood a little farther down; you could get there by the same route, from Crossroad, and it was called Sandy Run. And my mother moved in this house; and that's when my baby brother Clarence was born. My mother knew then that she couldn't care for us because there was six children. And of course then the family met and decided that they would take...each one would take one of us. And that was the heartbreaking day. I remember, my mother waited until I was seven years old, and my father's first cousin, they came with a buggy. And she got my clothes, and she caressed me and put my little bundle in the foot of the buggy, and of course, that's where I sat because his two cousins was on the seat. And she told me, she said, "Pleasant, don't forget, this is 1922, and you're seven years old today," and she took her apron and I could see her wiping her eyes. And she said, "Don't forget to pray," she said, "God'11 take care of you." And they drove off, and this particular cousin that took me...when I arrived at her home, she was in bed, and her name was Susan, and she was ill. MG: What was her last name? PH: I don't remember. I don't remember her last name, but her husband's name was Jake, and I called them Cousin Susan and Cousin Jake. I made a solution of soda for her to wash her mouth, and I brushed her hair and put powder and cream on her, and she would caress me...and I didn't stay very long because she died shortly after that. And I remember the first night, I cried bitterly because Cousin Jake... This was really a riot. At seven years old, I cried because I was afraid to sleep alone, and then when I discovered I was in the bed with a man, I told him, "I'm seven years old, and you have me sleeping in the bed with a man? Oh, Mama, come and get me." [laughter] I was crying and Cousin Susie~I remember just as if it was yesterday— she said, "Jake, take..." something, she said, and put it under me so that I wouldn't wet the bed, and put me in that bed; that if I had that much sense, she didn't want me...she couldn't stand no more of﻿15 PH: (cont.) that crying. And this is the truth, at seven years old. It amazes me, the things that I remember, and people thought I had no sense of memory. When my brother was born, the twenty-eighth of February, 1922, T remember just like it was yesterday. My mother went into the kitchen... She was aware of her confinement, I didn't know nothing about that; I just knew she was, you know, huge, but I didn't know what was going on at that age. And my aunt came from Reevesville, South Carolina, to be with my mother during her confinement. And my mother had made a dishpan like this, full of biscuits, tea biscuits, so that we would have enough t6 eat during her confinement. This aunt comes down and she didn't want my mother to know that she was eating these tea biscuits. And I had this little blue chambray dress on with red rickrack around the collar and the pockets, and it buttoned down the back with a belt on it, a pair of black sneaks with black stockings... And this sister wants me to go steal this cookie for her—she going to put me in the window, 'cause if she passed the bedroom and see me, she would put me in the window. I should go and get this biscuit for her, and I wouldn't do it. She said, "I'm gonna make you get a beating." I said, "For what?" And I still wouldn't go. Do you know that next morning, she went—if I'm lying, I hope I don't make it to heaven. That sister went in the kitchen and got a tin cup of water, and my mother was in the same bedroom on the other side of the window, and that sister poured that cold water on me-. And my mother turned over and said, "Pleasant, get up before you wet the bed." This old big mouth, Aunt Daisy, she hollers, "She already wet." And that sister poured that water on me, and I told my mother. In 1945, my aunt visited Philadelphia, and my mother asked her about it, and she said, "Lizzie," she said, "it's bad enough for a person to do something and still yet worse to lie about it." Daisy said, "I don't know where death is, if that child's not lying." And she was so little and so strong, you know, she was a young girl, a young woman—she should have known better, but she didn't. So you can see how I made it. If I hadn't prayed, would I have made it? MG: Well, now, go back to your grandmother, though—she made a great impression on you. And when your cousin Susie died, did you go then to stay with your grandmother? PH: No. I didn't live... MG: You never lived with her? PH: That wasn't the grandmother that I lived with. We was at her house for overnight, but not to stay. After Susie died, then her cousin Emma took me. MG: So what went on, though, during the times that you were with this cousin? What did you talk, about and do that left such an impression on you? PH: Well, see, as I said, it wasn't a long period of time. We spent like... After they had invaded the house, and we went out and saw this barbed wire nailed around all of the windows; and well, then the neighbors﻿16 PH: (cont.) thought that it wasn't safe—they had beat my mother the next day—that it wasn't safe for my mother to live there. And they took—the neighbors and my grandmother—took the furniture, and we spent a couple of nights at my grandmother's house. But my father^s mother which...she made an impression on me as far as when she told me that she knew she was going to die, and she didn't want to die without telling me that she knew where my father was. MG: Let's move over now to your mother's side of the family. What was your mother's name and where was she born? PH: My mother was named Elizabeth Adams, and she was born in Saint George, South Carolina. ^G: Do you know when? PH: - In 1889. MG: Now you've said quite a bit about your mother in telling about your father, but what are your other impressions and memories of her that you might want to add? How did she make her way after the family broke up following your father's... pH: she went...this is back to my grandmother, to bring you to the point. See, in September was not yet harvest time for cane and the harvest wasn't completed. They were still digging potatoes and what-have-you, and all of the garden and things that my mother had, that they left around the property, my grandmother gathered. MG: Now was this Grandmother Adams or Grandmother Haynes? PH: This is Grandmother Haynes. And of course, my brother was not old enough to eat potato, but my grandmother brought some peanuts and one potato for all of us after she gathered the crop. And there was sugar cane. She brought a few joints of sugar cane that she had cut after... And that was the only time I remember her visiting my mother. I became attached to my mother's father. At this time I was walking and he adored me, and he had a second wife, and the second wife didn't have good feelings for my mother—I won't go into that. And to keep them from harming me, my grandfather literally carried me around in his pocket. MG: You mean his second wife? His second wife didn't like my mother; so naturally, if she didn't like my mother, she didn't like me and my grandfather didn't trust her. And he didn't believe in hoodoo either, and he taught me against it, and so did my mother.. MG: PH: Did she—the new wife? The new grandmother? Yes. Yes-. My mother's stepmother. MG: What was her name?﻿17 PH: Mary Adams. Mary... Wait. Her name, before she married my grandfather, was Mary Dooley. MG: And what was your grandfather's name? PH: Charlie Adams. MG: What was his first wife's name? PH: My mother's mother was named Ada. MG: Do you know her maiden name? PH: Green. So my grandfather used to carry me around, and he would dig roots and I would put them in the knapsack. And this was really, you know, enjoyment for me—it was really fun. And he used to pick me up when the apples or what-have-you was too high, and he couldn't reach it, he'd pick me up and I'd pull it off. And he would make medicine. And then, before I went to Philadelphia, I was with him for quite a while, and this was when he taught me how to take care of sick patients. My grandfather's hospital was on top of the barn. No one knew that he had these patients, and like, a regular registered medical doctor couldn't do nothing for the patients.... They would bring 'em over to my grandfather on mattresses and wagons, and they would help 'em get 'em upstairs in the barn. And to keep me from being assaulted by his children and his wife, I was with my grandfather. And he taught me how to make swabs and how to tie up wounds, and how to irrigate, and how to give enemas, and what-have-you. He said I was young, but I had to learn; and I needed to be prepared to face the world because I had a rough way ahead. MG: Now, he kept you with him to keep you away from your stepmother's... PH: Abuse. MG: ...stepmother... PH: ...and her children. MG; And her children. PH: Yes. That's right. MG: How did your mother make her way after your father left? PH: She used to go around, do washing and ironing, domestic, and until she got enough money to go to Philadelphia, and that's when—rfrom September until the following February—when my brother was born, from September until the following November, that's when. In November of 1922, my mother did domestic work and jobs; and she took whatever handouts she could get because there was no orphanage, no welfare, and only hard, harsh accusations. And she came to Philadelphia, and she was employed as a domestic worker.﻿18 MG: This was then in the next year, in 1920... PH: This was, like, in 1929, because in November of 1922... No, I'm sorry, 1923, my mother went to Philadelphia- And she did domestic work and the people that she worked for... She told them she had children; and of course, they used to give her clothes, and she used to send boxes of clothing. And the people that we were with, by me being small or whatever—my aunt which was my father's sister—I remember once there was a box came and the only thing that they gave me was a pair of high-heeled pointy-toed shoes; that was the only thing I could wear because I had small feet at that time. MG: So you didn't stay, then, with your Grandfather Adams for the whole time? PH: MG: PH: MG MG PH Oh, no, definitely. I spent more time with my Grandfather Adams—I called him Pa—from, say, like, 1927 until 1929. And otherwise, you were staying with various ones of your father's... Various ones...people. And I spent the longest period of time with my father's cousin—Susie's cousin, Emma. And the next longest period of time I stayed with this Aunt Daisy that poured the water on me. Now, do you remember Cousin Emma's... Did she have a married name? PH: Yes. MG: What was that? PH: Haynes. Her father was...Uncle Hector. MG: And your Aunt Daisy? PH: Her name was Daisy Adams. MG: Now, how many children were in the family? PH: My family? Was six. Six of you. Of us, yes. There was three girls and three boys. Was your mother able to keep any of the children with her? pH: Not one. Did they all stay in the area? Did you see them from time to time? No. I saw my brother once when he was walking. I attended an affair at Free Gift Baptist Church, and he was walking, and that was the first time I saw him, from the time he was born. And at that particular﻿19 PH: (cont.) meeting--that's when I went to my grandfather.. You see, I had, like in-between stays at my grandfather.. X wasn't there all the time. I don't remember exactly how much time I actually spent with him, but every time I was evicted from one place, my grandfather always came to my rescue. MG: Now were these mostly your father's people that you and your brothers and sisters stayed with? PH: No. MG: Did you stay with some of your mother^s relatives. PH: My older sister and my younger sister was with my mother's people. Pardon me. My older brother and younger brother was with.,. .. There was six of us—it was even. Three of us was with my father's people, but I was the pilgrim—I was with all; I went around. Even with my father's uncle, I feel that if I ever...whatever satisfaction and peace of mind that I have, he has contributed much for that... MG: What was his name? PH: Hector. That's my father's uncle. MG: This is your great-uncle? PH: Great-uncle. Hector Haynes. MG: You were going to tell me a little more about your Uncle Hector. PH: Yes. Uncle Hector was my father's uncle, which was my granduncle. And I was living with my father's sister. But before I went to live with her, I was living with another one of my father's sisters, for a short period of time. And the man that she was living with wanted to molest me—he wanted to use me. And my father's sister resented that; so what she did was took me and put me on the train. I was living in Orangeburg at the time, because my aunt, my mother's sister Daisy, abused me so, until they took me away from her and hid me. This was a white family. And they carried me all over the state of South Carolina. And then they put me with another family, which was a teacher, and the daughter was a nurse; and they taught me. MG: This is the white family? PH: The white family was living right next door to this black family, and they couldn't keep me because of the law, that I was twelve years old. I had a right to choose where I wanted to be, but they couldn't cross state line with me. And so they shipped me over to this family, and then, when I was walking the street one day, I found... My aunt discovered me. And she asked me what was my name, and I told her. And she asked me where was my father, I told her he was dead. And she said, "Your father's not dead, because he's my brother. And if he was dead, I would know it."﻿20 MG: Did you really think that he was dead all that time after he left? PH: Oh, yes. We were taught that he was, that they eventually caught him to keep my mother from trying to seek him out for support. At that time there was no law to make them, black people take care of their children anyway. But anyway, this aunt came to where I was living and the place where I was living, at the Paulin's on Russell Street... MG: This is the black family? PH: The black family was the Paulins, and I'm pretty sure the street, if I remember, was Russell Street. And this man that was a roomer at her house, he tried to make improper passes.. And her son, Clint.. And, naturally, that was a move again for me. MG: What was that aunt's name? PH: Effie. Effie Lou. MG: Effie Lou? PH: Yes. MG: What was her married name? PH: West. MG: Okay. So when you left her, she... PH: To keep me from being molested at the Paulin's, she took me. When I stayed there for a while in Orangeburg, then the man she had wanted to molest me; and she took me and carried me down to her sister, Marie, in Branchville. MG: What was Marie's married name? PH; Haynes. She later married, but at that time she was Haynes. MG: Now was Mr. Paulin the one who was... PH: Mrs. Paulin, I think her name...the nurse and the teacher was Erma Paulin. MG MG But who was trying to molest you there? PH: At the Paulin's, Mrs. Paulin's friend. Oh. I see. So when did you go to Uncle Hector? PH; This time, when this aunt carries me...Effie carries me to her sister Marie, and at that time, I was working in Orangeburg. And I swept yards and baby sat and whatever I did, people would give me a quarter And I was a miser—money was not to be spent for me. And I would save four quarters till I got a dollar; and I made a money bag, and﻿21 PH: (cont.) I tied it around my waist and I concealed it. And I was tight mouthed. I didn't tell nobody. And then when I went to my aunt's house, I paid my aunt's fare-r-she took enough money out to pay my fare from Orangeburg to Branchville, which I think is approximately eighteen miles. And she bought round-trip tickets, but I imagine she came back on one ticket or... I don't know whatever happened to the ticket, because she went back and she left me in Branchville with my Aunt Marie. This was in the spring of the year. And of course, my aunt took me in with my little satchel, and little comfort and a hay mattress, my little...whatever I had, that was my little sleeping quarters. 'Cause most of the places I stayed—I was a bed wetter, so I had to carry my own bed clothes. And I went to my aunt's house, and they were knocking stalks, replanted corn, chopped cotton, dropped cucumber seeds, set out tomato plants, and what-have-you. When time came to pick cotton, I picked cotton. I did the whole farm; I helped peel pears to can and slice, and strung apples to dry, and I did everything. And my aunt, this particular aunt, my father's sister, she took every cent I had. I worked even for her. When they had no work, I worked out on the farm. And she never even gave me a peppermint ball—only what I ate. And I was mostly vegetarian, so I lived from wild berries and maypops and haws, and what-have-you. And I was really mistreated; it was fun to me. But after I got grown and looked back, that woman took every cent I had. MG: She got your money belt? PH: She took my money, and told me that somebody else would take it, and she'd take it and put it up. And this man that she was living... was with, had molest[ed] her when she was twelve or thirteen, and she had mothered my cousin. All right, now after she takes my money... I work all the year, October, nothing to do, and I told her I didn't feel well. And she told me, she said, "If^I ever hear you complain again, I'm going to beat your so-and-so..." MG: She chased you away? PH: That woman, I was lying on the floor of my own little...hay... You know what—this was my sheet, two of them. And I had a croaker bag with the hay that I went out and gathered myself. MG: Croaker bag? PH: Croaker...they call 'em croakers. Bags—you've seen this heavy twine that they put feed in? MG: oh, yeah. Feed sack. PH; Feed sack, but rough kind, of hemp. MG; All right. Burlap.﻿22 PH: Burlap! Well, this, was what my mattress was made out of. I went out into the garden to the fields, and got the hay, and picked the burrs out, and put it in there. And that's what I slept in—most of the places on the floor. And she went out in the yard, God bless the dead, and got leaves...bush, what they call gallberry bushes.* And she got two or three of them and put together, and she was pregnant at the time. Do you believe that that woman jumped on me and beat me all across my back, all on my legs. And she had no reason. I had done nothing. She hated to hear me complain. She never complained.. And then, from there, I ran over across the field to my motherrs sister. This was my mother's sister, Idella.. MG; What was her name? PH: Her name was Idella Adams Jenkins. And she was like my grandfather, who was her father. She was so kind, so gentle, and so sympathetic. She took me in and swabbed my wounds, and my cousins then carried... Because I had some cousins that didn't understand either, and naturally, it was going to cause friction. And one who spit on me and did everything she wanted to do to me... MG: All because of this business with your father? PH: Oh, yeah. MG: And how you were regarded in the family community? PH: That's right. Because they took out on me what my father and mother did. My father and mother didn't do..,.and I wasn't no good either. I mean, this was the attitude, the impression that they gave me. And they was selfish. They didn't want me...if I ate, I was a greedy so-and-so; and if I didn't, I was a consumptive so-and-so. So my aunt couldn't keep me there because she had to keep her home together. And when they would do things to me that wasn't right, my aunt would beat 'em. And her husband told her he wasn't going to have it. So then, down the road to Sandy Run again. I was with my father's cousin, Eugenia Thomas. I stayed there. She had no children of her own. She raised her brother's two children—I forget now their names. And I stayed there for a while, and she had a niece and a nephew that was twins, and she wanted to go to the great camp meeting. And they came over to keep me and to keep the house, keep someone from burning the house down. That was the only thing you had to watch then, because thievery was far from their mind.. And they came and they bought a quart of white whiskey, and oh, oh, the party was on! I was twelve, and they were twenty-one that day. They were celebrating. They took this white whiskey and they made what they call toddies. They made this toddy and I didn't want to drink it, and they told me, "You'll either drink it or..." What they was going to do to me, he *Gallberry: This refers to a type of bush in South Carolina that looks like a blueberry or huckleberry bush, but its fruit is inedible.﻿23 PH: (cont.) was going to attack me, and I had to take this whiskey bemuse I didn't want to be attacked. All right? So, I taste it, tasted good; so I drunk it. And I got some sugar, and I made up some more.. And when I got through, [it seemed to me that] nobody was sober but me. The world... I was hanging upside down, everything. I never had such an experience in my life*—my head was going around, my stomach was turning up, and I was just like on a merry-go-round. I could feel myself swirling. We were supposed to sweep the yard—and they swept the yard, and I laid on the porch. And I was so drunk. And when she came, Miss Eugenia—I called her Cousin Gene— came back, she looked down on the floor. She said, "Oh, my God. What happened to Dick's child? Lawd God," she started praying, "don't let nothing happen..." See, that was my father, Dick. "Don't let nothing happen to me." And she got a whiff of me, she realized, well... Ilaughter] She realized what was wrong. She got this black coffee and she gave it to me, and I started regurgitating, and after a while, the next morning, I woke up. And that's another time I learned to pray. And something happened to her. She got a letter in the mail one day from New York, and they used to put money in the letter—nobody would take it out—but these neighbors never took it out because they didn't have nobody to cover, you know, to blame it on. So this letter had this dollar in it, or two dollars in it or something, and when she didn't get it, I was the only stranger there; so naturally, she didn't get it, and she thought I did it. So...that was another transfer. I had to go back. So that's when I went back to Uncle Hector. Uncle Hector, then, he taught me how to pray. And he told me and he said, "Pleasant, I feel sympathy," he said, "is no good, but I really feel sorry for you." He said, "I may be dead, and my bones be bleached as this cotton—" I was in the cotton field. He said, "But your mother and father going to need you before you need them." He said, "It's a sin and a shame, a beautiful child—beautiful head of hair, beautiful teeth, complexion, skin as smooth as velvet," he described me. He said, "And you're intelligent. You someday will be an asset to the world, if you were educated." He said, "Pray." And I said, "Uncle Hector..." That night when we went in, it was too late to work—you had to work from "can see" to "can't see." He went in, and in Uncle Hector's kitchen was a wood stove, a fireplace, a table, and two benches, and a cupboard. And he told me to pray, told me... I said, "Uncle Hector, I don't know how to pray." He told me to kneel down. I knelt down beside the bench, and he prayed, and he taught me to repeat after him. He taught me the Lord's Prayer, and then he taught me to say, "Father, I stretch my hands to Thee, ho other help I know. And If thou withdrew thyself from me, t?o whom other can I go?" And asked Him to please open the hearts and minds of men, and let them know that I was a human being. And he prayed—and, that night, I had a dream, and I was singing, oh, I was singing, "Do You Think I'll Make a Soldier?" And the next day, all day in the field, [sings] "Do you think I'll make a soldier, soldier?/ Do you think I'll make a soldier?" And he looked at me, he said, [sings] "Yes, I think you'll make a soldier, soldier,/Soldier of﻿24 PH: (cont.) the cross." And all through the field, all you could hear was, [sings] "Do you think I'll make a soldier,/Do you think I'll make a soldier,/ Soldier of the cross?" And from then on, I knew how to pray. And he said, "Yes." And I didn't know that that was a part of the song, and he got so happy. The last time I saw him, he told me to hold on, and keep on praying. And he took and kept me for a while. And his wife was deceased at that time. But during the time I was living with his daughter, Emma, his wife Mary—this was his second wife—and she was a teacher, and she taught me a lot. And you see my pots on the shelf? I was inspired by Aunt Mary that a pot or nothing else was clean until it was as clean as it was when it was bought or cleaner. And she taught me that cleanli-^ ness was next to godliness; and where there was no clean, there was no God. And that's what I learned from Uncle Hector's wife, Mary. And at that time, she was in Midway, South Carolina—that's half the distance between Bamberg and where I was born. So that's Uncle Hector's story, from my part. He taught me how to pray, and told me—who was it, told me, "Don't try to outfight 'em, try to outsmart 'em." And if you learn, study to make yourself improve, that you didn't have to fight, that God would make a way. And I believe that. MG: Who did you live with after Uncle Hector? PH: After Uncle Hector—this was the result of the prayer. This is where... that next day or two after that, I got down on my knees; and I went to a stump that was in the field, and there was a hole in the ground. And after I got down there to kneel, to pray, you know, I didn't know, I thought maybe it was a rat hole. But then I got kind of afraid, because I thought I felt something moving under my knees, under the ground. And my uncle told me that it was probably a snake, and not to kneel or stand anywhere I saw a hole in the ground because it could be a snake. So—to show you how God answers prayer, and how early in my life that I had faith in God—was that I heard that my sister was in Philadelphia with my mother. And someone gave my aunt my mother's address. And they heard how I was being mistreated and abused, and they told my mother to send for me. Well, in the meantime, then, I was back to this aunt. MG: Which one was this? PH: Marie. 'Cause there was work to do. When my mother decided to send for me, she met the same cousin across the road, because it was time to gather the harvest—harvest time. Time to pull, time to sow... Don't send for me, because I was too old for my grade, and I didn't want to go to school there and be embarrassed; I had not said that. MG: This is what Aunt Marie said? PH: That's what...Aunt Marie got her daughter to write it back to my mother and tell her I didn't want to come. Now this prolonged me going to Philadelphia, and prolonged my agony. So when my mother got the letter, she was then disgusted; and I don't blame her. But let me tell you, when...later on, something happened. Oh, yes. My﻿25 PK; (cont.) mother wouldn't send for me, because they wrote and told her not to. I kept on praying, and I asked God how much longer was I going to have to suffer... That I kept on praying until one day, one Walter, a nephew to this Eugenia that I stayed with—Eugenia Thomas—he came from Philadelphia and he brought a big box of clothing, because he knew that they were in need for the clothing at that time. And he told me my sister was much bigger than I was—you know, that nobody would look at us in size and tell that I was my sister's sister and that we were so close together, but I was... Anyway, he told me my sister was in Atlantic City, working, and he gave me her address. Honey, I took an envelope that had been addressed to Uncle Hector, steamed it, got a egg, and addressed it to my sister. She was living in Atlantic City; and when she received the letter, she moved that day to Philadelphia, to 1311 George Street in Philadelphia. When she received the letter, she answered me. Then I wrote right back. With another egg, X wrote the letter. MG: You were using egg for ink? PH: For postage. MG: Oh, for postage. PH: Oh, I used lead pencils, and I used to get the herry juices and use it for ink. And I wrote back, and I told my sister to send for me— that if she sent for me when I couldn't afford, I would work and pay her back. Within a few days, my sister replied. At that time, even as long after slavery as it was, they did not want workers or the hands to leave. MG: That's right. PH: And they did everything to prohibit them from leaving. And there was a man—he could not work because he was an amputee. His name was Charlie Risher. And Charlie Risher ran a taxi service; and he transported people from South Carolina to New York, Philadelphia, anywhere they wanted to go through, between that area. And she sent the money to my aunt, Aunt Idella, my mother's sister. MG: Your sister sent the money? PH: My sister sent the money to my aunt; and she employed this man, Charlie Risher, to bring me to Philadelphia. MG: Was this a black man? PH: A black man, an amputee; so he could not work at that time. He was really handicapped. MG: He had his own car? PH: He had his own car, a Studebaker, or an old car, with the... When I came, it had a vase in it—and I still have the vase that he gave me﻿26 PH: (cont.) out of the car, and I'll show how long I've been collecting. And when I arrived in Philadelphia—my mother was living at 1311 George Street—and I thought that my mother would be glad to see me I laughs.] , which I was...so glad to get away from South Carolina. I thought all my troubles had ended. They had just begun. MG: How old were you at this time? PH: Fifteen. And my mother woke up the next morning and she had... At that time, she used to have dream books, the H.P. and the Lucky Star, and what-have-you... And she used to play the numbers. And the next morning, I woke up, and went down. She had breakfast, and then she started talking about my father, and I listened. She couldn't find this dream book, she thought I hid it. And I have a mark right here in my head—she had an old chair that was leatherette, with flying dragons with claw feet, and this head sticking up there with ears on it—and she, through her passion, she bumped my head upon the chair, because she couldn't find the dream book. She thought I hid it. And she had hid it from the law; she hid it from herself. Do you know where she had it? Wrapped up in wax paper, because at that time, they didn't want you to play numbers, and they didn't want you to have dream books. And if they figured you had dream books, you could play numbers, especially the kind that she had. MG: Who didn't want you to? PH: The law, at that time, prohibited number playing. And she had wrapped these dream books up in this wax paper, and raised the biscuits, and put them underneath. [laughs] She had put them under the biscuits-she couldn't find them, and she thought that I didn't want her to play numbers. And she is going to give me a shake, and my head hit this object. She didn't do it intentionally, but my head hit it, and I still have the laceration. MG: This is your first morning in Philadelphia? PH: Yes. And it was funny, it was real funny; I've laughed a many a time, I knew she didn't mean to be cruel, but she was absolutely cruel. She didn't mean it, she loved me. But then in the conversation a few days later, I said something to her—I told her I was hungry or something— and she said, "Why don't you go to your so-and-so daddy? Don't you realize, if I wanted you... [laughs] Don't you know if I wanted you, I wouldn't have left you?" And then she took it back, and she said, "God forgive..." She asked God to forgive her, she said, because she loved her children, but she bore the pain of death. And on her deathbed, she laid and she cried about how they changed her name. And when she went to apply for her marriage license, this white woman told her that—she asked her her name, and she said, "Elizabeth." She said, "What kind of Elizabeth?" She said, "Them damn Yankees up North want us to keep a count of how many of you niggers there is," she said, "and the only way we can separate them is..." In other words, the name Elizabeth was reserved for white, and Lizzie was for blacks—and that's how they told them apart.﻿27 MG: Now where was this? PH: In Branchville, South Carolina; the justice of the peace, where you go apply for a marriage license. MG: And this is the clerk, then, who told her that her name was Lizzie... PH: ...instead of Elizabeth. And my mother, on her deathbed, cried... My mother died, 2248 Chadwick Street in Philadelphia, on the second floor back, and that's where she laid.. And we reminisced, and we talked about the family, and we talked about different things.. She told me—my mother told me in her last words—she said, "Pleasant," she said, "where we lived was in a rattlesnake region. When I was carrying you, I was so afraid that I would mark you with a rattlesnake." She said, "When you came up, you were mean." She said, "You were a good child, but..." When my grandfather used to put me in this hole for therapy, 'cause I couldn't walk, she would put toys around for me to play with, and my brothers and sisters would come to take them away—they were younger than I was, two of them— but I would... She said she would be in the house, and she got the bigger children out there to watch to keep the snakes away from me while I was out. And she said, I would say to my brother Henry—she could tell which one it was, because I was...would always call him and say, "Don't do that, don't do that, Henry." And so Henry would come anyway and would take it. I would hit him and he would go in the house, crying. So my mother said that she thought sure that she had marked me as a rattlesnake. Then she came to the conclusion that...she said, you know, even if she did, "that a rattlesnake was the best snake in the woods, because, before he would bite you, he would warn you." [laughs] She told me on her deathbed, and I laughed. I said, "Mama, do you really think that I'm different, that I'm mean?" She said, "No, Pleasant." She said, "God's going to bless you," she said, "because little did I think, like I treated you, that you would be the one to hand me my last drink of water, so to speak." And that evening, when my sister Ruby came home, she told my sister, you know, that she was going to go... Then she told me that the only thirg she regretted... that all my good work was [not] in vain, and that God was going to bless me. Eyes have not seen, or ears have not heard the blessings that God has in store for me, because I was a good child. And I, what you going to do.' You just accept it. I cried the day my mother died. The song she used to sing...when I caught myself, I wrung my hands and cried, but then I realized what my father told me—not to worry, that his father had told him that death was the gate to endless joy. And my mother said she weren't afraid to die because death was the only...she said, "There is no justice in this land. Death is the only just thing. Anything that exists, whatever you want to define it as, state of being, because death will come in and he'll take the baby, he'll take the rich, he take the poor, the black, the white, the learned, the unlearned. He didn't pass up nothing. So he was just. There's no justice in this land, other than that."﻿28 PH; (cont.) I would like to tell you a joke. One of ray coworkers told me one day, we were sitting around working, and she said, "This woman was on Thirteenth Street and Market in Philadelphia, and she said, 'Can I have another thumb like this?' And she'd look at the policeman, and she would grab her little thumb, and she'd look at him and laugh. And she was saying, 'Ain't no justice in this land.' And the policeman said, 'Well, Miss, what do you mean? I represent justice.' She grabbed the thumb again; she said, 'Ain't no justice in this land.' And she would laugh. So he wanted to know what she meant; so she said, 'I just left the court.' Well, you know, the city hall is right within a block—and she said, 'I just left the court,' she said, 'I got my divorce.' And she laughed again. She said, 'Ain't no justice in this land.' And the police said, 'Well, what did the judge say? Why do you say there's no justice in this land? Why are you laughing so heartily?' She said, 'I'm laughing at the judge and his decision.' The policeman said, 'What's that?' She said, 'He gave the man the kids and they wasn't even his!'" [laughter] So that is the way justice is. There is no justice. And it's hard to get along. And if you don't use determination—and talk about discrimination, you have to use it all.. You have to be able to coordinate to make it in this world, because it is a hard, cold, mean world. I could sit here and talk, and I imagine it would take me as long to tell the story as it did to be inflicted upon me., I caught hell.' And when you hear me say, through tears sometime, I kept praying. Through fears, I kept praying. I was 'buked, and I kept praying. I was scorned, but I kept on praying. I was sick, and even the doctors thought I was going to die, but I kept on praying. And when they say there's no God, I believe that there's a God—He's alive, because He lives within me. And anytime I asked Him, "Lord, if You're there, manifest Yourself to me; let me see that You're real." And I can talk on now. I don't know whether you're ready or not, but another time, when I... I forgot to attest.. Can you visualize a woman twenty-four years old being deserted... that meets a man, for three years you pal around with him, and you know, sex was a no-no at that time. After the third year of keeping company, friendship, go to the movies, hold hands, and discuss our problems... And when my mother would mistreat me, he would always say, "Sister Lizzie, that's wrong. Pleasant has suffered enough. Why do you treat her like that? Other people did enough to her." And so one day finally— I was going to night school—and he told me, he said, "Let's get married." He said, "I'll go to school with you, and you'll be able to finish your education and go at night, and we'll both go together." And I made up my mind all right. I just says, "Well, because my mother accused me of doing everything and God knows I wasn't guilty of the things..." And the reason I'm married to my husband today—my mother accused me of doing things that I didn't do—and my husband told me, said, "Well, you just as well do them because everybody thinks you're doing it."﻿29 PH: (cont.) Well, see, I was dumb enough to fall for his line. But he was good to me—he was sympathetic, he was kind, he was gentle. He promised me the moon and green cheese, or cream cheese; and I thought he was telling the truth because he really spoke up against my mother's brutality. And my brother's, too. So I got married and I lived with my husband for five years, long enough to raise a family of four children. And, for no reason, apparent reason at all, because he came up with a different point of view as far as the no-no sex word, and I couldn't understand it. One night I laid in bed and I cried, and I asked him to tell me why he treated me the way he did, that I... Asked him, wasn't he satisfied with me as a wife, was there something I wasn't doing? And my mother suggested to him, she said, "I don't care where you could have gone to get a wife, you couldn't have married more efficient a person than Pleasant." She said, I'm not saying it because I'm her mother." Said Mama...she just, in her opinion, described a type of person she thought I was. And she asked him, what did he want? Know what his reply was? She said, "Ed, you can't love her If you treat her that way." You know what his reply was to my mother? He said, "Sister Lizzie, you want me to tell you the truth?" He said, "I never loved Pleasant." He said, "You know why I married Pleasant? Because she was smart. She was clean, she was intelligent. She was a damn bumblebee; she knew how to do everything." You know, a bumblebee always... He said, "I was like the dog with the haystack. You never saw a dog eat hay in your life, but a good watchdog won't let the damn bull eat it." And my mother cried. And I'm in the hospital with the last confinement, my last son. My mother came to the hospital to see me, and this is when they knew that I had cancer. And she told me—the doctor said that that would be it, that if I had another child I would die. I came home—I went in the hospital on the twenty-seventh of February, I came home the sixteenth of March, and when I woke up, my husband was gone. MG: What year was this? PH: 1940. And I didn't see... I just came home with the new baby, and I didn't see him for two weeks. Came back, it was time for the check. He would come and get the check cashed, and he would take half of the money back. And he was living with this woman, Odessa, at my aunt's— my father's sister's house. And she was living with [my auntT, Shirley Harris, had this place with Shirley. And he come back every time in time for the check, and when I got the check cashed, and he would take half the money and he'd go. MG: What check was this? pH: Welfare check. So he came -this particular day...it was in the summer, and he kept doing this over the period of time; and again, I want to show you what prayer'll do for you. My mother kept praying, and I kept praying, and one day I was leaning, looking out the window. I had my two children outside playing, and the other two was in the house, and I looked up the street, and I saw him coming. And I've always been a collector, so I had guns, and I got this .38. And I said, "Here comes this guy, Mama, here's the action." And my mother﻿30 PH; (cont.) saw me with this revolver, and she threw her arms around me and she caressed me.. She said, "Pleasant, don't...come to me." She said, "I know that I'm not a perfect mother, but listen to me." She said, "Think of your little children. Nobody but nobody's going to keep those children as clean as you keep them." She said, "Do you realize that there's nobody else around here hanging up clothes like you hang up clothes? Your babies look like they never touch the floor." She said, "You think anybody else is going to do that?" And she—she was lost for words, but she found one word to say. She said, "Pleasant, please listen. Your arm is in the lion's mouth up to the pit." She said, "Long as you have your arm out there in the lion's mouth, his teeth cannot sever your vein." She said, "But if you move, if you pull, you fight, you gonna be the victim." She said, "Let your arm stay there, stretch out, and let it stay there, and lean on it. And while you're there, say a prayer." She said, "And when that lion get tired, he'll fall off. You don't have to worry, you can walk off and go along about your business." And she said, "Give me the gun." And I gave my mother that .38, and I haven't seen it from that day to this one—not that one, not that particular gun. "When he comes in," she said, "meet him with a smile. Have his food ready. When you look up the street and see him coming, always leave something in that refrigerator that he can eat, and that you willing to prepare, and treat him and kill him with kindness." And I did that. I didn't kill him. Because she said, "No jail, no place..." She said, "If the judge turn you loose and don't give you a day, it's not worth standing before the judge. Because if you leave it to God, He'll fix it. The doors He open, no man can close. If you just only remember to pray." And I did. I made up my mind; she said, "It won't be long. You're a young woman." She said, "It won't be long before your children will be grown and you can go out there and do what you want to do." And I did that. I took my mother's advice. She wasn't always right. No one's perfect. And I realized the hardship that my mother went through, that it had to come out some way. But she was good, in other words. Now she was a great believer. One time, the doctors, then they told her...and they caused me a hard time, too. 'Cause, pardon me, not being malicious, if it hadn't been for the doctors, I would have been six feet under long time ago. But then, if I had listened to 'em^on the other hand, I would have been six feet under anyway. So they're not all good, they're not all bad, and if I have to speak a good word, it'll be for the doctor. "Go if you get sick, but if you could take care of yourself, take care of yourself." Because they gave me up to die. And they even had my mother's... "She is not in pain as she... Miz Haynes, she's sick. She's not as sick as she pretends she is. She is afraid of dying." MG: Well, let me go back here for a couple of points before we move on. What was your husband's name? PH: Eddie Harrison.﻿31 MG: Okay. Now I'd like to, too, before we move really into a full discussion of your life in Philadelphia, to see if we can recap all those many moves in South Carolina. PH: There's so many of... And I know I didn't... MG: Can you remember..., PH: I'll try. MG: ...how they went? PH: First one, on my seventh birthday, in 1922, I went to another section of Branchville called... There was a church near, McBranch Baptist Church, to Cousin Susie and Cousin Jake. From Cousin Susie's, I went to Cousin Emma—that was Susie's cousin, and stayed there for a few years. From Emma, to my mother's sister, Daisy. From Daisy, I was rescued by a white family. MG: What was their name? PH: Jones. John Davis Jones. They took me on a tour. His occupation, he was an engineer of the roads. He engineered all of the roads through the state of South Carolina from Orangeburg to Savannah. MG: What was his first name? PH: John Jones. MG: Let me just insert a question here now before we move from the Joneses. You mentioned Aunt Daisy, talked about her before, and the difficult relationship and time you had with her. What was the problem there? PH: What was her problem? Alcohol. MG: Okay. And after Jones? PH: The Paulins. MG: That was the black family. PH: That's right. And after the Paulins, Effie Lou. After Effie Lou, Marie. After Marie, the first time, my grandfather. MG: Grandfather Adams. PH: Adams. After my grandfather Adams—there was one time in there that I went back, then I came back...I went to Orangeburg, and I stayed there for a while with the same aunt, Daisy. And then when I went back to Branchville, I went from...back to Marie's. And then from Marie's, I went once to...when she beat me, I went to my aunt across the field, and she sent me then to Gene, Eugenia.﻿32 MG: That was your Aunt Idella, but you didn't stay with her, you just... PH: Just went over there and stayed until she could get me over to my father's cousin, Eugenia. Then from there, back to Uncle Hector. And I think, from Uncle Hector...I left there, and between the aunts you know, from one house to the other. I stayed until my sister Ruby sent for me. MG: Which aunts? PH; Idella, Aunt Idella. I left from her house.. MG: So all these moves, now, took place during the time from your seventh birthday until you were fifteen years old and went to Philadelphia. PH: That's right. MG: When did you walk? PH: In September, before the twenty-first of September, because I started walking a few days before my father left home, and he was in this melee the twenty-first of September of 1921. MG: Have you ever, did you ever hear your mother or the other relatives talk about what the problem was? And how did you just begin one day to walk? Was that what happened? PH: From the therapy, in the hole. MG: From the exercise? PH: See, they used to put me in the hole, and they would pull me, and they would make...the weight would go down into my feet; and this way, I imagine, that it stimulated muscles or the nerves, or strengthened them, or gave me confidence that I could... MG: Did you have some sort of paralysis, polio? PH: They don't know what it was. I was a breech birth, and my mother thought that the midwife pulled my feet and maybe, did some damage to them. MG: And you said that you had a problem with bed wetting for a long while. Was that emotional, you think, because of the kind of life you were leading, or what? PH; No, I just think it was a system thing that, sometimes children catch cold in their bladders or they drink certain beverages. And see, I'm an allergic person, and evidently, they weren't aware that this was reacting on my system. And eventually, I guess, I outgrew it. MG: Now there's a theme I think I see through here. We've made little mention on and off different times, but never really developed it, of other members of your family and your exposure to several aspects﻿33 MG: (cont.) of what are called the occult sciences, the supernatural, hoodoo. PH: Voodoo, hoodoo, whatever... MG: And that is sometimes difficult to separate from homeopathic medicine or natural healing, all of those things. And all of these are mixed in your background. PH: Yes. MG: Go into that a little more for me, would you? Tell me how you were exposed, or the nature of that exposure, and what it did to you, your thinking, your experiences, your activities as a grown woman. PH: In other words, you want me to explain to you the experiences that I've had with the people that believed in hoodoo, as I refer to it then? Well, first of all, my mother and my grandfather Adams resented the fact that...and they didn't identify with this. My grandfather said it was nonsense and ignorance; and he didn't believe it, and he believed in medication, food, and proper care. But there was my grandmother on my father's side, and my father's people—they were on the opposite side. They believed in the occult. They believed that people could put dust down and people could pass snakes, and people could put evil spells on you, and what-have-you. And see, my mother's people didn't believe that. And I remember of an incident one time...I don't know where I was. I was living—I'm trying to think whose house I was at—and, you know, how children used to peep... And this woman came to this house and she was supposed to be one of these hoodoo workers, and she told, "Oh, don't get that doctor, don't do this," and "Don't do that," and,^ "He's been poisoned," and "He got snakes in his stomach," and he's this, and he's that. And they had this... At that time, they didn't have a bedpan, they had a bucket. And this man was sick, and we children were peeping—I was a big girl—and this man, he was very, very... he was low. And this woman went in the room—this was supposed to be a spiritual or hoodoo worker—and I heard these words to face. She told him that the man had snakes. I actually saw that woman went in her pocket and pulled out a tobacco bag that had this garden snake in it and put it in that bucket of stool. "See here? See here? He's passing snakes. Oh, yeah, he gotta do this. I need twenty-five dollars to get the medicine cure." And them poor fools went and got the medicine for twenty-five dollars and gave her... I have these words to face it to judgment—there is no such thing. Now, I saw her when she put the snake in there; now she told the family that the man passed the snake. He didn't pass that snake; she put him in there. And I don't believe a word of it. And just like I told you, I don't hate nobody in my heart. My heart's not big enough to harbor hate, because I realize there is good people and bad people. But I do realize it, and you just well believe it, and if you can't prove it to me scientifically, I don't believe it. I wouldn't believe God if He hadn't manifested Himself to me and answered my prayer when I called Him—He answered, He was there, and I got what I wanted.﻿34 Did your knowledge, though, that you learned with Grandfather Adams of herbs, of all sorts of natural healing, tend to create confusion sometimes in people's minds about where you were coming from? With my family. My family, they were confused because they thought I was of the same cult of my grandmother on my father's side; and naturally, they couldn't understand me, so they feared me. Because you did, in fact, know how, and do know how, to use natural herbs. Oh, definitely. I'm a herbalist, and I'll make no denial on that.. There is a very few domestic herbs... Sometimes they get away from you, the names, like in chemistry, you forget the equations and you have to go back and, you know, sort of brush up on whatever. But every herb on sight that I know, I know it. I know how to make concoctions and 'fusions, and know how to administer them, and so on. And when I forget, my grandfather told me, "Don't be ashamed." Another thing my grandfather taught me—and they said old people were't educated, but to that, I disagree. My grandfather told me, "If you forget something, remember this." He said that, "The palest ink was better than the best memory. And if you forget something, go through the book, and refresh yourself." He said, "Study to make yourself improve." He said, "And when you do, you get that," he said, "you're gonna have a hard time." And see, I didn't realize what my grandfather was telling me. He said, "You're going to have a rough road ahead." He knew how he was treated. But I don't regret, not one moment that I spent. And he told me that if he had no money to give me, but if I listened to what he had to say, eyes have not seen or ears have not heard what was in store for me. Money couldn't buy what I have. Were you able to work with your herbs and to use them effectively when you were in Philadelphia? Well, I'll tell you, I could not work... When I really took my knowledge seriously, was in 1949, when I was stricken ill with cancer. And of course, I was operated on and they said I had a fifty-fifty chance, and after the operation, it was less than that because my blood count had gone down so low. I went from 137, and three months after, I weighed 103.. And then I had gained weight at that time, but when I was able to get out to get on a scale, I weighed 103. And during that time when I had this horrible experience with the eruption of my incision, I had the operation. And the Thursday before Christmas of that year, they called my mother and told her to come and get me, that they had done all they could do for me, and it was just a matter of time. And, of course, I came home on a Thursday—all night long I didn't sleep. Friday, all day long, I couldn't sleep. No sleep Friday night. And Saturday morning, I was in pain, so much pain; and I thought about over the past, and I thought about people telling me to pray. And when I was in the hospital, the minister came in and they thought, "This is it," and he asked me, did I believe in God, and I told him yes. And he said, did I know God...in pardoning of my sin, and I told him﻿35 PH; (cont.) yes., And he started to pray for me, and he asked God, he told God, that I admitted Him; and he said that if I owned Him before man, that He would own me before his Father; and he asked Him to please—if it was His will, to heal me and let me go home and raise my little children—and that I was a good girl. MG: This is kind of the last rites, though, at the same time? PH: Yeah, that was the last rite. And of course, then they took me out of the intensive care and put me into a ward overnight. And the next day, my mother came and got me, and, as I told you, I couldn't sleep. And then I laid there; and I was so sick, that I couldn't even hum Zion's song. I couldn't do nothing, but I was in such pain.. All of a sudden, this pain, you know, struck me; and I just knew that if another one occurred, that I was gone. And I laid there, and I was so sick. Until I said, "Father, I stretch my hands to Thee,./ >to other help I know./If Thou withdrew Thyself from me,/To whomever can I go?" I said, "You promised me a long time ago that if I called Your name, that You would answer, and I'm just asking You to 'Let Your will be done."' And about that time, another one of these attacks was coming, and I felt that this pain was so sharp, it was so sharp, like a knife cutting. It was so sharp, it felt like you had taken a knife and heated it and just rip it down my stomach. And when I got this pain, I said that prayer; I laid and I tried to calm myself, and this pain hit me and when I jumped, my stomach ripped open. The eighteen stitches that they had put in my body ripped open, and I could feel the blood and the pus running down my side. And I called my mother. My children was outside playing. And I called my mother, and she came up. She was disgusted and despondent. They had told her not to worry about me, I was gone. That if I survived, I was the only one that they knew that lived with their blood count as low as mine. I don't know what it was. But however, when my mother came up and she was going around, they told me, "You're not half as sick as you pretend you are. Look, you have to help yourself. You can't give in to those pains. Stop that crying." That's when I asked God...told Him I stretch my hands to Thee. She had come back upstairs and I called her back upstairs, and pulled the covers back, and sure she saw my intestines. And she knelt down beside my bed and she said, "Lord, please don't take my child. Heal her." And she prayed, 'cause she knew then that I wasn't jiving. She got on the phone and called the police—this is on record in Philadelphia. I lived at 1943 North Ninth Street. The house is demolished now, but it's on record in Philadelphia. They kept the record. It's on record in the Philadelphia General that they called back and told them that they had an emergency, and at that time, if you were operated on at one hospital, they didn't take in another hospital's trouble—you went back. And it was during the Christmas holiday, and the Dr. Bernard Finch operated on me, and he had left for California. MG; Now you had been discharged? PH: I was discharged on Thursday.﻿36 MG: And your incision... PH: ...erupted, opened up. MG; Your mother called the police... PH: That's right. MG: ...and you were taken back... PH: They would not accept me. I was sent home with terminal cancer, and it was just a matter of time, and they would not take me back in that hospital. MG: After she called and after the incision..,. PH: After she called the police, the police came out with the emergency wagon to take me to the hospital. The police called the hospital to notify them to be ready—they were bringing in an emergency case. Now, I was laying in bed, and I heard what that operator told... this person told the police, that I was a terminal cancer patient. MG: And they refused to have you back? PH: They refused. They had no place for me. There was no one there—it was during the Christmas holidays—to take care of me.. If they brought me outside and I caught pneumonia, I wasn't going to live anyway. And they did not take me back. The police went around the corner and got the city doctor, and he was an optometrist—at one time he was a medical doctor. And he came around and his name was Dr. Levy. He lived on the 1800 North Eighth Street. And he came in and told me, he said, "Mrs. Harrison, you are a sick lady. You're a sick person." He said, "Pray." And I said, "Dr. Levy, please pray for me. I am too weak. I'm sick." And he put his bag on the foot of my bed, and he knelt down, and he was Jewish. He prayed, and he told God that he left the matter in His hands. It was all he could do. He gave me two sulfa tablets, that's all, because I was allergic to penicillin. And he told me he had done all he could. I called my doctor—at that time it was Dr. Gaskill, and he's since died. And he couldn't come because he was ill at the time.. MG: Gaston? PH: Gaskill. He was in the 1900 North Twelfth Street. And on with the deal with the opening of the incision. I took my hands, after I discovered that it had opened, and when I bent up, and see, I was relieved of the pain—then the devil set in. I was laughing, you know, 'cause I was relieved, I didn't have no pain. But the aftereffect, when I looked down... .with the training that I had, it was a great help. I took both of my hands, one hand and put it on one side, and the other on the other, with the palm down to the abdomen, and I pressed it together, and I held it* I held it there until I could clean myself, and.,.sent one of the children to the drugstore and got this tape and this drain. Then tell Dr. Shaw what to send. And﻿(cont.) he sent what I needed, gauze and the tape,and I stuck that tube in my—the thing that you catheterize with—in my stomach, and I took that tape and I taped it up. And X said, "Lord, if you don't leave me, I won't die." And guess what? This coming December will be thirty years, and I'm still alive. And they made me so angry, and they told my mother they wanted to know...keep them abreast of what happened, keep them informed, they wanted to know. And they made an appointment for me sometime up in the spring at the Philadelphia General, after they found out I survived. And I went, I got dressed and you know, I was a sharp little chick, in my opinion., I'm like Muhammad Ali, I knew I was something. I had a shape like a Coca-Cola bottle Ilaughs], believe me. And I got dressed real sharp and pretty, expen^-sive clothes, and combed my hair and put my earrings on. And I said, "Here's me. And I'm not dead yet." And guess what? I didn't take no more medicine. I made my concoctions and my 'fusions. And they say you're not allowed to do it, but I'm here, and I'll stand on the doctor's head and tell him. He's too conceited... ...to say what he doesn't know. That what he doesn't know. Because he caused me to suffer. As well as if it hadn't been for him, I would have been dead. But he should be careful what he...he should know what he's talking about. Like me, I will not tell nobody how to do nothing, and I know of many an experi ence. I'll tell 'em how to make one, I'll give you a recipe for my cake, I'll give you... But my secret experiments, I just don't pass it on because, even as simple a thing as nutmeg, if you give somebody. Do you know that nutmeg is toxic? Do you know? Yes. Do you know tansy is even poison to the touch? You can't be passing on things like this to people because you can cause trouble. And I was tight-mouthed, I played it cool. But I don't want people to think, "Well, you think you know everything." But I'll tell you, when they had Christ... getting ready to hang Him, they told Him that He could save the others, save Hisself, didn't he? Now they gave me out, and I'm still here, then who did I save? Myself. And there's power in prayer and above all, I'll say, common sense is not common among the human race. 'Cause if it was common as the word common, the world wouldn't be like it is. Now, it sounds like you had developed infection while you were in the hospital—it was the cause of that pain in large measure—and they discharged you as you were... I mean, obviously, malpractice here. Did folks think about suing in those days? I'll tell you, when we get to suing.... If I was a person to sue and to seek revenge, I would have sued everybody from the United States government to my mother and father. I do believe... I had a case here not long ago that, if I wasn't a Christian, everybody who worked﻿38 (cont.) in the Social Security Administration would be sprayed with my 17-gauge shotgun. But I'm a Christian; and I know enough about chemistry that, if they are not afraid of me, they'd better be.. But I'm a Christian—I only did it for my own self-entertainment. And I don't hate nobody. But they should wise up. They discard things, these people that look down upon me as a dummy. And sometimes I play right along with them.. When I told the Social Security, "Yeah, I'm a dummy. Little bit sick, stupid," I said, "but that Census Bureau is dumber than I am." Social Security was the dummy, not the Census Bureau. And then I went on to tell them what they said. They tried to evade the issue, not to give me social security. They claimed I wasn't as old as I claimed I was, even claimed that my brother, Walter, was older than I am. See, the fact that someone got their stories mixed, due to the fact that I didn't walk, that I had two brothers...a brother and a sister running around there walking, and I'm sitting up in my mother and father's arms, they figured that my brother Walter was older than I was, but I was older than he. In 1920, the Census Bureau did not have a record of my birth. The Social Security Administration filed three affidavits that they did have records of my birth. MG: And that just started a whole chain of mis... PH: Misconception, misinformation. Deliberate lies. MG: Let me ask you a couple more questions; we can finish up South Carolina, and then we'll move on to focus some more on Philadelphia. Now, did your relationship with your mother fluctuate between a hostile relationship, a painful relationship, and a pleasant one, or did it just change from unpleasant to pleasant? Did it go back and forth, or did it change? PH: Well, as far as my mother is concerned, I was never what you call hostile. I was more sympathetic. MG: No, I mean, from her side, towards you. PH: Oh. It changed, it fluctuated. MG: She would feel one way, then she would feel another way, she'd feel another way again? PH: That's right.. And I was definitely, without a doubt, the black sheep. MG: Did you ever try and rationalize—I'm sure you did in your own mind— why you, why were you the focus? And I think we could say, probably, that your mother's very painful experience with your father altered her perceptions of her children. PH: Definitely.﻿39 MG; But why so much you? PH: I think that what happens to people is in their destiny; I think it's cut out for them. And I think that this world is a dressing room... And He said He wouldn't put no more on you than you could Bear, and this was my lot. This was like Job. Job was an honest and an upright man, and he suffered. And I felt that, for some reason you know, this was my lot, this was the way it was supposed to be. And that I knew in God's own changing time, in His own appointed time, that He would come and deliver me. I knew that I had suffered, I was aware that my mother had mistreated me, and that I had been mistreated down through the years. When I was in Orangeburg, South Carolina, one of the painful things that I remember as a child... I was living with my mother's sister, Daisy; and of course, as I told you, I came from a family, some light, some dark, and my mother's sister Daisy was a beautiful nutmeg brown, beautiful, lighter than...you know, beautiful light brown. She wasn't as fair as you are, but... MG: Your Aunt Daisy? PH: Yes. And of course, my mother was more my complexion. So Daisy had my sister, Cleverent, and she had Cleverent first. She had taken the charge of her. And when I left this cousin, Emma, to go to Daisy— she was an alcoholic, and my mother didn't know it, and I was living with her. And of course, I was a big girl, and the people of distinction, people that recognize quality, saw something in me. I had this air, this courtesy, this politeness, this "please" and "thank you" and "pray for me" and they knew that I wasn't being treated right. Someone found my mother's address—she was in Philadelphia at the time, and wrote to her and told her that I should be in school, but I was being wasted. And they thought that I would make a wonderful person if I was given the opportunity to an education. And do you know what my mother did? Sat down and wrote her sister a letter, and told her that when she got this letter, to get her belt and beat the hell out of me—that I was writing news up there to her, because she knew that she was doing the best she could for me. For that was the day I cried, and I prayed. Then I was big enough then to go out and baby sit for different people, and that' s how I met the Davis Jones people. And they saw marks and bruises and black eyes where this man would hit me and beat me across my back with this big buggy whip with the cat-o'-nine-tails on it... and if I was sick, there was nothing wrong with me. My aunt is still alive and she lives in New York—this is Aunt Maggie—I never lived with her, but she took up for me one day when this uncle, supposed to be Daisy's man or husband... after my Aunt Daisy made me steal this chicken. Now you put the corn down on the steps, and lure the chicken in the house, and I had to build a fire in the stove and heat the water, scald the chicken, pick the chicken,dissect the chicken, cook it, and when Uncle Jesse came home, he... My aunt served the plates, and she put this chicken, a piece of chicken on my plate. And they had﻿40 PH: (cont.) a dog named Wippy, and this dog was under the table, and Aunt Maggie was. there. And he took the chicken off my plate, and threw it under the table to Wippy. And after that, he had hit me already with the whip—I had these marks all on me—and I went to these John Davises, went out trying to find help, money, because it was during the depression and I would baby sit and sweep yards and do whatever I could to help out.. And that's when I met Mrs. John Davis. I went and knocked on her door. And she was pregnant and she needed someone to stay with her, and she knew that I had experience. When I started to talk to her, she knew that I could dial the phone, and I could make soup, and I could make tea, and I interested her... .and her husband was out on the road because he was an engineer of the highways, as I told you. And this house was right next door to the black family, the Paulins. And they carried me all over South Carolina, from Orangeburg to Florida. And finally when it was time for her confinement, I called him—I don't remember whether it was...his family lived in Greenwood or Greenville—at that time, your mind is not sharp—but I called him, and he came home. And then when he left, he had left me with the Paulins. MG: Did your mother, except for the times that you've mentioned, with these couple of letters, try and maintain contact with the children after she had gone to Philadelphia? PH: Oh, she kept in contact. She kept in contact for a while, and then there was a seven-year period that nobody knew where she was. MG: Anybody? PH: Nobody. MG: Did she ever remarry? PH: No. MG: Now we talked about your brothers and sisters indirectly, but let's get their names down starting with the eldest... PH: Ruby. MG: Is she still living? PH: [gestures no] MG: And next. PH: Henry. MG: And is he living? PH: No. MG: Next?﻿41 PH: Pleasant, Walter.,.. MG: Is he living? PH: [gestures no] Cleverent... MG: Cleverent? PH: Cleverent. MG: Living? PH: [gestures no] Clarence.. Did I mention Henry? MG: Henry was after Ruby. PH: Then Pleasant, then Walter. MG: Yes, Walter, Cleverent, Clarence—is he living? PH: Did you have Cleverent, and then Clarence? MG: Yes. PH: How many is that? That six? MG: Six. PH: That's it. MG: Is Clarence still living? PH: I'm the only survivor.. MG: Only survivor. PH: Only survivor. MG: You said that you saw one of your brothers once at church who was just walking then. PH: That's right., MG; ...but that you really didn't have any contact otherwise. When you came to Philadelphia, which sister was it already living in Philadelphia? PH: Ruby. MG: Did the others move out of South Carolina? PH: No. After I went to Philadelphia, then Henry came. Then later on, a few years later, Walter came—no, Cleverent came, then Walter. Walter was the last one to leave South Carolina.﻿42 MG: Clarence never... PH: No, I'm wrong. Clarence was the last one. Walter was the last one to leave during our childhood years, a teenager, whatever. And after I was grown and married, then I got in touch with Clarence. Clarence then found Ruby, and she sent for him also, but this was in the forties. MG: You've talked a little about your education. Could you tell us for the record how much actual formal education you had, and where did it take place? PH: The actual formal education was in night school in Philadelphia, Standard Evening High School. After I dropped out from Reynolds Evening School, that was like an elementary level, and with studying at home and with the help of my friends and the desire to become educated, then I would study and I would take books and learn words, different words each day. And I would spell and I would do math problems and then I went to night school. I was so delighted and it was my dream come, you know, true, when they accepted me at Standard. They tested me and said that I was capable of doing the work at the Standard Evening High School, and so I did. MG: So did you complete high school there, or how far did you go? PH: No, I'll tell you, when you're ill, it's difficult, because I would start some terms and maybe I'd go four or five nights, and then sometimes maybe I won't go back. But I got the basic, I had my textbooks and I would study. And then when I got ready to go back, I would drill with my friend that was going to school—and I had a girl friend, and she's since died. And I would study, and I tried to improve myself. And I would get recipes and directions from the knitting manual and I read them—The Work Basket—and I would order books on millinery, and weaving and painting and what-have-you. And I went to school—I would go to different schools at night and register, and sometimes I was ill, I couldn't attend. But I studied; and I would get tutors to come to the house and try to help me. And that was the amount of formal education. MG: So would you say that the most significant part of your education, then, was from members of your family and self-teaching? PH: Self-taught, that's right. Because Uncle Hector's wife was a teacher, and Mrs. Paulin was a teacher; and I think the real, real thing is that I was just interested in education. I really wanted to know what things were, and how they work. And I was interested in relieving pain and suffering, and I prayed that I would some day be able to help somebody, while I pass along...then living wouldn't be in vain. And if I died today... As the song singer said, "And if I was dying and I only had one word to say, I'd speak it for Jesus and breathe my life away." Because I firmly believe that He'll be there, He'll meet me in the place where He'll prepare, and this I'll tell everywhere I go.﻿43 MG: Do you read actively now? PH; I have cataracts on hoth eyes, and I don't read as I used to. MG: But until that time, you... PH: Until that time, I was active. I read the newspapers, and I kept up with the current events, and I had little magazines that I would order and do, like, current events and... MG; So this was really a lifelong pattern of continuing education? PH: Continuing. That's right. MG: Now, you've told me about persons who were not members of your family, who had some contact and influence upon you—the Paulins, and the Joneses. Were there other people during that time you were growing up who were not related to you that were important in your life? PH: Well, no, not.... Yes, I'll say... I said no, but they were, like, white families, people that I helped, like I would sweep yards and... There was once two families in Orangeburg, South Carolina. One was a Mrs. Ruby Westberry. And when I was a girl before I left Orangeburg, I would go around and knock on people's doors and ask them did they need any help—that I would sweep their yards and wash their windows and what-have-you. And she was engaged to be married and she had bought this new home, and she took me in her car and carried me over, and we cleaned her house. And for years I would go over and help her; and when she was expecting a baby, she moved in a new house, and I would go over and help her. And this, the funny thing that broke that relation up—this was the day or two before my aunt carried me down to Aunt Marie—that she was gonna have company, and she was pregnant, and she asked me... I was a terrific little cook, and I could make chicken that—I was conceited—I thought no one else could make. I can make some pretty fried chicken. And I made dinner, and they didn't know how, white people didn't know how to make sweet potato pies like black people. And I made sweet potato pies, and I never will forget it, and I made her a layer cake out of self-rising flour; and that was the best tasting cake I ever ate. I put cream in it, and I did butter and eggs and the works, and I put that cake in the oven. I could read; I turned that oven on 250°, and when that cake got brown, I took it out. And her guests were so thrilled. And I made everything so delicious. String beans and ham and... And she wouldn't give me none of that food after I cooked. She went to the refrigerator and told me that this food was for her guests, and she was going to save this food—it was delicious and if I knew how to cook that well, I could go home and cook my own. And she went to the refrigerator and got some old cold candied carrots and gave them to me. And her guest was from the East somewhere—I don't know where she came from, but she wanted to give me a tip. And she said, "No, you don't come here and spoil our niggers." And she wouldn't let that woman give me ten cents.﻿44 PH: (cont.) And they went in the living room.. God knows, I pulled a trick on her that day. Now I'm supposed to wash the dishes. The swinging door, I went in there and threw my uniform on she bought, and I was walking around there with my little cap on, like a little monkey, and honey.,. When she knew anything, I left every dish she had right on that table and in that sink. And see, she couldn't see me from the back door, 'cause she was in there entertaining her guest, and the woods wasn't far away, and I stayed right behind that garage so she couldn't see. If she opened that door, or went to the window, she couldn't see me, and it wasn't long before I was through the woods, and through the woods to my Aunt Effie's house. And the next couple of days, she carried me to Orangeburg, and I laughed... And that afternoon, her husband came. I think his name was Smitty Westberry, they called him Smitty Westberry, and he told me to come back—that he knew it was a prank, and that she was pregnant, and that was why, that was the way she reacted. And I told him all right, I'd be back Monday. But see, Sunday my aunt carried me to her sister, and that was it. And experience after experience, I just couldn't understand why these people do this. One time again, in Orangeburg, I was working for a family of people. Louise Perry Clear; it was Perry Clear. Her first name was Louise and she lived on—I forgot the street now. But she was very good to me, and she had an electric stove and the stove was cruddy. And I knocked on her door, and she gave me a job cleaning the stove. She disconnected it and, oh, I just loved shining up things, and I went in there and cleaned that stove. And she recommended me to another lady, and she was gonna have a birthday party for her little girl. Ibis woman—that's why that ice cream churn has such a significance to me. You know, whites didn't... Some of them didn't want you in the house—so it was hot, it was in the summertime. She put this ice cream churn out on the step and packed ice around it, and asked me to turn it. And I was a pretty good-sized girl 'cause wasn't long before I went to Philadelphia. Well, I had never tasted ice cream, and she told me that if I turned the ice cream for her, she would give me the dasher and she would give me a dish of ice cream. Well, I got through turning that ice cream and, you see, my complexion, as they say. . .and I start perspiring, and I was just sweating naturally, 'cause out there, sweeping yards, so dirty [laughs]... You know, that woman made me churn that ice cream and when I got through, she took that ice cream churn, and she told me she would give me the...pulled the dasher out, to lick, and whatever ice cream was left she would give it to me. And I sat out there on that step, and she closed the door. And I sat there till I fell asleep, and I woke up. That's how exhausted I was. And she gave me a nickel. That's it. She gave me a nickel. And then there was another family... MG: She say anything? PH: That's all. She didn't say nothing, gave me the nickel and told me to go home—that's all. Then, the real good family that I worked for...﻿45 (cont.) One day I was walking the street—this was on Russell Street, on the same street the Paulins lived on, but it was nearer into the station in Orangeburg, to the railroad station, and this woman's name was Gussie Wannermaker.. And she had something wrong with her feet, and I knocked on her door—she had a screen door—she was living in the house with her mother, Mrs. Coopes. And she was sitting in the chair, she couldn't get out. And her mother was of an age, and she was ill, too, but she was up walking around. And I knocked on the door and I asked her, did she have anything that I could do, I didn't have a mother or father, and I needed help, that I was living with my aunt. And she came in and I promised her if she would give me something to do, that I wouldn't steal from her. So she said all right, so she told... The little girl was named Mary Vance. She had two children, one was Mary Vance and Charles was older then Mary Vance; Mary Vance and Charles. And she, Mary Vance opened the door and she said, "Are you a nigger?" [laughs] And she, Mrs. Wannermaker called her to her and said, "It doesn't make a bit of difference what she is, and don't you let me hear you say that again." She said, "Mommy can't walk, and she needs her." And she taught Mary Vance not to say that. Had she moved to South Carolina from Philadelphia? Who? Mrs. Wannermaker. No. They were permanent families. I would say....1 don't know where Mr. Wannermaker came from, but when I met them, they were living in Orangeburg. He was a pharmacist. So I went in and of course, she was confined to this chair; and I got water, a basin, and soap, and I washed her feet and dried them, and I cut her nails and picked the corns, and everything, and she felt so much better. And my grandfather's concoctions, because I had been exposed to him...and I got my little 'fusions and next couple of days, couple of weeks, she was up and she was brand new, telling me what a wonderful help I was. And she wouldn't let him touch it, you know let her touch it, that I bathed her feet in tea leaves and peroxide and everything else. So that went on, and soon Mrs. Coopes died. You mean, she was up and walking? Oh, yes. And couldn't walk before? And she couldn't walk before. Well, her feet was all swollen and they were blistered. I don't know what she had, but... And I had no fear of contamination, because I remember that I took first, I took iodine, and I put some iodine in the water; and she told me there's a cheaper way, that iodine and salt was the same, and the next time, just use salt. So I said okay. You know, I was pliable, I was. So anyway, I got her feet back to normal, and she was walking around there, giving me the praises, and they always admired me. When I left that section of Orangeburg, I didn't get back over that side because it was﻿46 PH: (cont.) too far for me to walk from where I lived. But they admired me, and I admired them. And it was just from one job to another, from the people of Orangeburg that's old enough. I used to help a lawyer and, you know, some of them...when he started getting fresh, X quit and went somewhere else. Because, see, at that age, I begin to mature; and as I said, men are just like pigs or dogs, they didn't figure I had enough problems. MG; Was that a continuing problem in these homes where you worked? PH: No, just once in a while—just this Paulin case, and the case of my aunt. 'Cause where I went to Aunt Marie, I guess he figured he had already done enough damage, and he never tried to make advances. passes. And they accused Uncle Hector of making advances, and he was not this, and... He taught me how to pray—that's when... And he brought the subject up that he made "...,my bones may be breech, but your mother and father are going to need you before you need them." MG: Now you say, Mr. Paulin, too? PH: Mrs. Paulin had this man, Mr. Michael was living with her—that was her boyfriend and boarder. And when she went out one day, he tried to seduce me, so I wouldn't let him. MG: And her husband was on the road. PH; No, Mrs. Paulin, Mr. Michael was Mrs. Paulin's friend and roomer, and he was the one that tried. MG: Yes, but I'm saying where was Mr. Paulin? He was gone? PH: He was dead. MG; Oh, I see. PH: And Mr. Michael was Mrs. Paulin's boyfriend. MG: Oh, I see. Now you've said what religion has meant to you in a personal way, and the influence of your Uncle Hector and the rest. To what extent have you been formally attached to churches and church activities and that sort of thing? PH: Well, every community that I lived in, in all of the homes other than Daisy—that's where I lived when I joined the church, and was baptized, right in Orangeburg, South Carolina; and after that, when the time that I spent back in Branchville at the church that was not far from where I was born. And I joined the church and I worked in the church; I used to sing in the church, I participated in fashion shows and I would make presentations like for the group that I sang in. They had a program where, like a contest for the one who set the most beautiful table at Bright Hope Baptist Church then, I forgot now what year it was, in the fifties or sixties. And my group won; and it was funny, this was another hardship. The president of the chorus—it was﻿47 PH: (cont.) an inspirational chorus—after I had worked, this friend of mine and I had worked and polished silver...and I put the Venetian lace tablecloth on the stretcher, and I got the candelabra, and I polished it, and I made the punch and carried the punchbowl and the crystal. And oh, I made a beautiful table, and they don't want me to win. So the little girl, one of the little girls from the Sunday school—I donlt remember what her name was, but she was a beautiful little thing—and she came up to me, she said, "Mrs. Harrison?" I said, "Yes?" She said, "Show me the lady that set the table up for Bertha Mae." She said, "I want to catch her not looking 'cause I'm going to screw that tablecloth up; I'm going to spill punch all over it." And I said, "Uell, for your information, I'm the lady that set the table up for Bertha Mae, and please don't you spill no punch on my tablecloth." And she didn't. She went over and told another member of the gospel chorus to find out from me who was the lady that set the table up. So she asked me, and I said to her—her name was Miss Demmans, And Miss Demmans said, "Pleasant, come here. I want to ask you a question." So I said, "What?" So she asked me, who was the lady that set the table up for Bertha Mae. I said, "I did." I said, "I did it." So she said, "Oh, come on..." she shooed me off like this [gesticulates] So I took her by the hand and I got her over to Bertha Mae. I said, "Mrs. Marshall, would you please tell Miss Demmans who set the table up for the inspirational chorus ." She said, "Pleasant Harrison and her friend, Claude Linear, set that table up." And she said, "Oh, I don't well believe it." She said, "You just well believe it, because you have not ever seen..." She said, "There's nobody in Bright Hope Baptist Church can surpass Pleasant Harrison, because she's got things nobody else don't have, and I know it." And she said, "If you don't want to believe that she set that table up, you just go to her house and see. You haven't seen nothing." So anyway, Sunday when we went to church, sang, and I sung out of, oh, I'm telling you, out of my soul. And they asked me to lead this song, "We are soldiers"—and we had guests. And when the Reverend Gray got up to thank the groups for the money, and we raised the most money, and we won the prize... When the president of that group got up, instead of her—when they said to give her credit for raising the money and winning the first prize—instead of her saying, "Well, we could not have won this prize without Mrs. Harrison and her friend, Mr. Linear, and for that we want to thank her," now that would have been, you know, appropriate, she took the credit! This is the church, my church that I attend. And do you know what? I contributed twenty-five dollars toward the new church, and I received a letter thanking me for my contribution, and if I paid twenty-five dollars, I could pay more. And guess what? I took that letter and that was encouragement for me to do my own thing. I said, "If you mean to tell me that I worked hard, and I made a sacrifice and gave you twenty-five dollars, and you had the gall to ask me for twenty-five dollars more—I'm a sick person, and you paid all of that money for that property to put that church on, and I have enough property in Jersey, to set, you know, the whole thing in three times or four?" I said, "Uh uh." And I got down and I prayed again. And guess what? I decided that I was going to build my own house, and I﻿48 PH: (cont.) was going to take my money and I was going to use it for my own benefit, and I was going to help whoever I could. If I saw anybody needed a pair of shoes, and I had two pair, one pair belonged to them. If I had a biscuit and someone was hungry, I gave it to them. And I went out many a day and worked on the farm, picked up sweet potatoes and sent sweet potatoes into Philadelphia by the load—the rejects. And I fed my family greens, beans, peas, peaches, pears, tomatoes, apples, everything I could get my hand on. And I see somebody going to Philadelphia, I say, "Here, take this and give it to somebody you know in Philadelphia." I could have sold it. But I didn't. MG: So you made your own home your church, in that sense? PH: I made my own heart my church. That's what I did. Because I was ill, I could not travel, I had nothing... If you're not going to give me credit—if I gave you the money, the least you could have courtesy to say thank you; and if you could do better next time, do better. And then another problem I had, I joined the credit union, and I had a habit of—they call me a miser or whatever—of saving ten percent. MG: This was at work? PH: Anywhere I got a dollar, ten percent didn't get spent. I didn't care where the dollar came from, ten percent of it didn't get spent until... And I made a sacrifice, that this is what I was going to do; because I had been mistreated so long until, when I died, I wanted a place of my own. So one Sunday morning, on my way to Bright Hope Baptist Church, I read... One time I was reading a history book and Abraham Lincoln said, "A penny saved was a penny earned." And along the wall of a gas company to my right was a Pepsi-Cola bottle, and it was half empty, [laughs] or half full, whichever one you want to take it, of Pepsi-Cola. Someone had drunk half of the Pepsi-Cola, and set the rest down. I picked up that Pepsi-Cola bottle, and I walked to the curb and poured the other part out, and I took that Pepsi-Cola bottle and put it in my handbag. I had my robe and hymnal on my arm, and I'm a praying child, and I prayed and blessed that bottle, and I said, "Lord, I'm going to take this bottle to the store and I'm going to get two cents for it, and if this two cents is ever spent during my lifetime, it's going to be spent to get a place for me to live. So that I won't have to be 'buked, and scorned, and mistreated by other people. And if it's Your will, bless this bottle, and bless me, and give me courage to keep on. That was my prayer to myself. And I went on to church, and that was the Sunday that they asked me to lead "We are soldiers in the army." "We gotta fight, although we have to cry,/ We are holding up the bloodstained banner./ We have to hold it up until we die./ Yes, we're soldiers of the army." And I told that church up with that song. And when the time came for consecration, I led the song that you, like when you bless...I can't think of it right now, anyway. "You have longed for sweet peace and for faith to increase,/ You have fervently and earnestly prayed./ But you cannot have rest or be perfectly blessed,/ Until your sacrifice on the altar is laid." And I prayed in church and asked God again, and when they said, "Put whatever sacrifice and whatever prayer you have," I put my donation in, and sure enough, just like He said He would, He answered.﻿49 PH: (cont.) I went back home and I went to the store where they gave the refund and the man was such a chiseler, or miser, he would give the children cookies and wouldn't give them two cents back on the bottles. And I went in and put my foot down. I said, "Listen, Gene, I found this bottle, and I'm not going to tell you no lie, I bought it here. I want two cents, because I'm a customer here, and the customer's always right." I'm saying, "You give me two cents. I don't want no candy because I'm getting fat." And so he said yeah. He said, "Miss Pleasant, you so sincere and you so honest, what do you want with this two cents? What can two cents buy you?" I said, "Gene, I made a consecration today that, whenever this two cents is spent, it would be spent toward a place for Pleasant Harrison to live in so she won't have to be 'buked and scorned, and having the neighbors sweep trash in my door, and telling me what to buy, and telling me my children don't owe me nothing, and that they're grown and they can do this and do that at thirteen years old." I said, "I want a place so I don't have to kill them. So he went to the cashier and gave me the two cents. Big spender, he gave me a dime. Everybody around in that candy store gave me a contribution. When I got through, I had sixty-three cents. I went back around the corner where I lived, and I got a can...I used to buy tomato juice and Hi-C because, see, that's very important in the treatment of cancer, tomato. I used to buy, by the case, tomato juice. MG: For the vitamin C? PH: Yeah. And I took this can and punched it and got the juice out. Then I took the screwdriver and punched a hole and I made a bank; and every penny I got, I put it in that bank. And they say "chiselers." I don't remember—and they can investigate, and they can't find, and they could never find my record where I chiseled the welfare. I never went out and abused my tody with men. I walked the streets in Philadelphia and I had a shopping bag in my bag, and if I saw a rag, if I saw a bottle, if I saw anything left with wire, copper wire, anything that I could resell, I picked it up and I carried it to the junk shop. I carried it myself. I went junking at night after working all day long, and picked up—sometimes I made seventy cents, eighty cents. And I kept on praying and I kept on working. And if anybody come up today and give me a hard time and tell me, I got what I have unfair... And IRS, "I owe 'em this, and owe 'em that." I don't owe 'em nothing; they owe me. 'Cause if I had sued the hell out of [them] when that object fell on my head, and I suffered with headaches for twenty or more years, and they talking about I can't prove that I got it. And the supervisor told me, said, "Pleasant, don't you accept it, don't sue 'em; because if you do, they'11 pay you the money. And somebody that envy you'll come up and kill you. You won't enjoy." "If you can make it," and she says, "I know you can, don't do it. Don't accept it." I worked for the United States Marine Corps; I was one of the highest honored civilians that they had. I've put in a suggestion, and they honored me [by giving me a pin] with the anchor and the eagle, and﻿50 PH: (cont.) [the emblem of] the corps. I don't remember whether it was a fourteen-carat or an eighteen-carat gold pin that they mailed to me. Because I was out sick, I didn't go in for the regular ceremony.. But I was told on the phone by Miss Lipp that "You don't have to hold your head down. You are one of the highest honored civilian employees here." And I kept on, and when I got... Just like I said, I didn't care what ten cents they say belong out of your prayer, belong to God. And I say, "Who is God? I am. He's within me, and I'm going to take my ten cent and give it to me. And I'm going to help anybody; I don't care who it is." I've met children along the streets in Philadelphia in the snow with no shoes on—I carried them in the store. I had four of my own, and I bought shoes and put them on their feet. Next time that little boy saw me he said, "Mommy, Mommy, Mommy, that's the lady." And she said she thought that the child had stole the shoes. And she thanked me, and she said, "Lady, God going to bless you." I said, "Honey, put that in the proper perspective. God is blessing me." I said, "Among the people that can't walk, can't talk, can't see, can't do nothing for themselves...and I have the use of my body and my mind, and I'm going to see somebody suffer, and I have money in my pocket and not spend it on a child—I'd spend it." Women walk the streets—they didn't have food, crying—I would buy lima beans and cans of sardines, by the case; and if I had, they had. And I shared everything I had with them. So I don't feel as some people, I don't feel that the world owe me a living; I feel that the living is out there for me to get. And I got it, through sacrifice, through hard work, through conservation, through aggravation, through pain, through sickness and almost death. And I made it, and that's how I made it. And they can say, "Well, I don't know where you get your religion." I said, "I found it on my knees praying. I found it in lonesome valleys. And you people that don't believe in God—if you had ever been sick and God had ever done for you what he did for me, you'd believe in Him, too. And there's nothing wrong with it." If they say, "You know, religion is a form of occult." I said, "But if you can prove to me scientifically that it did anything for you, then you practice hoodoo and voodoo and whatever you want. Don't try to change my course.. Because nothing is impossible, but it's definitely not probable." MG: What was this injury that you received while you were working? Where was that? PH: At the United States Marine Corps, on the fifth floor. I don't remember what date it was, but I was working on a machine, and my machine was directly under a skylight, and it was almost time to go home. And the man that...the general helper, they call him, pulled the chain to close the skylight, and a quantity of ice and water struck me right on the top of my head. I was all soaking wet from perspiration, and I went home. Because at that time, it was so near time to quit, stop work. And I went home and then I caught a cold and sore throat after sore throat, headache after headache...﻿51 MG: You had a concussion? PH: I had an X ray, and they said it was a possible hairline fracture and contusion. And I didn't report it. They told me to go ahead, and the supervisor told me don't report it because it would make the record bad. They were working for a clean record, and they didn't want no accidents reported. And since I wasn't hurt, I thought, no external... other than a little bump, and it went away; and I didn't figure that it was going to give me a problem. So finally it got worse and worse and worse, and I tolerated it until one day, being ill—and it was after this first operation that I had—I start wheezing from the dust from the mirror machine and having an allergy. And I was in this department and I asked the supervisor, or whatever you call it, to give me a slip to go down to the doctor. Well, a few days prior to that, she had brought some work back for me to do that I didn't do, and she didn't want to give me time...credit on my time card for it. So I went to the office and I reported it, and told them I did the work, but I was a good soldier. I did what I was supposed to do and complained after. So, one day we got into it, and she got on my nerves so bad until it was...being ill, as I said, and exhausted from work, I asked for a slip, and it was during the time of this bias thing, and they were uproared and upset about it. When I asked for the slip to go to the dispensary, and I got down there, they had called the dispensary and told them I was coming. When I got down to that dispensary it was a man—I forgot his name, it's on record in the NAACP—Mr. Shorter came out and interviewed me. And he lived in Jersey, I think, at the time. I went into the dispensary, and when I got there, this attendant, he was in uniform—I don't know whether he was a doctor or what he was, because I was sick; I was wheezing and I couldn't catch my breath. And the woman had told me in the discussion, that if I say you are right, and if I say you are wrong and you're right, what she said went. In other words, I've forpotten now the exact way she worded it, but it was the same thing. And I went down, and when I got down, this guy looked at me, and you could see anger in his face. You so-and-so's, in other words, he had a don't-like-you-anyway expression, and handled me like, rough, and hand me this glass. And when he gave it to me, I accepted it, and I spilled it on my hand. And my hand start burning, and it was like, you know, ice, and it was so cold, like ether. And the spirit came into me and said, "Don't drink it." And I held it in my hand, and he tried to make me drink it. That officer hauled off and hit me. My eye swole up, I had contusion, possible fracture; and I went to the NAACP, and I told them. MG: This was Mr. Shorter that hit you? PH: No. The attendant in the dispensary.. Mr. Shorter was the interviewer from the NAACP. MG: Oh, okay. I see. PH: And they came out and I could have sued 'em, but you had to have proof. I went to a lawyer—they don't want to be involved with the government. But again I prayed, and I was sick. And there was a doctor... I﻿52 PH; (cont.) couldn't go to work because the pain was so severe. My eyes were watering, my nerves were shattered, and I tried to work. And I had my four children—I really wanted to work, and I couldn't. I cried, I prayed, and finally one day I went into the dispensary and this doctor was in there, and he told me, he said, "Pleasant, it's not our policy to work sick people, and whether you realize it or not, you're a sick girl." He said, "You're sicker than you realize you are. Suppose you go home, you stay until you're well, and then come back. You're a good worker, your job will stay waiting for you." And I tried again. I didn't want to give up. I kept on trying to work, because I was satisfied working. As I've said before, I wasn't working for the money; I worked because I felt I was needed, and that my children needed my support. And so finally I tried and I couldn't... such pain when I moved my head, I could feel something moving, or the blood couldn't penetrate through the vein and would cause pressure. And finally I went in to this doctor, into the dispensary, and he looked at me and he said, "Pleasant, go home. And I'll see to it that they mail it to you." I told him, how could I... He said, "You won't get as much as you would if you were working, but if I know you, know how you manage, I know that you will make it." He laughed, he said, "In time, you'll have more money than we have," you know. MG: So they were offering you disability pension? PH: Yes. MG: But they never offered you medical care? PH: I asked... My daughter wrote and asked for medical care, and I was supposed to make...they had arranged for an appointment, for a hearing. And I was so sick, and I had received this phone call that if I went down to this hearing and what they were going to do to me. And I didn't make no...pull no punches; I didn't take no chances. I just stayed home and I read that, God said that He suffered His children not to beg bread and I just didn't go, out of fear. MG: What were they, what did you hear they were going to do? PH: They told me if I went, they were going to kill me—if I went to that hearing. Somebody called on the phone.. So I didn't go. I'm here, aren't I? MG: What were they afraid of? PH; I was afraid; they weren't afraid. MG: No, but I mean, why had they threatened you in that way? PH: Because they didn't want to see me with the compensation from the govern ment. Not that the government would have done it. It was this person, someone connected with that dispensary, someone connected with that girl that had all this mouth and made me do, operate...repairs and opera﻿53 PH: (cont.) tions on my own time that I didn't do, and I had my book... MG: But the doctor was willing for you to get the... PH; He knew I was sick. He knew I couldn't work and he said it is not our policy to work sick people, aid he knew I was sick. He knew I wasn't putting on. And I made it. And I could have sued them, I know I could have sued them...'cause I could have sued them after seven years, up to seven years. Why? With my educational background, my religious training, and the Bible teach rae that I suffered not my children to beg bread. What's the benefit in gaining the world and losing your soul? What was the benefit in my going up there, they give me ten thousand dollars? What could I do with that? That was no money. What good was medical benefit to me when they were angry with me for telling that woman off and telling them that they were prejudiced? Talking about, "We are not prejudiced, our percentage of employees was ninety-some percent." I told them I didn't care if it was ninety-eight percent, they were prejudiced. 'Cause I was a victim of the circumstance, and I told the major that. And that's on Tecord. MG: So did you end up getting any kind of compensation? PH: I got nothing but my disability. That's all I got. MG: Now let me ask you this—you had firsthand experience with the Ku Klux Klan in South Carolina. Were there other events locally or nationally, of a political or social nature, that made an impression upon you during the time you were growing up, as a young woman, and so on... Things outside your personal experience that really focused your attention and meant something to you important in your development? PH: A group, a local group, or persons, or..,. MG: ...an event, whatever it might be. PH: ...an event. MG: Things that... Is there anything that you remember that stands out in your mind? PH: That stands out in my mind to shape...that I took...influenced after? MG: Yes. PH: A teacher in Branchville, South Carolina—her name was Ruth Owens. When my aunt had taken my money and I was going to school at the Free Gift Baptist Church school, and she knew about it because, see, the teachers then stayed from one house to the other in the community. And she was working, helping my aunt in the field with this man she had and...her children's father. And she knew what had happened; and she saw me, I was crying. And I asked her, she was telling me to pray, and I asked her, I said, "Does Jesus care when I'm oppressed? So oppressed that the briny tears fell from my eyes?" And she said yes. I said, "Does He care enough to be near?" And she told me, she said, and she started﻿54 PH: (cont.) to sing. She said, [sings] "Oh, yes, He cares. I know that He cares. His heart is touched with your grief." And she cried. And she was working along in the field, she didn't want them to see that she was talking, and she told me, "Yes, He cares." She said, "You got to pray. Sometimes you have to give up the right for the wrong. Sometimes you'll be so depressed until you can't even moan the Zion song." She said, "But He cares." She said, "When your long nights are weary, and your days are dreary, He sees. I know He cares, He cares enough, His heart is touched with your grief." I had a hard time. I don't hate, and I thank God right now that He created me. He didn't make my heart big enough to harbor hate. I have no animosities in my heart for nobody. I just thank God that I made it." MG: But her comfort and her advice were important to you? PH: Important. When I hear the song now—now I have laryngitis, and I can't sing in the words the way she said it. And maybe it's the will of God—but she really was an inspiration for me, as far as religion. Uncle Hector and Ruth Owens. I used to love the Rickenbackers. They were my teacher, Miss Fannie Rickenbacker; Jeff Rickenbacker was a preacher; and Kissler and David—they were all inspirations. MG: This is out of context, but it occurs to me at this point that we need to insert a couple of dates into the record. We mentioned when Mrs. Harrison's father died, in 1975, the date was June 5, and her mother died on the eighth of June 1961. Mrs. Harrison, let's talk a bit more here about some aspects of your personal circumstances. We began to talk a little bit about your husband. Tell me where he was born, what was his background? PH: He was born in South Carolina. MG: Was he the same age as you or older? PH: Five years older. MG: When did he go to Philadelphia? PH: A young boy. How would you characterize him? What kind of man was he? MG PH: In our courtship years, he was very kind, considerate, compassionate, and friendly; a warm human being. Then after we got married, and was married for a year, and we had our first child, his brother came to Philadelphia. And he ended the way that we got along, because we shared our work, and he was like an iceman back then—that was his employment.. Because after he lured me out of school, then he was going to go to school with me.. Then when... After I had the baby and I was ready to go back to school to continue my education, he told me he had me where he wanted me—he wasn't going to let me go. He wasn't going to school, and he wasn't going to let me go. And so I just, you know, figured I'd read and write and do the things that I did—just imagine﻿55 PH: (cont.) that I was in school. MG: Why didn't he want you to go to school? PH: Because, well, he's not an educated man, he could write his name and he could read, and since he's... I guess he figured that's enough for me, I'm making a living...that was enough. That was enough for him, so he figured the amount of education I had was enough for me. MG: When were you married? PH: February 7, 1935. MG: And then by 1940, you had separated? PH: That's right. MG: Did you ever formally divorce? PH: No. MG: Is he still living? PH: Yes. MG: Tell me something about your children. You had four children. Let me ask you first what their names were, in their birth order. PH: Eddia, E-D-D-I-A. We call her Mae. Her middle name is Mae. And Betty Ardella. Richard Raleigh. Norman. That's it. MG: Could you tell me a little bit about each one of your children? PH: Well, each child has his own personality. A child is warm, considerate, and at times hostile, angry—all with the exception of one, Norman. He, well, I can include him, too... At times warm and cuddly, and the next time, "Why'd you want to do that for? What you want to do that for? It's foolish." And that's it. Because they were taught... You see, I had to go to work, and I spent time with them, because when I was at home, I talked, I lectured, and I taught them the importance of education, being honest, and not holding animosity in their hearts. And morals, and everything that I knew. But then there was the family that came back and said... As I told you, my mother accused me of things that I didn't do, was why I got in trouble and got married to my husband in the first place. My mother was the obstacle. And they would make remarks; they were at times... I said, my mother, whatever she thought, if she thought you did something, she would accuse you of doing this. Not meaning it, and that was it.. And so naturally, the children sometimes thought that I was wrong when I was right. And not that they didn't love me; I never felt that I wasn't wanted. But as I said, I understood enough about science to know that you don't grow peaches on cornstalks.﻿56 (cont.) And I knew the family background, and I was able to cope with my children and love them. Because there's one thing that my mother taught me after we were all in Philadelphia, and she was talking about the troubles that she had bore down through the years, and she asked me even then, she said, "Pleasant, you had a hard time coming up." She was sick then, I was her nurse. And she said, "Remember, hate will get you nowhere. You have to love your enemies as well as your friends. And that, forget it—forget all the mean things that people have done to you, and just remember, that you can never have peace of mind as long as you have hate, and animosity in your heart." And I taught my children the same thing because I believe that Even with my sharp tongue, as she said... Even my grandfather, from way back— they were old people, they were uneducated people, but they had wisdom. And with my children, due to the fact that I was away from home, my neighbors... Society raise your children today. You work and support them, but society tells your children what to do. This is the "in" thing to do. "So you pay no attention to your mother, you walk out with your mother, you let your mother take you to the movies... Ah, you're a sissy," and all that kind of garbage. And this is bad influence on them. And if I tell my daughter, "You're thirteen, and you have to be Careful and not to go out and be seen walking the streets with all kinds of men and the type who... You should not marry out of your class. And you should seek all the education you can, because once you get married, your husband may do you the same way your dad did me." And I went on, and I spared nothing. When they were old enough, I didn't tell them Santa Claus brought the baby, I told them the truth and that was back in the forties. You understand? And I believe in the modern way of life. I'm a young thinker—I'm an old woman, but I'm a young thinker. I believe that a child should be taught and trained from birth—not just wait until he gets grown and try to cram everything into him at once. You cr.n't do this; it's not going to work. And forced education... I don't think under stress. And if I had to go through a test, I would not have absorbed as much as I have now. Because I did it on my own leisure time. If I woke up too sick to go to school, I studied. And I taught my children this. You don't have to be... I said, "You know, when it comes to education..." I told them a story about this young man that had been stricken ill, and the doctor said that he wasn't going to be able to do no hard work. Well, back then, that was the only job a black man could get, was backbreaking jobs, digging ditches and cutting crossties and working in coal mines, and all of the hard and dirty work. So this young man was sick, and he came from a large family, and one of his brothers, and they were inseparable... And so they had to make provision for a higher education for this particular brother. And the other brother, one of the brothers that was working, decided... told him, "Don't worry, all I want you to do is go to school and study and do the best you can." So he went to school, and he got A's and B's, and of course, he was medical student. He was higher material; he was what you call an A student. So he entered into the medical﻿57 (cont.) profession and his brother supported him. And when he got through, when he finished college, he was very grateful to his brother. And all of his classmates decided that they were going to go out and celebrate, and they were going to do something that they had never done before. They were the first ones to graduate from this college as doctors, and what-have-you. So they got their fraternity together, and the money, and they went down to the dock, where they rent the boats, and they went out and rented a boat. But they said, "No one can go along on this trip but the educated, you have to have a degree." And the doctor was so thankful that his brother put him through college, and he knew of no one that could row this boat like his brother, and he wouldn't feel safe unless his brother rowed the boat. His brother was also a good swimmer. And so, when they came up to this meeting place where they arranged for the trip, when they passed the line, they had to tell what college they went to and what did they major in. And the uneducated brother, the doctor's brother, said... They asked him what school he attended, and he said he attended public school. But they wanted his formal education. He said, "I attended the college of hard knocks." He said, "What did you major in?" He said, "Commonology, swimology, you know, sociology." And this guy laughed, he said, "You attended the school of hard knocks?" He said yes. He said, "Where is that located?" He told him what state he came from. He said, "Aw, no, who do you think you're talking to? I know every college in this state, and I'm a librarian. I'm a Harvard man. You can't tell me this. Commonology, there's no such subject." But he realized that his brother was the doctor, and he cut his harassing short. So it was time for them to go, and they all got on the boat. But first, the doctor, they had all had white shirts and blue suits and black ties. Well, this brother had bought all this clothing for the doctor for his graduation and for his prom, and what-have-you. So they got on the boat, and once they got on the boat, this librarian, he then started harrassing this brother again. So when the brother got on the boat, he opened up his shoes... They were all at this ball, with their white shirts and blue dress suits. They got in the boat. He opened his shoes, and this educated guy, he looked at him, this librarian, he laughed and giggled and looked at the others and winked and made signs, and said, "He attended commonology. That's a commonology student. That's the college of hard knocks." And you know, they made all these passes. So eventually they got on the boat, and away they went down the river. And after a while, a crocodile came along. And this hard-knock guy, he had his shirt off, and his tee shirt, and all this, these fancy doctors, they were sitting up there all tied and collared and shoes. And the alligator or crocodile hit the boat, turned it over. This guy, commonology, he kicked his shoes off and swam away. And they said, "Hey, wait a minute. Come back here and save me. Help!" And he said, "Look, if you can't find your commonology and your swimology, [take] drownology." [laughs] So to say, if you don't have common sense—don't care what college you attend, means nothing. So the school I attended was the school of hard knocks.﻿58 MG: But now, for your children, did you encourage them to receive more than commonology, to.. PH: Oh, definitely. I said, "You have to coordinate commonology with psychology, with biology, you have to know science. You have to dig, you have to know chemistry. You must know what things are made of. You must know what you are talking about. You must know some science so that if somebody comes and tells you that this is a peach tree, you're going to know it's a blue spruce. Because people are out there to get you." Sometimes I used to sit down and try to explain to them, like poetry or poems, and I used to tell them all the time—I almost forgot it, I dreamed I was a majorette, and that I was in Mexico, and that I was invited to attend a matador's banquet. When I arrived, they greeted me, the band was playing the matadors' jamboree, and the food was all around, and all of a sudden, I heard a sound.' I saw matadors laying on the ground. The bull came out as the master of ceremony, and he said, you know, for him not to worry—he was just there to plug his product, from beefsteaks to bologna. And he wouldn't leave before he told them the truth about the show—that even he wanted to plug, to tell them that b.s. was just cow manure. [laughs] So that was that. Now if you understand that poem, he told them that he was there to plug his products, from beefsteak to bologna. And he wasn't going to close the show until he let them know that b.s. was cow manure. That's so. You follow me? You understand that once you know the product... When you say beef, you mention bologna, salami, pepperoni or whatever they make, and you learn to use that product for what it's worth. Do you know, what they call the... What's the term for the garden that you grow and don't put the chemicals into it? MG: Organic. PH: Organic. And he said that he wanted them to know that even organic food was just from cow manure. With the best fertilized organic food, it was old simple cow manure. And it came from the bull, didn't it? That's so. Let me ask you, back to some of the advice that you were giving, I think you said, your daughter as you were talking to her. You mentioned that you told her not to marry out of her class. What did you mean by that? You observe a person by the things that he does. In other words, if you see a person and you think he's dumb, or you think he's educated— when he opens his mouth to talk, you gonna know whether he's dumb or you gonna know whether he's educated. If a young man comes to visit you, pay a call on you, and he comes without his hair combed, not groomed, shirttail hanging out, teeth not scrubbed, and all of this—you know that this is not the type of man that you want to become associated with. If he takes you to the movie and he abuses you and hits you, this is the wrong man for you, darling. You don't have to take that. You go to school and get an education. Be the best. If you take the part﻿59 PH: (cont.) in the play, and you decide you want to olay, and if it falls on you to be the jackass, be the best jackass in the stall. Don't play around; put the best effort in what you're doing. Don't go out there and assume nothing. Learn what you want to know. Get the book and study to make yourself improve, because you have a hard road ahead a rough road. ' MG: PH: MG: PH: MG: PH: How do you feel that your children responded to your efforts to educate and instruct them during the time they were coming up? Well, I have mixed feelings. First of all, they didn't go as high in school as I wanted them to go, because if they had, they wouldn't have stopped at high school. And they told me, I made it as far as I made it, and I had no proof. They knew that I was versed, but they didn't give me credit. Because they knew that it was no Rood to me what...my knowledge, it was no good.. Because I even had an official right here in New Jersey to tell me—she came out to interview me from the Food Stamp Program, and I was receiving food stamps, and she told me—she came m and she saw what 1 was doing, and she said to me, "Mrs. Harrison it's a shame you're not educated." And I said, "All depends on what you'call education. If education is know-how, I'm educated." And I make no bones about it. I said, "There is not one person—I don't care what college or what university he attends, can compete with me as far as what I know. Not that I'm conceited and think that nobody else out there can do it, but I'm talking about a single individual," I said that can take a white ash, and plant a seed, plant it, process it, and' make soap that floats." I said, "Take a cotton seed, plant it and cultivate it, harvest it, process it, make yarn, the thread, make the garment, make the yarn, make the material, make the dye, make the garment, and press it design it, and wear it." ' These are all things that you can do? These are things that I can do. I said, "There's very few people that can go out there and take the trees and know what branch or weed to pull to make a certain dye. There's a very few people that can go out there and plant a grain of corn, and plant it, cultivate it, harvest it, process it, and make from corn meal to corn oil to corn whisky, corn starch, corn anything, any product. And when you are capable of doing these things. And if you need help, you go to the library and you'll get a book and look until it gives you the information that you want to know. I don't care if I never have a diploma," I said, "and I admire a diploma. And that's the only thing that, if I am to live longer, I intend to go to a college and receive my diploma." Now that's the only thing that you've seen that you have not seen here. And there's...any desires that I have—that I want to live in peace with all mankind, and I want a college degree. But now, your children, then, you're saying, were skeptical of what you tried to tell them about education, is that right? Yes, because they felt that when they reached the high school education that it wasn't necessary—the girls—it wasn't necessary for them to try to further their education, and this, you know, sort of broke my heart.﻿60 PH: (cont.) Because they didn't produce what I expected. MG: Did the boys think differently about that? PH: Well, the older son has a problem, on the borderline of alcoholic. He tried to commit suicide, a couple of times, and he's got a mental problem. But the younger one is an IBM specialist, and he graduated and went through his instruction... MG: Do all your children live in New Jersey now? PH: No, none live in New Jersey. MG: Where are. they living? PH: Norman lives in New York, and Eddia and Betty and Richard live in Philadelphia. MG: What is your relationship with your children now that they're grown and the rest? PH: Like a daughter-and-mother relationship, sometimes close and sometimes distant. And they take a drink once in a while, and then I will tell them how I feel, and they tell me I just want company. But I've adjusted. And I accept a person, as I said before, for what he is, not what I want him to be. And as far as my children go, they have a right to live their lives the way they see fit. And if they want to spend it drinking, all I can do is say, "Look, you know, an excess of alcohol is detrimental, and it's hazardous to your health. And if you want to go ahead and do your thing, go ahead, because you have a perfect right, but I'm not going to do it. And when you come visit me, if you can't control your alcohol, don't enter." MG: Do you have grandchildren? PH: Yes. MG: How many? PH: Ten of them, and two living great—grandchildren. I had four greatgrandchildren; two passed. MG: You mentioned, after you and your husband separated, the struggle that you had, to work and keep the family together, and be their support, both financially and spiritually, and all the rest. You mentioned that you were on welfare. How did that experience affect you and affect your children, do you think? PH: Well, I'll tell you, I only accepted welfare when I wasn't able to work. And I wasn't a continuous welfare recipient. And I thought that welfare was a wonderful program, but it was abused, and that they didn't have the right setup. Because welfare could be used to help people, but because of the system, they...the system says, you see, the people do this to themselves. Now, if you'll bear with me, while I try to relate to you that...﻿61 PH: (cont.) First of all, if you go to school, and the teacher tells you that you're inferior, and it's no use in you taking this course because you're black; and it's not going to do you any good, you won't find employment in this field—you have destroyed that person, and you made him a candidate for welfare. And if the system was used for, say, "Now I'm going to sponsor you. I'm going to help you find work." And another thing, the educational process destroys people. The teachers say, "Well, I know mine, and if you don't get yours, that's too bad," And if they ask questions, they don't get no answer. And they harass the students, some of the teachers; you have teachers that harass students and you have students that harass teachers. And what they need to do is to get together and reason with one another.. Because I know, I've been in classrooms; I didn't stay long, but I learned more from a few days than a whole lot of college graduates learn in twelve years. Now you believe this—I mean, in college twelve years, not just grammar school, ^ high school and what. Because, first of all, you must use common sense; you're another human being, you're dealing with people, not pigs. The welfare department, why they have so much abuse and why they...they destroy the people. In other words, they put the boots on them, tie their strings, and then tie their hands and tell 'em, "Pull your boots up, pull yourself up by your bootstrap." You know what I told a woman one time, she was talking to me, and I said, "You're looking at the profile of courage. You know what? I' m glad, as David said, when they said, 'Let's go into the house of the Lord.'" I said, "Do you know my grandfather taught me how to make the boots, make the boots, and the strings to pull up on." And that's what I did, literally speaking. I can take anything that I want and imagine., go to the library, if I don't have the book already here, and I'll come up with what I want. They need courage; they need to be taught honesty, and love. If they would teach these children that, they wouldn't have so much trouble; there wouldn't be so much sin and lawlessness. If they would just go and sit down and teach that child from the first day, "Look, honey, you have a future," like I taught mine. "You have a future before you. You're going to have rough roads ahead, you're going to have to make sacrifices just like I said, you gonna have to cry sometime, you gonna be mistreated, you gonna be 'buked and people are not God. If you sneeze or cough, they don't want to sit next to you because they're afraid of you. This is being scorned." I said, "Now you learn all you can, and save. Don't be extravagant__make do. Go out there and use what you have. Don't go buy an orange and want orange extract, and buy lemon and you want lemon extract, and throw the rind away. What do you think the extract came from? If it's orange extract there's a certain amount of orange, and if they mentioned orange first, it contains more orange than it does in the flavor." You follow me? This is what I taught my children. But the neighbors, my mother, that's for her people, you don't want to do that. Well, they, they don't... This is my thing. MG: So you felt that to some extent your instruction was undermined by other... pH; By jealous and unaware people, uninformed. That's where my problem came﻿62 PH: (cont.) in there. And the system, the system itself destroys people. Then they go around and talk about a welfare recipient. Where else is the man going to go... Where else can he go but to the welfare when you've destroyed him in your educational system? This busing... The white man himself—and you know that I'm not prejudiced, because I do not have to say what I'm saying. I love the white man the same as I do the black man. I will share what I have with him. I have no animosities in my heart. My mother taught me... And she bore the pain of death, and if she could lay and die easy, then she didn't have no hate. And she instilled love into my heart. It may sound awful foolish, but hate... It requires energy to hate, and if you use that energy to work and make an experiment, you have made a contribution to this beautiful country of ours.. It's beautiful. When you see the trees and the beautiful building. But you have to seek your own soul's salvation. Can't nobody make peace for you. And once you have a peace of mind, you have a beautiful life. And just like I said, and I'll repeat it and regardless to all of the interviews—if they would take this money and start at the beginning, and educate these children; tell them what they'll do if they violate this law; and the mothers and fathers spend more time preaching and praying and begging their children to respect people, regardless to race, creed, or color, as a human being—this world would be a beautiful place to live. Now what I've been through with, as a child, to be in a house that was tied in and fenced in with barbed wire, all around it. And when I looked out at night...and to get out of that house, I had to crawl underneath the barbed wire to come out. And it leave me with no scars, no marks of hatred. If those men would come here today and knock on my door and ask me for a drink of water or piece of bread, I'd give it to them, from the depths of my heart. And that's why God has been good to me. And I can go to God any time of night, and sometimes I lay and groan and I ask God to make my enemies leave me alone—and I keep on praying. If I was on the top of the Statue of Liberty, with an international hookup, I would say, "Man, you have destroyed yourself with your own belief, because the Book said, 'Go preach the Gospel, say the Word, the Lord bid the whole earth My grace receive. He shall be saved, that trust My Word, and I'll condemn who not believe.' And the greatest commandment of all, 'Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.' And if you did that, all this ifs, ands, and buts would be eliminated. Where would the friction come if I loved you and showed you nothing but warmth and courtesy and kindness and assistance, where would the hate come from?" MG: Do you think it's very likely that what you're talking about would ever happen? Not just here, but any place. PH: Well, I'll tell you... MG; Is that one of those possibles but improbables? PH: It's a possible but improbable because man is not going... At this day and stage, he does not rely upon God. Some of them don't believe in God; they think it's a myth. But you have to begin somewhere. And if this﻿63 PH: (cont.) world or country is ever to Be saved, it will be saved through the blood of Jesus, which is righteousness—not pretending, not talk—action. Now, I cannot express, I wouldn't care if you could have degrees in philos-°phy,» English. . . I don't care what college or university you came from, you wouldn't have words—Webster or Standard, or no dictionary can properly define love and how it affects different people. And why? Because love is...even beauty, is in the eye of the beholder. If you would just go back and say, "Lord, what can I do to be saved?" And you said, "Well, I'm going to wake up today and I'a going to try to treat people like I want to be treated." "But they're not going to do it." "But you didn't hear what I said." If the doctor tells you, " If you don't take this medicine, you're going to die. If you don't let me take this object out, it's going to blood poison you and you're going to die." And you don't let the doctor take it out, you don't listen, you don't accept his word, so then you die. And you are lost, where you could have been alive, since you value your life so dearly. It's not even making yourself... You don't know what you're doing, don't take chances, don't assume, learn. And if you do that, this world would be a better place to live. And the Book said that He was going to change it by the twinkling of an eye. Did He? By the twinkling of an eye. So it may not be possible, but it's not impossible. It may be probable. You follow me? MG: PH: Let me ask you about the role of friendship in your life. Would you say that you have a number of close friends, have friends been important to you? Well, I've said I wasn't an invert, and I'm not... But friends... Sometimes you live a lifetime and you only find one. But I have numerous people that I consider have been friendly toward me. As I spoke to you about my neighbor, and I have another person that.,. . they're willing to do anything for me. And I have a neighbor that just passed. And during her lifetime, I considered her a friend, and we used to talk—I would tell her my problems, and she would tell me her problems. And I told her that I was too busy to let her drag me into her circle of friends, and don't mix me with her friends... That I was close to her, and I would do anything for her, and I hope she felt the same toward me. But I found out one day... I had to stay in the hospital, and another neighbor... She always admired me, and I always gave her the time of day, friendly, speak, or conversation, but never personal—never, you know, chat. So finally one day, I came from the hospital, and she heard that I had phlebitis, and she saw me walking, and she knew that this was taboo for me at that time. And she told me, ' said, "Come on here and get in this car and let me take you home," she' said, "because you are too nice a person to get a blood clot in your leg." And she said, "And I couldn't rest, I'd die." She took me in the car and she brought me home, right out in the driveway, and she put me out. She said, "I would come in, but I'm busy." She went on. She gave me her phone number. I brought the phone number back home, and I put it down and I couldn't find it. So this friend that died, I called her, and every time she got ready for a phone number of someone, she would ask me; right off the top of my head, I gave it to her. And when this woman called, I misplaced this phone number, and I asked her to give me this woman's address, phone number, or tell the woman to call me. And she said, "I'll do neither one." She said, "You﻿64 (cont.) don't want to meet her, she not good." And I met the woman once; I went shopping, and I told her, "Call me." And she did the same thing I did—she misplaced my phone number. And all during, this supposed-to-be friend, all during her lifetime, she was my friend, she was this, and she was that. And finally one day after this woman had passed, I found this phone number. And I put it aside, and brushed it aside until finally, three or four weeks it lay there. Finally a few Sunday nights ago, I called her, and I identified myself and told her, and she went on to tell me about the things that this lady had said. And the things that she accused me of. I just prayed. But during this woman's lifetime, she used to get on the phone and she would tell me, "Well, you're the only friend I have, and you're this..." I said, "Mrs., when...you're doing, you're cleaning your act up," I said, ''because, you know, God don't want no coward soldiers in his band." I said, "You talk religion or something that you can't live." And I even repeated a song that I heard that was recorded by Dorothy Love, "Ninety-nine and a half just won't do,/ With seventy, you won't make it,/ Eighty, God won't take it./ Ninety, that's close,/ And ninety-nine and half is almost./ But get you one hundred,/ Because ninety-nine and a half won't do." No, it won't do. You have to do what is right, I said, "You know that someone was talking about you, and I'm supposed to be your friend, and I'm not a tattler. They said if you died, they wouldn't go to your funeral." I said, "That's no way to live in the community, I don't want you to just accept me as a friend, as an only friend." But I found out that the woman was sick. She had to be sick. She was, like, you know, senile. So when she died, it took until after her death for me to find out that everything that... And she didn't lie on me. Only in one case she lied, when she accused me of doing the same thing to her that my father accused me of doing. She said she carried me somewhere, and I put some white stuff all over her car. Now this woman was transporting chicken feed, and all you had to do was open a bag or the vibration from the riding of that car would make that dust go all over her car—you know, where they bump, plop the burlap bag down, the feed would seep through. And she didn't have sense enough to realize that. And the dust from, come back and another... She said that I put grease all on her visor, you know, trying to do something to her. So I said, "I don't believe in this." And she asked me did I know where she could go that was somebody that was good that could do something, and that she had this... She had gone to this spiritualist and he told her that this woman that didn't live too far from her, and gave my description. And she said that this person had did something to her, that her sickness wasn't natural. And I told her, I said, "The last time I prayed and asked God to make my enemies leave me alone is when someone broke in my house and took a lot of my mother's things." I said, "I went and I lit my candles, like I usually do, like around the holiday." I said, "But when David burned candles and incense, it's nothing wrong with that 'cause spiritual use. That's what you want to do, you do that. But I don't practice that." I said, "I lit those candles on that candelarbra, and I prayed. And I asked God as the smoke exhausted into the air, that I wanted Him to hear my cry and my plea, and answer, and make my enemies leave me alone." And I said,﻿65 PH: (cont.) "You know, two weeks after that, that man had never...,I don't know if he came back in the house. I did not leave this house to go nowhere, because I was afraid to. And do you know, that man went and got himself a fix, and he was stricken ill.. And he went to the hospital, and before the doctors could take care of him, he was dead." MG: What do you mean, "fix"—a drug fix? PH: Yes. Drug fix. And I said, "And when his cousin, or someone, knew about it, and she knew that this nan had broke in my home. And the reply I gave her, I said, 'These young people go around and they break in, they steal, they rob, they kill people like me, old people like me. You know, God getting tired of them.'" That's what I said. I said, "I don't have no sympathy for these people that kill themselves." MG: Was this an incident that took place since you lived in this house? PH: Yes. They broke in and stole more than five thousand dollars worth of my value. More than five thousand. MG: Well, overall, as you look at your life, would you say that you're a group person or more of a loner? PH: Definitely a loner, with an open mind and an open heart. MG: Let me ask you some questions about race. Do you have any preference among the terms "colored", "Negro", "black"? PH: Black. MG: Why is that? PH: Because it's the only description in the Bible, when they refer to race. Was it Solomon that said, "I'm black. I am comely black. I was looked on by the sun." And if you believe the Bible, that's the oldest, only known description. MG: Have you used that term all your life, or just in recent..,. PH: No. When the thing was to accept "Negro," I was ruled and governed by the laws of my land. Because anything that is unlawful, according to the word of God, is sinful. MG: Well, it wasn't unlawful to use other terms. It was just common to use... PH: No, I said I was a law-abiding citizen, and not to accept the word "Negro" would have been unlawful because I would have caused a disturbance. It would have been confusion, had I been a radical. But I'm not a radical. MG: So in that sense, you saw it as lawful. PH: That's right. The law said, "You're a nigger, you're a Negro." In the South, it was common years ago, "nigger".﻿66 MG: To use that PH: MG: PH: MG: PH: That's right. As a person- They would walk up to you, half drunk, and say, "Come here, nigger," and do this, and do that.. Did your parents or your relatives discuss things with you regarding race when you were growing up? Yes. I was taught not to hate, and ask God to forgive them because they knew not what they were doing. Did they talk about specific things that happened to black people? Yes. My grandfather, I remember one...we were working in the field and he was telling me about... The first thing he told me, that he remembered slavery when he was about six years old, the day that Abraham Lincoln signed... MG: ...the Emancipation Proclamation? PH: ...the Emancipation Proclamation. And he said, all he could hear through the woods, and coming from the plantations that day was "free", and... As now, I have laryngitis, and he said, they would sing, "I'm free, I'm free at last. Thank God almighty, I'm free at last." This was a song, he said, he heard, he remembered as he was a little boy. MG: This was Grandfather Adams? PH: Grandfather Adams. And he told me a story of how the blacks were educated. He said, "You know, during the days of slavery, it was illegal, unlawful,"' he said, "for a nigger to be educated." He couldn't go to school. He told me of how the white boys would ride on horses and hit him because he would try to go to school. And he told me about one time they were working in the field and how the blacks were educated. He said they would get in groups under these tents they made—that was their church, what they call a harbor—and they would say, well, "When you hear me say something about the Lord"—they would sing, they were permitted to sing spirituals—he said, "you pay attention and work up." This was their way of communicating to each other. So they were out working in the field, and this slavemaster was very cruel and mean. And he was evidently an alcoholic because he used to go and sneak out in the woods and hide on a horse, and he would see with his binoculars who was working and who wasn't working. And he would come and hit 'em with this whip, with this cat-o'-nine tail. And they always had a field master, the nigger that they trust, and he said, "I hate to see my lord hit you like that. I'm going to tell you... I'm taller than you are." He said, "When I see him coming, you pay attention, and you don't have to work like that. Just keep going so if he comes and sneaks up on you, he'll see you working." But he would mark places in the road and tell him, When I come back you better be there and it better be clean " See they had to work by this...like, on production.﻿67 PH: (cont.) So this leader in the field saw this boss, this lord, they called him in that day. He camouflaged the horse.. He broke limbs from the trees and attached it to the harness on the horse to camouflage the horse; and they couldn't see from a distance, along the edge of the woods, whether it was the horse or the trees. But the smart guy, he could see, and he would detect an odor of the horse, or he would hear the horse, what they call, twitch, you know, make this noise. And so they kept on until, when this field master saw him coming, he would start singing. And he said, "When you hear me singing that song, when you hear me saying, you work up and get your work done. Don't let him catch you not working." And he said he had just left, this boss had just left the field on the white "horse, he was going to come back to hit these slaves again.. And when the man saw him, he said, [sings] "You'd better get ready. You'd better get ready. For my Lord is coming again so soon." He looked around and they were still playing around, and they wasn't working. He told them again, [sings] he said, "You'd better get ready. You'd better get ready. For my Lord is coming again so soon." Some of them didn't hear it, and he saw that the ~ boss was approaching fast. He said, [sings] "If you don't believe that I've been redeemed, for my Lord is coming again so soon." The lord was coming along by the river, that's why he said, "Follow him down to the Jordan stream." He said, [sings] "Follow him down to the Jordan stream. My Lord is coming again so soon. You'd better get ready. You had better get ready. For my Lord is coming again so soon." And then, he would tell me other stories, about how they would hide and learn to read, and that's a familiar story. And that's how mean some of them were. And he showed me a mark on his back where they marked him. And, you know, it was just...some of the things, when I look back, I said, "I would have searched into it more," but, just as I said, he literally carried me around in his pocket. And sometimes we would be the only one working in the field because the other children, "It's too hot. We're not going to go down there. We ain't killing ourself." You know, they had this accent. And wherever he went, I was there. And it was just an experience that, if there was any influence as far as the herbs go, definitely it is a trait of my grandfather. MG: You had close contact with whites as you worked for them. Were you in contact with them in other ways? Were there whites who lived near you that you would see on a routine basis? PH: You know, in the area that I came from, there were very few whites that you came in contact with. Now, they were good whites, but they didn't socialize. They would sneak to you... My mother's house at night, and they would crewel, and they wanted my mother to show 'em how to make peanut candy, and benne sesame candy. And around the holidays, as I said, they would pick peanuts. But they snuck in at night when no one saw them. And they would... As I said, some of them were good, and some of them mean. And I remember once a little baby got sick in the neighborhood, and the doctor said that the baby needed a wet nurse, and my mother nursed the little baby and raised it. And one day the mailman was on the wagon. He used to deliver the mail, because he was also the man that would buy whatever you had to sell, and he would take it to market. And he passed and saw this little white girl playing in the yard, and I remember this. I was in my﻿68 PH: (cont.) dirt hole—in my therapy thing [laughs]—and he asked my brother, "Who is the little white girl that was in your yard?" And my brother said, "That ain't no little white girl, that's my sister. That's my white sister." The man got off the wagon and went in the house to ask my mother. He said, "Lizzie, is this your young 'un?" And my mother told him, "No, Mr."—I think his name was Besinger—she said, "No, Mr. Besinger, that's not my child." And my mother, I guess, told him, you know, what happened. And the blacks and the whites did not mix, because if they caught you — they caught the white mixing with the blacks, they called them "nigger lovers," and they were just as against the whites that socialized with you as, you know___ They mistreated you. They put you in a class with the blacks. And the blacks hated you if you socialized with the whites. They don't want you to have nothing. They were very clannish, I'll say. Maybe it's not the right word, but that's my description. Maybe there's a better word. MG: So how did you regard white people as you were growing up? PH: Well, I just regard them as human beings that didn't understand. I've always had that. I couldn't figure out why they didn't like me—I'd done nothing to them. My family didn't come here, they brought me here. And they didn't understand what they were doing. They didn't know. The Bible said, "Forgive them, Lord, because they know not what they're doing." White man don't understand what he's doing—he's blind. He need to be taught. He needs somebody to take him by the hand and say, "Brother, you're wrong," and take him by his hand and lead him on. MG: You don't think that that's been done? PH: It's been done, but not in the right manner. All this racism, the fight— you go to church, you do it in your action, you treat people right. You don't wait to try to change the world overnight. And as long as they've been fighting and struggling since the year of 1954 when the Supreme Court ruled that segregation in schools were illegal, they have not yet come up with a plan to desegregate the school. This is just disturbing. You let Russia violate a law on the United States if you don't think they can change overnight. You let one of those foreign countries come over here and finagle around with Uncle Sam, and you'll see a change by the twinkling of an eye. They can do it—but it's hatred, bigotry, and every other mean thing that go along with it. If they wanted to, they could declare an armistice against segregation Monday morning.. They don't want to. Don't you know what... MG: These are white people you're speaking of, right? PH: That's right. This is the white man's world. MG: Do you think there's anything black people can do about that? PH: Yes. MG: What? What is it? PH: Well, I'll tell you. Black people can do something about this segregation﻿69 PH; (cont.) problem. First of all, I don't push myself on nobody. I am as educated as the next person, as far as reading, writing, and simple math. I have a teaspoonful of common sense. And if you don't want me, I don't want you. But I want to ask you and the world, How can you achieve a standard, when you say you want the highest standard that you can attain? If you're going to deny me of an education, how can I defend myself? An education is a tool, and if you don't have the proper tool, you cannot work. And if you go in the kitchen to prepare a meal, and you gonna make cornbread, you don't get nothing but corn meal. Now, some people have different recipes, but you can make something they call cornbread with corn meal and H2O—that's plain water. And you'll heat to cook it. You follow me? And if these people go back to the drawing board and say, "Look, as the prodigal son said, 'I believe. I'll go back home and acknowledge to my father that I've done wrong.'" All of these people, instead of going around saying, "I didn't do it. How much do they want us to pay? That's too much. They're taking the world away from us..." No. The blacks are not taking the world. If anything, the whites owe the blacks because they've been beaten, enslaved, they were mistreated, and they don't have to go into their pockets and pay to repay the blacks. All they have to do is take the same system that they have now, and the government put their foot down like they do on the other side of the... MG: Issues? PH: ...issues, and say, "Listen, as of today, you're going to educate the blacks as well as the whites." If you expect me to perform in society, why should you expect... If you're going to expect me to communicate with you, then teach me English. Teach me the proper pronunciation. Don't tell me I can't learn just because I'm black or white or Hispanic. These people are doing this to themselves. Then they're on the welfare, people don't get on the welfare, what the hell else—excuse my expression—can they do but get welfare? They done screwed up the educational system. They didn't pass 'em; they wouldn't give 'em the proper homework; they destroyed 'em by calling 'em names and erasing letters on the paper. I've had it done to me when I went to night school, and I wasn't working for credits. They don't have no record of me in school unless they lied. I can't go to the board of education in Philadelphia where I went to school; they don't have no record of me in South Carolina. But do I sound like I'm a learned person? MG: Now, what you've described here is what whites can do, if they were willing to do. But what can black people do? PH: Black people can... You'd be surprised, the strength that's in unity. First of all, I would say—just like they broke the barrier for freedom, first you have to set a goal. Set a goal, a moral goal. No radical, no anti-this and anti-that. Go look that white man right in his eye, and tell him, "Look here, white man. I an tired of your b.s.ing. Don't shoot the bull around me 'cause the bull told me in my dream that cow manure is nothing but b.s." Follow me? If you go up and tell him... Don't go up there screaming, stomping. Show that man that you know what you're doing, and don't expect to get rich overnight. As I just said, Don't try to beat the man with your﻿70 PH: (cont.) fist—you're gonna have contusion, fractures, every other thing, lacerations, and every other medical term you're gonna have. You have it physically, if you go out there to try to beat the world with your fist. You can't do it. You can't change people when they...people like...a person with a mind like I have, you can't come up and tell me who to vote for. But if you get together and say, "Sister, Brother, let's be sincere. Let's start now. This is the drawing board. We are tired of these people horsing us around." And I went to the Social Security Administration and I told them, "Don't finagle up with my birthday. During the time I was born, a white man didn't even want to pick up a piece of paper with a black man's name written on it." Anytime they changed my mother's name in the court, the justice of the peace's office...I don't have to tell you the kind of tribulations and trials that the black man came up through. If you denied the man of an education first, that's his tool, what he's going to work with? Do I have to eat with my fingers and you have a fork? I'm a taxpayer for the public school, why do I have to be denied and get secondary education when you get first class? You have to educate the man. Then you have to teach the man, let him see. Why do you want better than I have? You're not gonna take it, what the black man can do. What did I do? I told that white man I'll shoot him just as quick as I will a black man. "Don't come on my property and finagle up with me, because I don't bother nobody, and I get respect by white and black." And you know that because I have a black and white patient, don't I? And I love 'em both. And if I didn't love 'em and didn't want to treat her right, she wouldn't be in here. They get the same treatment. When I sit down to eat, I feed them. And if I told you, I described that condition of that white patient that I have, and I truthfully, deep down in my heart, love her. And nobody's going to come in here and mistreat her. Neither one of 'em. So now, if the black people get together and do like Pleasant Harrison did, and don't try to outfight, outsmart 'em. And that's what I did.. And I don't care whether they like it or not, I outsmarted society. They said that I could not get a house, I was not employed; there was nobody going to loan me no money. I had friends, and they thought I was crazy, and they told me I couldn't do it. But I said, I dreamed I was a majorette. Remember I told you? And I dreamed I was in Mexico. I was invited to the matadors' banquet. I said, when I got there, this bull was out there just bulling around, and he told me what cow manure was. And he made it very plain to me, that I must be alert to be productive. Now, for a comment from you, may I ask you for the matter of the record what you have seen? Am I unique? MG: I would say so, yes. pH: i didn't beat 'em with my fist? MG: No, but you threatened to blow 'em away with your gun» PH: If they come and bother me when I'm not bothering them. I know myself... They can say, this is their place—I know my place with the white man; I know my place with the black man. And I have no animosity in my heart for either one. But when he comes to me telling me that "You gonna have﻿71 (cont.) to do this," or "You gonna have to do that," or come snatch my mailbox open and tell me he gonna look in my mailbox, you know... And I'm a black woman, and he's not gonna take no for an answer, and he gonna use my body? Baby, I not only will tell him 1*11 shoot him, because love to me is sacred. I'll go to bed, but I'm gonna know and want to go to bed with who I want to go to bed with, not somebody come tell me. "I'm going home and get my .38 and come back and you gonna do so-and-so with me. No." And that's why I told him what I did. HG: And I have pictures of me carrying a gun. I walk around with my shotgun, a .22 pistol, looks like a .45. And I hang it on the outside—I didn't conceal it. And I walked around my house, and I stayed on my property with it. And I have pictures to prove it. And if you don't believe me, I'm talking... I know what I'm saying. Call the state of New Jersey and ask 'em—didn't they came here and tried to arrest me for carrying that gun? And I called the state attorney general, and called him and told him they had broken in my house and stole my stuff. And what this man said to me, and he told me, "Wear your gun outside. Don't conceal it. If you want to wear one in your hatband, one in your waist, one on your leg, wear it." And I tell him that they wanted to lock me up. "Tell them I said, if they lock you up, that I will..." He will pin their ears to their you-know-what-the part they sit on. Do you think that there are any generational differences in racial thinking among black people in the United States today, people of a certain group, say, your age range, with a different set of opinions than you would say' people of, oh, college age? I would say having young children of my own, and growing up as a...from what I remember as a teenager as we make progresses in society, and we live better, and have more... Children of my own... You know, young people my age, sort of, it's like an equation; it equals to the other. They think one way one day, and another. And I don't think that the gap—I'll use the term "the generation gap"—between the children and the parents, for instance, is not as vast as it used to be. I think there's a more, sense of reasoning now since... From my experience with the young, I am accepted more now with the young than I have ever been, and I'm accepted with the young more than some of the elderly people. So I don't feel the gap as much as...because I'm exposed to younger people, and I've been accepted. So I don't know about the other people. What is your evaluation of the racial situation in the United States today? PH: Stinks. PH: MG MG PH: PH: How would you compare it with, say, the situation as you perceived it during your first years in Philadelphia? Is it better? Is it worse? In some sense, it's worse. In a sense, it is really worse. And then in a sense, it's better. MG: What areas are you thinking of? In the areas of hatred. When I came to Philadelphia... I'll tell you where the hatreds set in and started, the beginning of hatred, when the﻿72 PH: (cont.) Supreme Court ruled that segregation was illegal—then that kicked off the bandwagon of hatred. Because the black haters then thought that they were being taken advantage of. You could have had some leader of someone that the white population had to sit down and reason. And sometimes I hear radio and television moderators, they discuss it. The average white man don't realize what he has done to the black people. They all talk about, "My father came here from this country and that country "but they don't realize that the black man was brought here in chains, and was held down and used as slavery. And ninety percent of them, what they have, fifty percent of it belonged to the black. And hatred, the reason they hate blacks is because they have to get up off of their fanny and work. Years ago, before freedom, naturally they don't hate you. They have to work for what they made you work for before. So you messed up their good thing. Abraham Lincoln messed up their good thing. So naturally they going to hate you. Some of them. Some of them don't hate you because some of them was slaves, too, and used for prostitution. So it's no problem that God can't solve, but as long as they're going to use... "Well, he's not going to do this," and"He's not going to do that..." The best thing—and if I had to... I don't know whether this is proper, the political issue, but as I listen to the radio and read the newspaper and heard the commentators, how they laughed at Carter, you know... When you really analyze Carter's desires and his dreams, and I put myself in his place, I said, "You know, there's only one white man that I actually feel sorry for because he's damned if he does and he's damned if he don't." And that's the way I cane up. Didn't care what I did, if somebody wanted to go up beside my head, they went up there. If they wanted to discredit me, they did that. And as the song singer say, "I may not have reached perfection, but I try." And Carter tried. That man tried. Any time you go out there with a plan and speak of human rights, and those commentators chew that man up and ridicule him like they did—it's pathetic. And they make you wonder whether there will ever be a change. Yes, there'll be a change. Look how long the people prayed, cried, and preached. But eventually freedom came, didn't it? What you see now, here's what I want to tell you—we were the slaves. Now that society has changed. See the change? Follow me. Everybody's a slave, now, for what they want. The oil companies, look at the profit they made. They don't care who they rob. It used to be a time... Talk about black on black—this human on human now, dog eat dog. I'm going to get you. I'm out here to get you. Look at all the profit the oil companies made. MG: Do you... I mean, it's kind of clear here that you identify to some extent with Carter. Did you feel that his remarks about human rights were directed in any way towards situations in the United States? PH: Yes, indeed. Yes, indeed. Not only in the United States—internationally, all over the world. That's how I feel. Human rights. All these people have to go and stop all of this big I and little you, and consider these people starving—and you can't take nothing with you—and give a helping hand. Divide. What's the use in you hoarding food and everything, and you know someone is hungry, and you don't give it to 'em? Didn't I tell you I went out on the farm where people plowed up potatoes—I didn't have to do it. If I felt well enough after my head stopped aching me, when I held﻿73 PH: (cont.) it down like this—and it's on record. I didn't do it to have nothing to talk about. Anybody come here, ask me, "You got so-and-so-and-so?" If I know they need it, and they're not trying to use me, I give it to 'em. I can jars of food, can stuff. And my children, my daughter, I know they're alcoholic, I know they take their money and buy whisky, but I don't want them children that they have there to become a victim of malnutrition. Because if you show me malnutrituion, I will show you malfunction, a sick person. Once you become inflicted with malnutrition, it endangers and cripples and maim[s] the whole entire system. I have experimented with flies, roaches, mice, bugs of every sort, butterflies, and all; and if you don't feed it, it's going to die. You got to know what to feed wild birds and everything, and if you don't feed a person... What's the matter with the black race today, they are victims of malnutrition. They are victims of persecution. They have not had the chance that the white man had or have. And their reaction, they have destroyed it. The Book, the Bible tells you, these signs shall follow as many as the Lord shall call... will go down through the third and the fourth generation, and sometime as many as God shall call, as many as follow. You take a child when it's born, and you give it a formula, put the child on a formula. A formula...the benefit of the chemistry students. Oh, that's a big term, but nine times out of ten, it's only milk and dextrose, which is sugar, or sugar cane, or millet syrup. And these are chemicals that's extracted through the process of maturity. And if you do not use the proper soil, you're not going to have the proper ear of corn. You must have some kind of fertilizer. As the bull said, even b.s. is cow manure, and he's got the best; and it's the best thing for the organic food lover, is b.s. That's cow manure, you understand? And if they would take and treat the human being as if he was corn or a tree that they prune and care for, he would produce the best product, the best ear of corn. He wouldn't be crooked, he wouldn't have specks. If you don't spray the tree, the bugs going to get into your fruit. If you don't keep your body clean, it's going to deteriorate. And the same thing applies to every walk of life. And until they face it, they're going to be butting around just like in the Bible days when they ordered mortar when they tried to build the tower. And they ordered mortar, they got bricks. They going to be confused. And this is why, 'cause they won't accept reality. MG: This is part two of an interview with Mrs. Pleasant Harrison. The interviewer is Marcia Greenlee. The date is the eighth of November, 1979. It's Mrs. Harrison's birthday. Mrs. Harrison, what is women's work? PH: In my opinion, women's work is anything that she is capable of doing. MG: Do you have any feelings about the equality or inequality of men and women? PH: Yes, I do. MG: What are they?﻿74 PH: I think that men are somewhat arrogant, and they want to be—maybe in their own rights they're justified—superior, dominating. And they want to limit the progress of women—some of them. I'm not saying that... But in my experience I've found that more men resent the women's movement than women. And just in short, I just think that they feel that they're the boss, and that they should dominate, and decide what a woman should do. Yet they don't want to do what they're supposed to do. If a man went out to work, and it was an agreement, they made the agreement, to let... We'll share the domestic work, we'll share the monies, and we'll live together in unison—this is all right. But I remember when I was a child, there were so many families that the men...they got married, the men went out to work. They didn't permit the woman to go outside. They would take bushes, like, you know, the yard broom, what they swept the yard with, and they marked, cleaned all around the door. The woman couldn't get out. And they thought that they had a right to starve this woman to death. This is what started the woman's suffrage. And if Susan B. Anthony hadn't complained and got people together, the condition would still exist. If men were going to do their part and do it right, there would be no woman's suffrage. The women would be... If she was satisfied with being a housewife, a mother, or what-have-you, and they said, "Well, I don't want you to do this," and you went into that contract knowingly—then this is a different matter. But they want to dominate, tell you what to wear, what to eat, what your place is—your place is in the home. Yet, they don't fulfill their duty. When they go out to work, they're supposed to provide the finance, to protect the home, and sustain it. But they'll go out to the poker games, the poolroom, the pretty women, and every other thing other than taking their money home. Then they turn around and say, "Your place is in the home." My place is anywhere I want to be and I am capable of performing a job, any job. And I'll dare any man to tell me I cannot... I know that climbing a ladder... At age sixty-four today, I'm endowed with a reasonable portion of common sense. I know that women are not built structurally as a man—he's stronger. But to say that a woman's place is in the house, I disagree with this. MG: What's your opinion of the term Ms.? PH: Ms. is a woman, in my opinion, that don't want to—either married or not— don't want to accept the title of being married or just... She feels that this Ms. puts her in a certain category that they won't know whether she's married or not married. MG: How do you feel about that? PH: As I said before, I'm not an invert, as far as these things are. I don't care who knows how old I am. I don't care who knows that I'm married. I don't care who knows that I'm separated. I don't care who knows that I've had love affairs with other men. But they seem to have something to hide, or use this as an identification, and I disagree with that. MG: The argument is advanced, I think usually, in use of that term, that when men make themselves known and use the term Mister, they don't reveal by that term whether or not they're married. And that women, then, in order to have the same sort of flexibility by using the term Ms., also don't indicate their status. And that if you want to know if a person is married, then you need to make that direct inquiry.﻿75 PH: That's right. MG: What do you think of that? PH: Well, if that's the way they want it, I'll go along with it. But as for me, it doesn't make any difference... If they see me and I identify myself as Mrs. Pleasant Harrison, then you're supposed to accept that; and if you don't believe that I'm Mrs. Pleasant Harrison, then you have your choice of investigating to find out am I Mrs. Pleasant Harrison. MG: But you prefer that title, using... PH: That's right. MG: How do you perceive the women's movement? How do you understand it? What is it? PH: I understand the women's movement as a step in the right direction because my perception of the women's movement is that they want equal, not separate. They want to be recognized, they want to stop this suffrage, and they are willing to share equal with the man. And I really think the women's movement is an advancement for the male, because after all, they have been mistreated, too, by some women. They've been used and persecuted just like anyone else. So let's not kid ourselves. But remember, they did it first. It was nationally recognized that men were brutalizing and starving and every other thing, in every way, to women and children. When you don't take your paycheck home, and take the food out of the house and give it to another woman, that's cruelty, unjust. And I've known of cases where this has happened . MG: So how do you feel yourself, in relationship to the women's movement? Are you supportive of it, do you have reservations—how do you feel? PH: Well, you define what you mean by reservations. Let me answer this; I am supportive of the women's movement. As to say, I'm a woman; I don't want one to tell me what I can do or what I cannot do because I'm a woman, because I feel that it is my constitutional right to seek enjoyment and entertainment and freedom wherever I can. And if you're going to tell me that I can't do something, you have infringed on my constitutional right. Whether it be a woman or a man. MG: By reservations, I think I meant, are there any aspects of the movement that you don't feel in sympathy with, that you don't agree with? PH: Is this the same group that burned the bras? MG: Well, I think there are a lot of different women and different interests in the movement. PH: That's the only things of the movement that I disagree with. Because what I understand about the women's movement... They want the right to participate, and do the things that they feel need to be done, because man has fallen short of his duty. And you see the condition that the world is in today. As I said before, this is what causes all of the confusion. People don't want﻿76 PH: (cont.) to reason, and without reasoning, you're lost. MG: And you feel that men are largely responsible for that picture? PH: Men are the sole responsibility. Because God gave man dominion over everything, and he didn't say just male. When he said man—that was plural, woman and man. MG: Do you feel that the women's movement should be or is important to black women as well as white women? PH: I feel that the women's movement is a step in the right direction for not only white women, black women, all over the world. MG: How has being a woman affected your life and your work? PH: Physically, I haven't detected any difference or...the only... As I would say, the gossip or the sayings or whatever, the people...gestures that they made to me... And as far as that goes, I just let it go in one ear and out the other one. Made no difference to me because I made my mind up that I was going to live my life the way I saw fit. Because I was taught when I was an adolescent that, "Look, you're not twenty-one, and when you get twenty-one, you can do as you choose." And I waited for that day. It wasn't predicted that I would make it that far, but I did. And, when I was twenty-one, I made up my mind that... Now if I make up my mind that I want to do something, I'm not going to let you tell me that I can't do it. If I want to go to the library and get a book, and go out there where they demolished the house and tore the house down, and get the book; and go to the hardware and buy a bag of cement and come back home and lay bricks in my back yard, because some day I want to build a house—I don't see where no man or woman has the right to tell me, "You're a woman, you can't do this." MG: Now, when we spoke yesterday, we talked about your involvement with the church. Did you ever participate in church activities and groups...have you ever participated in other kinds of organizations, of clubs, as an active member? PH: Only during my younger, teenage years; just before I was married, I joined a club called the Jolly Twelve, a social club. MG: What was that like? What were your activities? PH: It was like a Christmas Club. We wanted to raise money for Christmas, that we would have money to help needy children. MG: Was that pretty well the extent, then, of your group kinds of memberships? PH: The group kinds of memberships, then I was a member of the inspirational gospel chorus. MG: As part of the church? PH: As part of the church group. And I participated in fashion shows and programs that existed in the church, MG: Now have there been any civil rights groups or community organizations that﻿77 MG: (cont.) you held membership in? PH: No. MG: But you have been involved in a number of community activities? PH: Yes. MG: Could you say something about those, what kinds of things you've done in the community? PH: I was once in Chesilhurst... Oh, well, first, in Philadelphia, I helped to organize the community cleanup, fix-up. I was one of its founders, through Dr. Pasca—I think it's Pasca—at the Saint Christopher's Hospital. And I went from door to door canvassing, asking people to clean up and fix up so that we could eliminate rats. And after that, I worked a year and saved my money, and I bought fifteen power sewing machines. And I had my house wired so that it would, you know, be appropriate current for the machines; and I taught dressmaking and power sewing machine operating in Philadelphia. And whenever, wherever I saw suffering in my own way, I tried to alleviate it. MG: Now, when you came to Chesilhurst, what were some of your activities? PH: I was a member...in other words, I was a member of the board of health. In other words, I was the official on the board of health, and then I also was a member of the planning board, and the senior citizen's group was the only group I joined as a member, but very little participation that I did. Only I participated in a program in the church at one time. MG: I think maybe this is the point to insert some mention of the fact that you care for handicapped here, in your home, at the present time. Could you say just a little bit about that and how it came about? PH: Well, how it came about was that these friends... Before that, I have even back in my earlier years of marriage, when there was someone in the street that didn't have a home or that...during the time of the depression or the war, I took them in and I fed them. I did for them just as I would my own children, and specifically, this friend of mine, Claude Linear, that I spoke of earlier. He's now deceased, and he came from Virginia. And a friend of mine that lived up the street; we were very close at that time, Helen Wilson. She introduced this man she met on the bus, and he was just from Virginia; he was looking for friends, and the two men came up. And the man she met, he got his friend, and they came-up to visit her. And when they passed, I was looking out the window, because I always kept close watch on my children playing in the street. And when they looked up, they saw me in the window. And when they went to my friend Helen's house a few doors up the street, they wanted to go to the movies. And the friend that she met, brought his friend, which was Claude. And he said, "Who's that girl down the street a few doors looking out...that was looking out the window? Do you know her?" Or, "Who is she?" And she said, "That's my friend." And he said, "I would like to go to the movies. I wonder, would she like to go join us?" So she sent her little girl down to ask me, would I go to the movies with her, because﻿78 PH: (cont.) she didn't want to go alone with these two strange men. And she had told me that she had met him, this fellow, they had gone out, you know, to like a beer garden or somewhere. But they wanted to go to the movies, and they didn't want to go alone on this Sunday. And my brother, that Saturday before that, he came when I was crying because of being deserted by my husband. So he came in, took his handkerchief out of his pocket, and he wiped my eyes, and he said to me to shut up, "Don't you shed another tear." He said, "You're a woman, and there's no woman out there that can't present herself no better than you can." And he said, "And you're black—that doesn't make any difference." He said, "No man out there will refuse you because you're black. No man in his right mind." So after he left... He said, "I don't want to ever hear tell of you crying again." He said, "You have to offer what I have to buy." [laughs] That was funny! But he consoled me. And after then, the next day after this lecture from him—the next day I was willing to say yes, I'll go out, and then I did. And we went to the movie up Broad and Columbia Avenue, I think it was—whatever the movie was there. They closed it now. And after that we became friends and he would carry me to different places—to the movies, and clubs, to the programs, you know, on music and what-have-you, and we had something in common. Because he carried me places, you know, like to the theaters where Earl Hines and Louis Armstrong would appear...Pearl Bailey and Cab Calloway, the Ink Spots, and the Mills Brothers, Frank Sinatra, and the whole circle. Well, of course, I was exposed to...in the religious world, during the time of my affiliation at Bright Hope Baptist Church, we went from Atlantic City, as far as Atlantic City to Florida, singing. And I sung in Washington at First Baptist Church. I sang for the late Dr. Martin Luther King, and at Bright Hope Baptist Church I met his father. And this, you know, I haven't been isolated where I have not joined any active groups, as far as like political. I vote and register, and I make my choice, and I'm an active voter here in Chesilhurst. And I also joined a club—it was a nonpartisan club— called the Committee of Ten, and that was like a watchdog committee, to see that things went on according to plan. But they wanted...when they reached a point that they wanted to support one candidate or the other, then I refused, and I dropped out. MG: Now you met Mr. Linear in Philadelphia. Linear. Who was the brother? Which brother was it that was comforting you on the day that you mentioned? PH; My brother? Walter, the one that's younger than I. MG: Now, was it through Mr. Linear that the patients that you care for in your home came to you? PH: No, but his friend was stricken with rheumatic fever, and I took him in. I had taken in a patient before that, but he was the one that was connected with Mr. Linear. MG: So this was still in Philadelphia that this started? PH: Yes, and he was stricken... He had a room, and he was stricken with rheumatic fever, and of course, he couldn't care for himself. And he told me﻿79 PH: (cont.) about him, and he brought him to my home; and he couldn't walk, and I had to assist him up the steps. And, well, he couldn't afford to pay his rent; and I had a house, and the third floor, no one was using it. And I had food—I was on welfare, but I had food. And I said, well, how could I, supposed to be a friend, and this man's in need...how can I claim that I know God, and then refuse this man of assistance. So he was sick, and I knew that it wasn't legal for me to take care of him, so I gave him carfare... In fact, I carried him to the Philadelphia General, and I told them that he hadn't been here, and that I was keeping him, and doing what I could for him. They kept him, I think—I don't know whether they kept him a couple of days, or they told me to bring him back home and that he was to come back in a couple of days. And I gave him carfare, fed him, kept him clean, until he was able to go out and get a job. And then I even applied for the job for him at the gas work, and he kept it until they found out he was a bigamist, and they dismissed him. Then he went to the waterfront and he got a job, and he stayed there for years. And I don't know, I heard one day that some man by his name, Oscar Jordan, had met with some kind of an accident. And I haven't heard, and I've searched the phone ^books, and I haven't heard from him. MG: Well, this was the same man... PH: The same man that I had cared for. MG: Now, again, though, how did you get the patients that you have... PH: How did I get these patients? Through a neighbor of mine, a friend that... We were neighbors in Philadelphia, and we were both coming down, building the house at the same time. I didn't know... MG: In Chesilhurst? PH: In Chesilhurst. And I suggested that I was gonna build the house, this place, that I could take in elderly and handicapped people. And he said, "You know, Miss Pleasant, that's a good idea." And he said, "I think I'm going to do the same thing." So then he proceed-ed to build... He bought another place, and that was larger, more suitable for his project, and he built this rest home. And one day he came by here and asked me to take a ride with him—he wanted to show me his progress. And I did, I got in the truck and we went over; and his wife and I were friendly, so we sat and chatted for a while. And one of the patients came to the door, and he was senile, and had a book—illiterate, couldn't read or understand anything. He said, "Mommy, I want you to help me with my homework." And she said, "Well, you go sit down, and I'll be in there with you as soon as my guests leave." So he was satisfied them., and I said, "God's going to bless you." And her assistant, Mildred Greer, was there, and she was doing the paper work. And I said, "Because these people...you're the only mother, the only father that they have because the people, for one reason or another, they can't take care of them." So I said, "When I get my house situated, I'm going to take in some people." And so she said,"Yes?' I said yes. So she said, "All right, then, if I hear of anyone that wants a home," she said, "because there's a whole lot of people out there that need help, that I will call you." So the next day, I was in the garden way out on the far corner, but my﻿80 PH: (cont.) telephone bell Is loud—I had it on loud—so I heard the phone and I ran in. And it was Mr. Jones, and he asked me was I ready. And I said, "Well, I have to plaster the room." And he said, "Well, when do you think you 11 have it done?" And I told him. So when I got the room plastered... No, what happened was, the people didn't have time to wait for the room to be plastered. And they came over to interview me, the sister and brother of William Clark. They called his home and asked them, could they take William? And they said no. They asked, "Do you know of anyone that could?" And they told them that they knew of me, that I was the only one, only person that they knew that was qualified to take care of Mr. Clark—if I would. And so they relayed this to me, and they asked me was it all right to give William Clark's sister my phone number, and would I talk to her? And I said yes. So I told her... She asked me would I take her brother—he was blind arid deaf? And I said yes, and she said, "Oh would you, Mrs. Harrison?" I said yes. So she asked me when could she come, and I told her what time I would be available. So sure enough the next day she brought him, and of course, then I accepted him. And he became your first patient in this house? No, 1 had a patient before that didn't have a place to stay, Edward Sadler. He's now deceased. And I had children, two children, that their mother and father separated before that, that I took in and cared for. MG: What are Mr. and Mrs. Jones's first name? PH: Harold Jones and Betty Jo Jones. MG: PH: MG: PH: Now you have a number of activities that occupy your time to a great degree that are...some of them we might classify as hobbies, some are just really light interests—others are a little more serious than hobbies, I think. And I want to ask you about some of these things. You're a collector; you have been involved in a great deal of study and use of herbal remedies and experiments; you are proficient in any number of handicrafts, including spinning, weaving, caning, making dyes, making soap, making whisky, making wines, making incense, canning, drying, all kinds of needle crafts; you built your own home, the house in which the interview is taking place here, beginning in 1961. Let's talk about these activities. How and why do you think it was you first became a collector, and what kinds of things do you collect? Long before I knew the word collector or connoisseur, strange objects and, I'll say, craft objects amused me. They fascinated me because I found that somewhat...I felt isolated from the human, from my family, because of their attitude toward me. As I said before, I prayed, and I found comfort in doing and collecting, and this was how I kept my mind occupied. Things that interest me, I saw, I had an eye, I'll say, for quality and things that were intricate. And I just started—I would pick up pieces here and there, and clean it up. And of course, as I told you before, I was... My mother thought there was something wrong with me mentally, and one day she naturally carried me to have a physical because I was ill. Then she thought there was something wrong, and she called the doctor's attention to this, what she thought was an odd thing for a girl my age to do. And he requested that I bring some of the objects in. And I carried a little cream pitcher, and a﻿81 PH: (cont.) statue of Don Juan, Don Cesar, and a statue, a little—I don't know what you...words get away from you when you want them—another statue of what I thought was a portrait of Christopher Columbus with his manuscript concerning America. And I've always been interested in my country; I thought this was the greatest place in the world. And along with my family, I have a lot of pride in the American system, but I don't agree fully with everything they do and everything they say—and I imagine that this is healthy. And back to the collection... Down through the years, I just fell in love, from the homes that I savf...and I used to dream that one day, I want a place so I can have the things that, if I see something and I want to buy it and clean it up... When I was twenty-one years old... When I got married, I had a house full—brass bed, I had everything. I brought up all my pots and pans and everything. I didn't have to buy one thing when I got married. Of course, a lot of things, my family discarded. My mother when she disagreed with me, she'd get on her high horses, and then she'd put it in the trash. I'd be looking out the window, and I'd see it on top of the trash. I cried, but I couldn't get up there and take it off. So anyway, down through the years... And I found out that the quality of what I wanted was not in the new things; and if the quality was there, the design wasn't there. And if the design was there, I didn't have the money to purchase it. So therefore, I made friends, and I was a close friend. They took me as a person, and they told me that I was unique, as far as they were concerned. MG: Now who are "they" here? PH: These are the clerks and the persons that were employed in the Goodwill, the Volunteers of America, the Salvation Army, the people that had the little junk shops and the rummage sale. And when I would speak to them and go in, and they saw the things that I was interested in, they would say, "Oh, I'll bet you have a beautiful home." And I said, "No, just a junk shop." One woman I spoke to, and she said, "I don't know..." This woman was sick, and I went to give, help her, to stay with her today because her maid stayed home. And she said—you know, they all call you by your first name—she said, "Pleasant?" And I said yes. She said, "It's amazing to me that you would do this kind of work. It seems that you should have some business of your own, you should..." You know, in other words, she was telling me that I was below my class, serving her, and waiting on her. I said, "Well, you know, beauty is in the eye of the beholder. And I think what I'm doing is beautiful, because you can't feed yourself, you can't help yourself; and I'm here to help you, to let you know that I care, and I think that's beautiful. I would want someone to do this for me," I said, "and in the past they have." I said, "The reason I'm here today is because people helped me when I couldn't help myself, and I thought that was enough. And to repay someone, as long as I could help someone, I felt that I have not lived in vain." MG: Now, when you were first beginning this collecting in Philadelphia, and your mother took you to the doctor, how old were you? PH: Fifteen. MG: So it was really right as you arrived, you began to___﻿82 PH: MG: PH: MG: MG: Yes. Oh, yes, I.,. Then, other than the things that I brought in my little suitcase... Because I couldn't bring my dolls—they told me to leave them, that they would mail them to me, and that was just a way of getting them away from me, to keep the load from being...the car from being overloaded. And I never did regain them, but I had quite a collection. What are the main categories of things that you have collected? How would we break them down into groups? Well, first you would...I put first things first; my rock collection, then the bric-a-bracs, the cut glass, the china, the pewter, the wood, the clay and the crystal, whatever... And everything from the nineteenth-century piano to the petrified human heart. And you saw the rock collection, petrified cabbage, and lemons, and the whole thing. You also, I think, have a category of furniture, and something that we could refer to generally as tools and utensils. PH: Yes. That's right. MG: Was there any reason you think that you gravitated to these particular kinds of things? PH: Yes, because they were my surroundings of childhood. And I guess that in my mind, subconscious mind, I enjoyed them so until I couldn't let go of them, mentally, and I felt at ease with them around. How did you store these things as you...before you got, you know, a house of your own? PH: I had boxes... And we lived in a house, and I had access to my aunt's that I was close, Effie Lou. And I had a sister, Ruby, and neighbors that, like, if I couldn't store what I had in...I would tell them. I would put it in a' box, and go to their house and ask them would they mind if they put it in the closet and keep it until I got a place to put it* when I was overcrowded with my own space. And then I managed to evade apartment living, and I went out and into the house of my own. And one day I was on welfare, and I lived in Philadelphia, 1322 North Delhigh Street. And of course I was on welfare, and a visitor came. And I had like a little house that had a living room you entered right off of the street, and in the back, it was like called ace, deuce, and trey, rooms all...three rooms on top, and the little stairway that was circle stairway. And in this living room, I had the bowfront china closet, I had that round table, and I had the chairs that are in the basement—they called them horn...you know, the high backs, with the delicate cow horns, or whatever, stuck up with all hand tooled. I had a linoleum on the floor, and that high chair you see in the living room, and that commode you see, like the Grant's Drum. What else? A stool that you raised the seat, and you would store the children's galoshes and the umbrellas and what-have-you. It was a huge room, and when the visitor walked in, she said to me, "Are you Mrs. Harrison?" And I said yes. Of course, I had my bobby socks and my brown-and-white shoes on, little homemade dress, and she said to me, "Are you sure you're Mrs. Harrison?" And I said yes. She said, "Well, gosh, you look like you're twelve." And I said, "Thank you." And at that time I﻿(cont.) was twenty-two or three...twenty-two. And she said, instead of her investigating, you know, this was...she was flabbergasted. And I had my little crocheted tablecloth on the table, and it was immaculate; and all my little pieces of silver and cut glass and pewter was in the china closet, and it was clean and the children were clean—and she was flabbergasted. And she said, "Where do you get all of these beautiful things?" She said, "Well, if you ever decide to sell," she told me, she said, "you just remember the Smithsonian Institute in Washington, D.C. Remember that. Just get in touch with the Smithsonian Institution." She said, "They would be interested in this." Every day I would go out, and if I earned money, if I went out and worked on a farm, if... Some days you made fifty cents, some days you made a dollar, dollar and a half, and as I said, ten percent of what I earned belonged to me. I saved it. It was either spent to help somebody else or when my birthday came, I was good to myself. I bought myself something that I wanted, regardless of what it cost. If it was not of quality, I did not want it. And as rule, I could not go to the store—Gimbel's, Wanamaker's, all the big department stores—and purchase what I wanted. They didn't have it. If they had it—the department store had a beautiful collection at one time, from the arts, utensils, and I called them just collectibles, but I couldn't afford the price. And I would go down and, as they say, get sharp on both ends, with my cotton dress and conservative orthopedic shoes, and my hair combed. And, you know, I'd walk in, and you would never look at me and think, "Well, here's a collector." But I was fascinated with the things. And then when I priced them and saw the price, if I went out and saw one that I could get for a few pennies, I bought it. It occurs to me that there's another category of things that you've collected that we didn't mention early on, and those are family heirlooms. You have a number of hunting tools that were used from... My foreparents, my mother's father. Now, maybe you could mention some of those things, because we didn't talk about the spinning wheel and the loom. They have the spinning wheel, which is from my mother's family. How I got this spinning wheel, every— I'll say, in the north Philadelphia area, in the tenderloin section, which is Eighth and Spring Garden, knows of my mother cousin. Her name was called...and I don't know her last name today. We all called her '-'Fish Annie." And she gave me the spinning wheel, which was her mother's. And her mother and my grandfather Adams was brother and sister. Her name was Aunt Henrietta. And so that's how I got the spinning wheel. And it had been down through the family through her mother, and so that's it. And the pot that I have, the castiron pot and kettle that you see on the shelf—they were my mother's, that she, you know, brought from South Carolina, my aunt kept for her. And on her visits back—she also left a trunk at her sister's, which was Aunt Idella—and when she went back to visit she brought them back to Philadelphia. And I have rocks of hers and a stone of my grandfather's. And I have this wood, like pieces of wood with protruding roots, like a fist on a long—twelve to eighteen inches long—and this was my grandfather's hunting tool. And also, he was an Indian, part Indian; I had a bow and arrow, and this spear that is used, and the old daggers and﻿84 (cont.) swords and what-have-you. How did your family and your friends regard your collecting? What did they think of it? That I was a disgrace. And there was something wrong with me. And that my colleagues if they saw me—I remember on one occasion'—saw me in' at Ninth and Lombard Streets... There was some kind of a re-used place, and I went in, and she happened to see me in there. And her name was Betty... I forgot her last name, but she was an admirer of mine. And when I went back to work, she told me, she said, "Listen, Pleasant, you stay out of those places. You let that stuff stay in there for people that can't afford to buy. You have a good job, and you're working, and beside that, you're a disgrace to us as... We are operators; we are government employees; we should adorn ourselves accordingly. We shouldn't go in these places. This is not the proper place for you." And I asked her right then and there, Who was she to tell me what I wanted? If I had sense enought to work for what I wanted, I had sense enough to spend it for what I wanted to spend it for. And I asked her, Did she realize that the only thing of quality that I could afford was in these places? But she didn't buy that. And I had numbers of people to tell me that—what they didn't like about me. God knows they couldn't say that I wasn't a considerate and warm-hearted person. But one thing they didn't like about me is that instead of going into other people's homes when I visited...and observed the types of things they they had, and not to try to exceed what they had. Because this created animosity, and that was why I was not liked, rejected. I was an odd fellow. And because of my knowledge of herbs and chemicals—and when they told me something and I disagreed—I was too forward speaking for them. Because if I thought you were right, I agreed with you; and if I didn't think, I said, "Well, now, you're entitled to your opinion, and I'm not trying to convert you, but this is the way I see it. And if I respect your opinion, you should respect mine. What's the argument?" Let's move on to talk now about your knowledge of herbs, herbal remedies, experiments that you've done. We know from conversation earlier that it was primarily through your Grandfather Adams that you gained some of your early knowledge and interest. What are the kinds of things that you have worked with yourself, personally? What kinds of things have you made, how have you used them, and so on? If you're talking about concoctions, I have made medicines from... Specifically? Cough medicines from pine needles, and skin medicines from the oak tree, and soaps, and—you name it—extract oil of sassafras from the sassafras root, oil of orange, oil of lemon. I make extract, lemon extract, orange extract, rum... Or any flavor or fragrant that I want to extract from an object, a flower, or whatever, I know how to extract it and distill it and process it for certain use. Now I was my own guinea pig, other than rats, animals, chickens, the fowl, because... Well, we said, I guess we left this out—animal husbandry. I had knowledge of how, process of how they were formed. And so I sort of, being exposed to all of these things was like... Some people don't regard a field as a college or university, but it all depends on who you have in the field with you, and whether or not you have a listening ear. Because if I learned how to accomplish these things﻿85 PH: (cont.) through listening, and the most of it, I learned in the field or assisting my grandfather with patients. But I have an ear for listening, I have patience, and when I don't make the experiment the first time, I try, and I try again. Because I know that someone else has done it, and I want to do it, and I want to know for myself, from these experiences. Have you made some things that you feel are original? I mean, have you come up with some medications or other sorts of concoctions that you think are unique for your work? MG: PH: Yes. Watermelon. Some people buy the watermelon, and they buy the watermelon, and they eat the watermelon, and they discard every other part other than the red meat from the watermelon. And I, through experimenting, found that I used to get terrible pains in my back. But my grandfather said that watermelon is a good source of, you know, towards helping the kidneys to function, to eliminate the poison and foul things in the system. So I decided and I thought, well, this is in my field—I'm going to experiment, ^And I took the watermelon and this...when I speak to college students, I told them about conservation. I said, "We throw away too much. We'll go to the store, and go to the doctor, and spend all of our money. Not that I'm against the doctor, but if you go and be diagnosed and come back home and take care of yourself and use some of these concoctions, you'll find that if you read—these are the things that these things are made from." But the unique thing, experiment, that I have made that has been so vital to me, was the pain reliever such as mint, catnip, horehound, and the internal bleeding, the tarragon, and... It's another one—I'll come to it before. Tannin, from gallnuts and oak bark. MG: How did you use the watermelon? PH: How did I use the watermelon? From the watermelon, you can make sweet pickle, sour pickle, preserved; that you can later make coffee cakes, cinnamon buns, or what-have-you; use it as a spread for an hors d'oeuvre; you can make the juice; you can take it and distill it and make a wine, or you can use it to make the wine as a concoction or a remedy. And the seeds, you press, refine them and put them in a mortar and pestle and you can make a meal—put it in your breads, your meat, or what-have-you, to make a hamburger stretcher. And there's so many different ways that you can use it. The rind, as I said, you can make preserves, you make pickles; you make wine from the juice, which is a medication for kidneys, cirrhosis of the liver, and what-have-you. And I think it's a shame that people will go to the doctor, and don't take his advice. Go to the doctor. That's what he's there for. Everyone don't fool around or not attracted to this research, and interested in what things are. Because I'll admit, I have a heck of an imagination. And another thing... When I get insomnia, as I said before, and I can't sleep, I count my blessings instead of sheep, and I get up. And I said, "This is, when I'm awake and I can't sleep, the Lord wants me for something." And I'll get up and make this experiment. I'll ferment the watermelon in the proper manner you ferment any other fermentation wine, just as you would grapes to make grape wine. I have my own recipes that I'll use one part water, one part sugar, and one part whatever substance I'm using. Well, this is called medication. Then I ferment that and distill it.﻿86 MG: What kinds of things did you use as treatments when you had cancer? PH: The main treatments that I used when I had cancer... .my main diet was bulk, fiber, pineapple, tomato, grapefruit, and any of the vitamin C, vitamin A's, and the carrots and the dandelion, and you know, such... And I was a variety eater. And I'm not what you call a cannibal eater; I was mostly vegetarian. And I took care of myself. And the main factor is.... Some people say, "There she go." I prayed, and God opened my mind; and this may not be the appropriate time or place to say this—I asked God to come into my heart, and to my mind, and blot out hate, and help me to forget the bitter past that I had. And I consecrated myself to the betterment of mankind, and whatever I could do—even I was sick, I wasn't dead. And if I could help myself, then this would be a contribution. And the greatest contribution that I feel that I have made was the experience, when I saved myself. Because, from the knowledge that I had of the human anatomy, I knew that my time was near. And if God hadn't answered... Through the miracle of God, I'm here today, thirty years later, to tell you of my experiences. MG: So you felt that you approached cancer and treated it on both the psychological and physical basis. PH: Physical basis, and psychological. MG: Say something a little more about your handicrafts and the things that you do. PH: Well, to make a long story short, I think I mentioned to you that I cane—I can take a calf and skin him and tan his hide and make shoes, make...I know how to use the hide for clothing and chair bottoms, and what-have-you. That's one. And whenever you hear me mention crafts, that covers a vast field. There is not one craft that I was interested in, that I cannot do, or won't try to do. Making the clay, and the cooking, and the canning, and the drying, and you name it. The art, the drawing... It's poor, but if I want to do something—the painting—there's so many things. You name it, and... MG: What has attracted you to that kind of activity? PH: Curiosity. I wanted to know. I was interested in knowing because of the attitude of how I was accepted, and how I was treated, and the curiosity, I guess, which I said I was born with. And the early exposure to my grandfather, which he was...they said I was a replica of him. And he had a little son. My uncle, Uncle Peter, by his second wife, he said to me, you know, referring about Grandpapa Adams, he said that we were like two peas in a pack, and I was my grandfather's god. "Don't do nothin' wrong...don't you touch that... I say God. I say that's her God." That was...he had this accent. "Don't touch that, that his God?" MG: Let's talk just briefly about your building your own house. You explained to me as we were speaking off the record earlier, that with very few exceptions, you did the entire construction of this house. Tell us a little bit about what you did, and why, and the rest. PH: Well, why I did what I did—I had employed a builder. And I tried to get a building permit to employ who I wanted, and you know, like I'd be the master mind, but the laws would not permit me to build a house. When I submitted﻿87 (cont.) my plans, they wouldn't accept it because I was not a certified builder or architect. Therefore, I called my attorney, and he advised me and recommended someone. And of course, I won't go into his record, to say anything harmful about him, but he tried to take me over. Because at that time, I paid him $740, and he was to do the work. And I paid him each month, when I received my check; he was to work one day a week, and I was to pay him for that week. And I would give him assistance and get whatever help, which I had been promised, that they would come down and give me a hand, which never materialized. So anyway, [the builder] got around—he came up and saw me, and he got my plans, and the only way I could get the house started was for him to say he designed the house. But I designed the house. But he said, "Designed for Mrs. Pleasant Harrison"—they accepted that. Then, when time for him to proceed with the work, he did not do this. He ordered...came out to survey and mark the property off, and measured for the proper footing, and.. I'm just saying off of my head, the footing that I have, is fifteen inches wide and eighteen inches deep. And when this was all installed, I waited and he didn't proceed with the work. He had investigated and said that I had no money, and that I was, you know, a little bit off to think that I could do this. In other words, he couldn't carry me as he started, but the money that I paid him included the excavation and the footing. And so when he got to that, then I was like the rabbit in the briar patch—I was at home So then I said, "If he can go out and employ people, and he doesn't do the work himself, so can I go out and get people to help me to do what I want to And the house is constructed in the basement of... First, the man put eight inch blocks, and he didn't leave a ledge for the brick, to put the brick on. So when I came down—this is the man that I employed—when he put the blocks down, he only used the eight-inch block. And I said, "You need twelve-inch blocks. Why didn't you order the..." I ordered the twelve-inch blocks, and he sent them back and said that the eight-inch blocks was sufficient. But then he didn't have the ledge down, and they had a white bottom on the house, and then I would have to stucco this every time. So I said, "No, I'm going to fix this." I went up around the whole outside with four-inch blocks, and that gave me a twelve-inch foundation up to the joists that hold the floor. So then he proceeded with the blocks. When he got the blocks finished, it was crooked and every other thing, imperfect. Imperfection that occurs in the house is due to this mistake that he made in the blocks * So anyway, then I couldn't get no one to do the bricks. Then I proceeded to do it myself, and I got up around four feet, and this young man passed, and he said I reminded him so much of his mother. And he knew that he was a bricklayer, and he couldn't stand to see me do this work, because he knew that climbing on that ladder, and he knew how he felt when he got home__he said he felt like somebody had beat him. And he heard that I was sick, and if he would do it, even if I didn't pay, if I just listened to him and let him, he would do the brick work, and I didn't have to pay him one single penny if I didn't want to. That's how much he thought of me. So I said, "How could I refuse this?" But I paid him. I gave him something to compensate for his gas and what-have-you. He didn't want to take it, but I insisted that he did, because he had family, too, and I would do things for the children and what-have-you.﻿88 MG: What was his name? PH: I'd rather not mention because... And so he took over, and when he got to the fireplace, he didn't know how. He took the book, and when he didn^t show up, I lined the fireplace out. And we worked together, and I showed him, you know, from the diagram in the book how it was supposed to be on a 45° angle, and up; and so I have the two fireplaces, one in the basement, and one upstairs. And it just went on from there. Then when I got to the windows, I purchased the windows and I put them in myself. They were all encased, and I picked them up and set them in place, and he went up with the brick. And when we got inside, when time for the joists, they were twenty-foot, two-by-eight— And I came down one night, and someone had stole thirty-some joists. And I had to replace them, and I was angry they had left the other... The ones that they left...I was so angry and so steamed up, I dragged every one of them around to the front of the house. And I could have did the same thing from the back, but I put them on. I carried the ones on the front, and I stood them up and put them, leaned them up against a wall of the house. And I got up on the ladder and climbed up from the inside, and took this joist, and pulled it over and put it in place. And I measured, I made them sixteen inches on center, and I divided them equally, as near as possible. And that's how I did the joists. Then it was time for the roof, and I sawed and made the eaves. What you call, for the eave—the measurement for the two-by-four for the roof—I measured it and I stationaried it, and nailed everything in place. And then it was time for the three-quarter-inch, four-by-eight plyboards. The man delivered it, and it was in here in the middle of the floor. I took a nail, and hammered an inch away from each end side, and I nailed this nail so that it wouldn't pull out. And I tied a piece of wire, electric wire that I had, onto each nail. And I stood that board up, and got up on the ladder, on the joist, and straddled the joist and I pulled it up. And I pulled so many up until I was tired, and then I quit and did something else—and that's how I got it. When I got it up there, then I broke my joints and sawed it—I know how to operate the skill saw—and I marked it, and sawed it, and I nailed it. And there was a man that came along and he saw what I was doing, he said, "Miss Pleasant, you're a woman, and I hate to see you work like this," he said. But they, the neighbors, told him not to help me because if I fell, that he would be responsible. You know, they were so afraid for me. So he said, "Let me put the first row of plyboard on, and then you can go from there." Do you know that that man put that plyboard up there and left a part that water could seep into the basement? He didn't cover the bricks. And I didn't notice it. When I got up there to put the shingles on, he did the same thing with the shingles. Then he covered it up. But he still left that place that that water could drip down between, the block, and the brick. Now I said the man was either ignorant, or he didn't see it—he wasn't paying attention. But if he was experienced as he thought he was, he wouldn't have done that. When I discovered it, I had to get on the ladder and get up there, and insert a piece of shingle underneath that to extend the shingle over that brick so that the rain couldn't blow in, and the water settle and cause damage in the basement. So that part was completed. Then my next operation﻿89 PH: (cont.) was the electric work, because I had already studied out, and this same man came in... He knew that he had made this mistake, and he was going to try to correct it, but he was trying to cover up for him, for where he was supposed to put the...where the joist was supposed to go through for the support of the house. It was off two inches, and he tried to cover up for it, which he did, and the house on this end is two inches off. But in the middle it comes down, you can see it, down through the center. But I said, "It doesn't leak, it passed inspection, and I'm thrilled." MG: So now this work went on for two years before you were able to move inside? PH: ...move in. And at that time, Mr. Paul was the building inspector, and he came in to see how I was progressing, and when he got in, he was surprised. We maintained our friendship, but he knew that he wasn't going to go along with me, with my...you know, like, the type of plan that I had, piecemealing his salary. But he promised at first, until he got the initial payment... But I was appreciative of what he had done, because I said, well, he didn't fulfill his promise; and the day he was supposed to start, which was first of September, and he didn't start—so the thirtieth of October, that's when I got the permit. But anyway, that's...the following spring, he had not done nothing. So then I started blocks and started to build. And I didn't have any money myself, but I piecemealed it, and that's how I did it. If someone gave me a dollar, a dime for a birthday, or children would give me a few pennies for birthday... I picked up bottles in Philadelphia, and rags...I went to the beer garden—I was a regular patron in the beer garden, but I didn't drink. I carried my bottles, and I got my thirty or forty or fifty cent, and I bought forty or fifty cent worth of nails. And I would get the bus, and come down and do a day's work, and go back to Philadelphia... I carried my drill, saw, and drills, and tools, my hammer. I put 'em in my tool kit, and whatever I was going to work with, I brought it down, worked, got on the bus, and went back. MG: Now, we mentioned yesterday the award that you received from the Marine Corps. Have there been other types of public recognition that you've received? PH: Well, right offhand, I don't remember any, other than the one I told you about the intitiating the cleanup, fix-up program in Philadelphia. And not publicly, but during my childhood years in public school, whenever I participated in programs, I was always greeted with a round of applause. And I remember, in Orangeburg, South Carolina, there was a contest they had, of the Charleston and the Black Bottom, and whatever the new dance of that day. And they also had a sewing contest, and I carried my doll and my material and scissors and what-have-you, and I cut out, right in the presence of the judges, this doll dress that I had seen in the McCall magazine. And it was like what they called the fishtail with the tunic. And I made it, and every stitch—I used the proper needle and thread—and every stitch was like... superb. And that was the work of art, and that was when I was told that I had talent, and these people wrote my mother to tell her not to waste talent, like, not to educate me was a waste of talent. And that they thought she should come and send for me and put me in school so that I could better myself. So she then replied to my aunt, and wrote this letter back, and told them to beat me because I was writing her news on her. Well, she thought﻿90 PH: (cont.) I wrote the letter—I didn't.. So, and from one little experience to the other, and with the house, day by day, I just piecemealed it. And I had a friend that was in the demolishing business, and I saved my money and I took what I could use, and I used it. My joists, I have two...a four-by-four division, walls, I have plastered walls—you know, just this area is paneled. I don't like paneling. And in my family room I have tongue-in-groove knotty pine. And I have oak, solid oak tongue-in-groove floors, and steel doors, sliding doors, electrical work, plumbing work. Now, the gas company installed a gas tank, but I got a layman to help me with the heating system, because I could not lift the heating. But I sort of maneuvered it, and all of the work that I could do, like nailing the strap, strapping, and all of the plumbing work other than the hot water heater I installed myself. When it was time to have my washer installed, I had the line already in the plans; I ran the line, I put a switch on it with a meter, with a fuse box, and in addition to the circuit breaker, so that if I wanted to turn the washer off for maintenance, I wouldn't have to walk all the way across the basement to the circuit breakers. And to the box— and that's from one to the other. And I feel that a lot of people, women, that say, "Well, I can't do that because I'm a woman." I think that's a flimsy excuse. Because it's not that difficult, if you can read. And I was talking to a doctor once, and he was informed of my ability, and he said to me, "How do you do this? What made you do this?" And I said, "If you really want to know the truth, necessity is the mother of invention." I said, "I've been pushed around all my life; I've been so disappointed and mistreated." I said, "Cares alone has made my hair turn gray." I said, "I can't stand this no more," I said, "Jesus knows how much I can bear, and I'm glad that I know the worth of prayer." And I said, "I just ask God to come on and show me the way." And He did. He led me and guided me along the way. And if God leads you, you can't stray. This is the thing. Some people say, well,'! don't know what love is." Love to me is doing things for people, being sincere. Not to do nothing to people that you wouldn't want done to you. And that's so simple. MG: Where are the places that you have traveled? PH: I've traveled from the Atlantic to the Pacific, in this area. Say, from Atlantic City to Florida, in this area. On one night, with a group of singers, I went to Chicago and Detroit. I participated in programs in Detroit and Chicago. But I left the airport at night, and I came back at night. And, as the Spaniards say, "acordarse nada," or I remembered nothing,*—nothing but the church that I was in, because at night you can't see. MG: Let me ask you some questions now about your feelings and your attitudes about growing older. Do you think that it's true that, as you grow older, you grow wiser? PH: I wasn't no dummy when I was young. [laughter] This is, you know, like, a loaded question. I think maybe some people, they grow older, and they don't take grace with it. I hope I'm, you know, answering you correctly. When I was The correct phrase is, me acuerda nada, from the verb acordarse.﻿91 PH: (cont.) younger, I always hoped that if I lived to be old, to get old, that I would do it gracefully—not a grouch, and unpleasant like some of the older people are. And I told my mother, when she would tell me about people doing this because of their handicap or their age, and I said, "Mom, I don't mind getting old. All I want to do is live to be able to take care of myself. And I do want to grow old...if I do, I want to do it gracefully." MG: Have you, as you've grown older, changed your mind about the kinds of things that you want to accomplish, the kinds of things that you want to do? PH: No. MG: What would you say is most important to you now? What are the things you most want to do? PH: What I'm doing—caring for someone that's less fortunate than I am. MG: From this vantage point, looking back over your life, what would you say gives you the most satisfaction? PH: The most satisfaction—my accomplishment, my experiment, my experience, and the outlook, my ideas... And I still feel that I am right. And I feel, as I said, my greatest accomplishment, one on one, was when I was gravely ill, and through prayer and my herbs, that I maintained myself, and restored myself to a reasonable portion of health. MG: Now that brings us to the end of the formal questions that I had prepared for you. Is there anything else that you feel is an important topic that should be included in the record that we've not spoken of? PH: Well, even if I have, and if I'm repeating myself, I cannot put too much emphasis on my people, in which I'm very proud. I'm black, and I feel that black, being black, has not affected me to the extent that it has stopped my progress. I have had difficulties, interruptions, and plain, just downright dirty tricks. But I did not let this discourage me. I made up my mind that I was determined, and I was not going to do nothing to nobody that I didn't want done to me. And I realized that knowledge was power, and you even had to know how to use that because it was a dangerous tool—especially when you thought, entertained the idea that you were superior over anyone. I'm not better, or no one is better than I am. And if there's any superiority, I feel that if I don't do a dirty trick and you do a dirty trick, then I'm superior to you in that manner. And education is one thing that I would love to just sing a song and to tell my people knowledge is power. Education is a tool to give you...that you should learn to use to better yourself. Use what you have. Experiment. I saved myself and many others... People called me...babies with colic, "Oh, what can I do? I carried the child to the doctor, and you tell me what to do. I'll do it." This will eliminate you from, you know, libel. What can I do? My cousin called me this year and asked me, What could she do, that the baby had the colic, and it was crying and in pain? And I told her how to use this 'fusion of catnip, and give the baby a lower bowel, you know, douche, enema, and to give it this catnip tea, and what other to get to give the baby. And she called me back...and she called me from Philadelphia, and the baby's fine, never cried any more. And these kinds of things. Self-help,﻿92 PH. (cont.) self-help Know what you're doing, and do it. Don1t depend on whitey-whitey don't know how handicapped he is himself. Because once you endow yourself with hate, you are in a bad road of stumps. You have a rough road ahead. Chemistry-don't be afraid of chemistry. Don't be afraid of equations. Equations only mean, salt, sodium chloride, tannic acid—the very tea that you steep_once it s steeped, it's a chemical, you've changed it from dry to liquid, right? You ve made a 'fusion. So now this is... "Oh, tannic acid, I m afraid of that!" Well, all of the things...you describe the foods that you consume every day that contain... Carrots is arsenic. And if you acquaint yourself wxth these things-the chemicals we won't go into, we won'i discuss them because that s there for the chemists. I don't want to be accused of passing on information without a license. But that is the key to our downfall... Assuming we should teach our children we should spend more time with them. Go into the kitchen and make experi- ' ments, let them know where the dye comes from, let them know where the medicine comes from—experience is your best teacher. Teach them how to make cookies, teach them how to make egg custard. Without the knowledge of chemistry, the cook has a tremendous handicap. She must know the value of her foods, and how and what food to eat with what, what pot—you shouldn't use aluminum pots for certain things, such as spinach and collard greens and things that have a high acid content—tomatoes, and what-have-you. I have all pots, stainless steel, castware, even from my childhood. And if I feel like I want a good old-fashioned, what they call, soul food meal, I go get my neck bones and oxtail or whatever, and I take the skillet down and put it on, and roast my coffee, and I do...make my bread, and whatever. But I know what I m doing. And I don't use this, and think that I'm restricted just to this steel. As I said there is not nothing that I want to do, and if they have an instruction anywhere, that I have a creative mind... I've excluded nothing. I did my own landscaping; I dug my cesspool with my hands. Oh, that's no job for no woman. Who cares about a woman—what sex I am? If you need help you're sick and you've had an accident somewhere, what difference does it make if I m black or white, if I render aid to you? I don't care. And as far as the differences between the race, I have no, absolutely no animosities in my heart against black nor white, because there's good and bad in all of us And some people say, "Oh, you're a racist." I am not a racist, I'm not against my race—I realize that our background, we have not learned, and we've been taught to hate and fight among ourselves. And to go back to history—if you read it, you 11 know that I'm not lying—they didn't want us to be educated. They ve maimed us, cut the fingers off, the toes off, if they caught you trying to read. Well, what do they expect? I mean, now they don't want to give you welfare—they've destroyed you, they're supposed to give something, or either go finish killing you, or us. That's it. MG: Thank you, Mrs. Harrison, for a very interesting interview. PH: You're welcome.﻿PLEASANT HARRISON..