 Merze Tate: The date is November 13, 1977. This recording is being made in the home of Dr. Lena F. Edwards in Lakewood, New Jersey, located midway between New York City and Atlantic City. Here she resides in a cozy cottage in the midst of quiet and beautiful lake scenery and tree-lined streets and drives. Dr. Edwards, I'm very happy to be here with you today, and to know that you are willing to participate in the Radcliffe Project of Black Women Oral History. Would you like to give the background of your family, beginning anywhere you wish, either with your grandparents or your parents, and explain what influence they may have had on your life? Lena F. Edwards: I feel that I was rather fortunate, in that I was born at the turn of the century, of parents who had had many opportunities that the average black person had not had. My mother's father was Gabriel Coakley, who went to Mr. Lincoln after the Civil War and asked to have permission to have a lawn party at the White House to raise funds for a Catholic church for the freedmen. My father's father I remember; he died in 1905, at the age of 107. And he had been a cabinetmaker. My father was a dentist and taught at Howard University after I was seven years old; he had a terrific philosophy of life which has had a great influence on my entire life. The reason I'm a doctor is that I told my dad I wanted to be a dentist like him. He told me I was too restless, so I said, "Well, a doctor runs around a lot, so I'll be a doctor then." And I was twelve years old. And being a rather stubborn brat, I never allowed anything to stand between me and what I wanted to achieve, even back there. We lived in Washington, D.C., with all the various castes of black society that were there, and I grew up in what they call the elite. Merze Tate: What's that you call the elite? Lena F. Edwards: Elite. Something which I always resented. Because I always .'liked just plain people that weren't putting on any unusual airs.﻿2 MT: Dr. Edwards, how many brothers and sisters did you have, and what was your position—first, second, third, fourth—among the siblings? LFE: There were four children in the family. The oldest was my sister May, four years older than I was, and then a brother, two years older, and then I was number three. But fifteen years after I was born, my mother had another son. We grew up in a very good family relationship. Our parents were strict, but lovable. I had a great regard for my mother because she had so much dignity. But I had a fascination for my father because of his philosophy of life. He was always giving of himself to people, even though he had to help educate himself. I can remember he used to work in the post office. He went back to school, he worked nights, went to school in the days. In 1907, when I was seven years old, he got his dental degree. MT: Which degree was that? LFE: Dentistry. MT: Dentistry, yes. LFE: And a few years later, he went on the faculty of Howard University. So by the time I made the decision when I was twelve to be a doctor, it was 1911, because I wasn't quite twelve years old, and it was rather unusual for a woman, of all a black woman, to talk about being a doctor. I think some people thought that I was kind of a fresh brat. And I was, because I've always been very determined. But I made up my mind I was going to be that, and that's what I wanted to be. MT: And that's what you have become, and a famous one, too. LFE: And that's what I have become. I got my education at Lovejoy School, and there even I sort of turned the tide. My parents had sent the two older children to a school in Le Droit Park, where the better people attended school. And like my father, I said, "I want to go to the school in this neighborhood. It's good enough, because if I'm going to learn, the school isn't making any difference, I've got to do it." So I stayed in the school near home instead of going to the school where the best kids of the city were. MT: And which school was this that you attended? LFE: Lovejoy School, in northeast Washington. And I can't remember the name of the school in Le Droit Park, where they went. It was one of these class-type things, which I've always resented. And after I finished Lovejoy School...there's one thing about Lovejoy School I want to say. At the graduation exercises, Mr. Bruce, who was assistant superintendent of schools, spoke to us. It was in 1914, and I've always remembered something he said. "You children must be determined to be what you want to be, and don't be discouraged, because black people are like a basket of crabs. If one climbs to the top, the others get on their leg and try to pull it down." And that has carried me through all these years. So anyway, from there﻿3 LFE: (cont.) I went to what was at that time M Street High School; after two years, it became Dunbar High School. And with my same dogged determination, I managed to get high enough honors to be valedictorian of the class. And that school, I have a rather interesting memory, especially related to Howard University. Because Sterling Brown was my classmate, and I was one of the first women to ever be on the varsity debating team, and was on that team with Sterling Brown, and I forget the name of the other young man who was on the team with me. And I guess that's where my public speaking started. The other thing I remember very well about high school was Carter Woodson. He was one of my teachers. And I grew very fond of him, because he was so brilliant and yet so plain. He wasn't sophisticated like some of the Ivy League graduates. So when I graduated from high school, because of the fact it had been customary, everyone expected me to go to one of the Ivy League colleges, Wellesley or Radcliffe or Simmons, and I told them no. I wanted to do what my father did. "I'm going to stay and be educated at Howard University. I expect to devote my life to the development of my own people, and I'd rather live with them, and study with them at Howard." So I went on to Howard, as a premed student. I was determined to skip a year in school, so I padded my schedule to the maximum. MT: Was this at Howard? LFE: At Howard. And I did three years of college work in two. At the time that I was finishing that, they had what they call the combination course in medicine. So for your fourth year you could go into medical school, but I went in after my second year because I had accomplished that. And when time came for me to get my bachelor's degree in 1921—I had finished high school in '18—they told me I hadn't been in school for four years so I couldn't get my degree. I said, "I've got the credits. And good credits." In fact, I had more than...1 had almost finished four years in the two because I went to summer school. Dr. Carter Woodson, he was dean at the time, and he verified the fact that I had more than done my work. He had been transferred to Virginia State, was dean there. And so I wrote to him, told him they were holding me up for my degree, and he said everything was all right and I had the records. And he sent a special delivery letter to the school, and told them that I did my work under his administration, and it was approved. So I got my degree. Then I went on and finished medical school. And not only did I finish medical school, but at that time I wanted to go into research medicine. MT: What year did you finish medical school? LFE: 1924. MT: 1924. LFE: Six years after I finished high school. MT: Six years.﻿4 LFE: I had finished a college degree and medicine, and while I was in medical school I had a part-time job at the school, saved my money, and went to summer school at University of Illinois because I wanted to go into research work and was working on my master's degree in the summers. But the summer of my third year I was a little bit handicapped because I had had the flu, and I was afraid to go back to summer school. And I gave up the idea of getting my master's degree. I'm glad I did, because when I finished medicine I realized that I wasn't the person, in fact my father told me that I wasn't a person for research, that I would be better as a clinician because I like people. And there again, he thought I was too restless to sit behind a microscope the rest of my life , that I'd be better out with people. And that had great influence on the type of life I followed, because I have been always basically a clinician. I haven't done much writing. I read, and I study—I still study—I'm very proud that at the age of seventy-seven I got my Continuing Education Certificate from the American Medical Association. And I didn't really have to get it. MT: At seventy-seven. LFE: That's right. MT: Continuing Education — LFE: Medical education, because I did all the hours that I was supposed to do. So I've always been a student, but I've always liked people. I was interested very much in psychology, but I never wanted to be a psychiatrist, because in those days they spoke of a psychiatrist as a head-shrinker. Plus I didn't want that label. Also, I felt a good family doctor could take care of most of the problems of their patients, if they got close enough to them. And the patient would not have to have the stigma of having to go to a psychiatrist, because in those days, and to a little extent in these days, it's still a sort of a stigma, if you've had psychiatric treatment. When I finished medical school—if I remember correctly, I was number two in my class—I received a couple of prizes, and I did my internship at Freedmen's Hospital. Finished that in 1925, married right after I finished school, and we came to Jersey City in July of 1925 to practice medicine. By that time, I was pregnant with my first child, and she was born two months after I started my practice. That's Marie, who is now a physician. She was the first black to be admitted to Cornell Medical School. And she graduated there with a high record in her class in 1951. From here on in, except for my general medicine, I think one of the most important things in my life were my children. I had an idea that so many children come from poor families, that a person who has had opportunities in education and a chance to make a decent living should have a whole lot of children, so they could enjoy the best things in life. And so fourteen months after Marie was born, Edward came along. He is now a pediatrician in Jersey City, graduated in medicine from Howard University and did a residency in pediatrics after. In 1930, number three came along, Genevieve. She is a graduate of College of New Rochelle. She was one of the first﻿5 LFE: (cont.) blacks to be accepted in the dormitory, because I insisted that if she was going to that school, she had to be like everybody else. With the grace of God she was accepted and did a beautiful job. And went from there to Boston College, and has her master's degree plus in psychiatric sociology. Number four was Thomas, who studied three years at architecture, at Catholic University. And he decided he wanted to become a priest. And now he's the chaplain of Newman Center at Howard University. And we're very proud of that, because we like our association with Howard. My father graduated from Howard University when they called it just a teacher's certificate in 1887, and we are proud that somebody always has been in some way connected with the school. So then the next was John. John was born in 1938, and he now is an aerospace engineer with NASA in Washington. He graduated from Catholic University in engineering, and then went on and did more work. And the last one was Paul, born eighteen months after John, in 1939. He got his bachelor's degree in business, from the American University in Washington. And now he's teaching at Memorial High School in West New York. MT: In what place in New York? LFE: West New York, in New Jersey. MT: Yes, oh yes. LFE: The interesting thing about...in this time, these latter part of my years, I was appointed to the staff of the medical center, the maternity department, the Margaret Hague Maternity Hospital, in 1931. MT: And where is that located? LFE: That's in Jersey City, where I practiced. But by the time 1936 came around, the assistant attendings were being dropped, the clinical attendings did not have their boards. So I applied for a residency so that I could be classified, and was refused. And was refused every year. That was in 1945. I was told that I had two handicaps. First, I was a woman and that was worse than being a Negro woman, but I finally got in in 1945. So I did my residency at the Margaret Hague Hospital in obstetrics and gynecology. And went ahead and took my boards, and was also put on the staff of the surgical department as a gynecologist at the hospital. Both of these were kind of unusual, because there were not many black women, and possibly only two or three at that time that had had this opportunity. From there on I went into the International College of Surgeons, and that was interesting, too, because the doctor that was in charge of the recommendations for that area was a hard-boiled bachelor who didn't believe in women doctors. And I went to him and told him I was applying and I didn't expect him to refuse me, unless he had some real good excuse of lack of good quality in my work. "So I'm not going to wait until you blackball me, I'm telling you now—don't blackball me." And I got in. I've had this crazy idea of speaking out all my life. Sometimes I may speak out too much. That's the only way you get what you need. You don't get it by wishing for it. You have to go after what you want and﻿6 LFE: (cont.) you have to go at it with determination and proficiency. When you get there, you have to be the best. And this has been the secret of my success, if I have any. Okay. Now from here on in what would you really like to have me talk about? HT: Now, you spent some time on the faculty of Howard University. That's where I had the great pleasure of meeting you and enjoying your beautiful home. LFE: Well, that's another story. MT: Well, have your story before that. LFE: I have a way of saying that since I reached the age of fifty—fifty-five, close to fifty-five—I have changed life every five years. MT: Maybe that's good! LFE: Well, I was at the Margaret Hague Hospital. It was at that time one of the outstanding schools for graduate work in the world, and they came there from all over the world. And when lots of the doctors were laughing at their foreign language and whatnot, I had studied German, French, and Spanish, and I used to sit down and talk with them. Because I felt that being an obstetrician, I should be there anyway when a woman was having a baby, so while I was sitting around I met these people from all over the world. I also met students from medical schools from everywhere, and a few that had reached there from Howard University. And one of them who was the son of a friend of mine in high school in Washington said to me, "You know, you're teaching us something about the humanity of medicine, and we're not getting it in school." I said, "I know you're not. When I went through, we got it. But now everything is rush, rush, rush. And machines, and tests, and people forget what I was first told when I was in medical school. 'When a patient walks into your office, watch him from the time he walks in your office to the time he walks out. Listen to everything he says; let him sit comfortably in the office and tell you what he wants to tell you. Then do a complete physical examination on him, and try to make your diagnosis and then follow it up with other tests that have to be done.'" And I had reached a point where I was becoming disgusted with medicine, because people were being treated like books and chairs and desks. It wasn't Joe Brown who had a problem because he was sick, or Mrs. Wilson or Jones or somebody who was there wondering what was going to happen to her children if she couldn't do the things she had to do. The humanity of medicine has always meant everything to me, and so—Evans, was his name—said to me, "Instead of going to mission," because I had mission in the back of my head as my second change of life, "why don't you go to Howard University and teach in medical school? And tell the students the things that you believe in. Because this is very necessary." So like a fool, I gave up a beautiful practice, still with my ideas of humanity. But the year before I left to go to Howard University, I had 360 maternity cases, and 100 operations. And I left that behind because my children had just about completed their education, and they were on﻿7 LFE: (cont.) their own because I had taught my children, "You're going to have a good home, you're going to have a good example. But when you get through school, you've got to be on your own. I'll be there when you need me, but I want you to go your way." So I thought that I was free to do my thing. And I went to Howard University for $4,500. MT: About what year was that? LFE: 1954, September. MT: As a professor in the College of Medicine? LFE: No, this is very interesting. I was not accepted as a professor because I hadn't written enough papers. MT: Oh yes, you must publish. LFE: I was an instructor. MT: I see, you know, they have a saying at Howard, "Publish or perish." LFE: Yes. And I remember that when I was at Freedmen's, at Margaret Hague, also, I had a very famous professor of surgery—I was his assistant attending— and as we were discussing some papers that had been written, he said, "Paper doesn't refuse ink. If you're going to write in medicine, write your experience and the contribution you have made to medicine." Well, I was there at Freedmen's at least a year before Dr. Kelly Brown, I think, whose office was next to ours, put me wise to why I was just an instructor when I had been offered...Dr. Howard Taylor, chairman of the department at Columbia University, and Parks of Washington told me I should be head of the department because I had the best qualifications. And I told them no, I can't be head of the department because, as some people know, with my last two children I was in heart failure. And they should never have been born. When the last one was born, I came near dying. So I promised God that if he let me live, I wanted to see my children grow up. Because that was number six. And I'd come see Him every day. So I go to mass every day. And if I accepted the head of the department, I would not...I would be automatically approving sterilizations and therapeutic abortions, which was against my religion. So I finally found out that I had to publish papers. So I didn't sit down and read a book and rewrite it, in my name. I came back to Jersey City on a weekend and pulled over 500 records, and from that wrote my own research papers that were accepted, and after that they made me an assistant professor. I did not accept a position at Howard Medical College as head of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology because as head of the department I would be responsible for all procedures. I could not approve sterilization and therapeutic abortions. I enjoyed my work at Howard immensely. But I never got out of my head the fact that I had to go to a mission. And I enjoyed my work with my﻿8 LFE: (cont.) students, because I had a feeling that by the time a person got into medical school, there was no point in me reading a book and writing up a paper and giving a lecture. They should have the assignment made to them. I talked part of the time and we'd discuss it after. I also introduced them to the department audiovisual instruction, and wrote to every place I could get some free films and prints to put on the screen for the students. I used to get up sometimes and leave home at seven-thirty in the morning to help a student whom I thought needed a little extra help, because I didn't want to see anybody fail in my work. Because I feel that a good teacher can teach anyone enough to understand. And I love that work. So I stayed there until 1960. But by then I was getting old; I was in my sixtieth year. If I didn't get to my mission, I didn't think I had many more years left. So I resigned, and went to Saint Joseph's Mission in Hereford, Texas, to live in a migrant labor camp, and give my money and my life to the poorest of the poor in this country, who are the ones that put the bread and the food on our table, and yet are treated worse than their cattle. I enjoyed nearly five years there of work, and there again with my big mouth, I applied for a staff position at their hospital. And if I remember correctly, I was the only woman on the staff at that hospital. And I was the only certified obstetrician/gynecologist within fifty miles. And the hospital was going to be certified that year. I knew they needed me more than I needed them, and I took advantage of that opportunity. Because when I went there I wanted to build a whole maternity clinic right in the area, but I knew we had to get it together, and I had to do something about delivering patients and taking care of patients before. And I got full courtesy privileges at that hospital. Me. Deep in the heart of Texas, a black woman, a doctor. Which I mention because so often now young people feel, they can't do this and they can't do that, that somebody has done something to keep them from doing it. If you can't do what you want to do, you fail to do something for yourself, and don't blame it on what somebody didn't do, or didn't give you an opportunity to do. You have to make your opportunities in this life. They're not made for you. And when you get it, you have to excel. But by the time I had been there two years, we had a ten-bed maternity clinic built. I remodeled the old clinic that they had there that was in terrible condition. And so, altogether we had a twenty-five-bed hospital right in the labor camp. I lived there with the people, and when they got up five o'clock in the morning to make their tortillas and go to the field, I made house visits. Sometimes I went out in the field to get food for the hospital, because they allowed us to strip the fields after they had gotten out what they wanted. And that way we saved money for the hospital. We took five people from the migrant labor group, and with the help of some nurses that came from Saint Mary's School in Minneapolis, we taught them how to be nurses' aides. One became a licensed vocational nurse, and then went on, with my help on tuition, to become an RN. Because I believe that if you go into a mission, you don't go there to make people like you; you go there to have some appreciation of their culture. I really learned my Spanish, and talked with them in their﻿9 LFE: (cont.) language, had our menus in our hospital that were like the things they liked. Instead of insisting they eat toast, they had tortillas. People don't know what tortillas mean; tortillas mean that people that make them didn't have ovens and toasters; and often they were baked on a rock, with the heat of the sun; and if you study the culture of the people, you don't want to make them over. You have a lot to learn. And maybe you even want to adopt some of the customs that they had. And this had a lot to do with my success with the people, who...when I first went there, and had been there for nearly a year, a young lady came in to me, and she says, "You know my people can't understand you." I said, "Don't they like me?" "Well, yes, but they wonder what's in it for you. That you're doing so much for us." And of course I understood that, because of the fact that I know that people who have been trampled down are afraid to lift up their head for fear somebody'll step on it. And they figure that anyone who does something for them as much as I was doing had to have some ulterior motive. It wasn't long before they understood that it was just because I love people. So I enjoyed it very much. There again, I had to be also active with what they call there the Anglos, as well as the Hispanic. And so, much to the shock of the missionary people, I also participated in the program that they had at the Casa de Amigas, from the Ministerial Alliances (a club of Protestant ministers), and went there and visted with them. In those days, before Pope John, they thought that I was doing wrong by associating with Protestants. But it never made any difference to me. Because God made us all, and each to his own with his own religion. I've never argued religion with people. So in associating with them, they finally had me going all over the Panhandle, talking about the migrant situation. And that's how we got some of the funds for our hospital. I wrote all the way to Washington, to the Department of Labor and told them, "You have an agricultural labor bureau here, and you are not doing anything about the employment of the migrants. They don't even write up an application and put their name and address on the form. How come?" "Well, they don't understand my language." "Huh! You have some that are in high school that speak the language. Put them in your office and let them be interpreters. My tax dollars are not for the doctors' sons, and the affluent people's sons to get jobs here. I'm interested in seeing the migrants have opportunities." I communicated with Washington. President Kennedy was the president at the time. And meantime, Ebony had heard of what I was doing. And Mrs. Gerri Major, who was associate editor, came and spent four days in Texas with me, and took pictures of what I was doing. And so in February of 1962, I think it was, a three- or four-page article with many pictures went out in Ebony. And in that same issue, Nat King Cole's daughter had a coming out party, and President Kennedy was there, and he had read the whole thing. And he had to find out who this little woman was in Hereford, Texas, who was doing missionary work. So he appointed me to a Labor Department Committee for Employment Security. I served in Washington for about seven years on that, and the Manpower Committee. Still with my big mouth saying, "You've got to do it fair. There's no reason under the sun some should have much and others should have little."﻿10 LFE: (cont.) And I had some beautiful contacts on that committee. I was the only woman on it, but was very highly respected. And to this day, once in a while, I get some word from somebody. I have some of their books; when they published, they sent me an autographed one. And I'm still interested in labor. Because if we don't do something about the inequity of labor in this country, we're going to have one of the worst guerrilla warfares that you have ever seen or heard of, and I believe it. I live with poverty; I know the stress under which they live, and the tensions, and the inconsiderate attitude of men toward them, and the executive departments of this country are keeping them poor with programs they don't want to work. So they can say, "They aren't worth it." MT: Perhaps we could place on record a summary, in the sense of your activities in Texas. You did not confine your work by any means to obstetrics. There was some general medical practice? LFE: It had to be that way, because they had so many medical problems, and after all, in spite of the fact that I was a specialist, I was a family doctor at first. And when I went there, I knew I was going to do family practice, because I wanted to help everybody I could. MT: Yes. About how many did you treat? LFE: I treated more than 500 families. MT: Families. Which would mean, more than 500 patients. LFE: That's right. And in our own hospital, which I was in for just about three years after it was built, we did about 320 deliveries. But after I had been there for about a couple of years, the Anglos became so interested in what I was doing for the migrants, they asked me if I would treat them. And because I needed more money than I had—I'd broken my own savings accounts and everything, and had a beautiful response of donations from the hospitals and friends in the East—I decided that if they could find me a place to have an office, I would work for them about four office hours a week, but I still was devoting most of my time to the clinic. And there I had quite a few of the prominent people's deliveries, because they realized that I had qualification, certification. Many of them have become very good friends. Every Christmas, I get technically loads of letters, from both the migrants and the Anglos, after all these years. I left there in '65. MT: That's very rewarding. LFE: But I still hear from them. MT: That's rewarding. LFE: One woman wrote to me, she'd had three children by forceps delivery, and I insisted that we would take this and do it the natural way. And she wrote to me after that child was six years old, and said to me, that's the first one of her children that had not had some brain damage. And﻿11 LFE: (cont.) she was so grateful for it. And speaking of brain damage, it was while I was in Texas that the March of Dimes went from polio to brain damage in children, infants' problems. Knowing that I had a reputation for believing in natural childbirth, I was one of the fifteen people in the country that was called to New York for this brainstorming session on how we could go about getting it started. And I think that was a great honor, and I enjoyed that time there very much. From time to time things like that are always happening, and you wonder how they happen to run across me. Though I feel that when you do your thing in all earnestness, and with all the love that I put into my work, somehow or other it gets around. MT: Yes. LFE: And that's the important thing. So, those are some of the main things that ^happened while I was in Texas. They asked me if I wanted the hospital named for me. I said, "For me, my God, no." These people have a patron saint, the blessed Mother, Our Lady of Guadeloupe. And we named the hospital Our Lady of Guadeloupe Hospital. And I went all the way to Mexico to get a statue, one of the most beautiful I could get of her, because a family from Jersey City, a Mrs. McGuire, wanted to give a donation to the hospital as a memorial to her daughter, who died in surgery. And the night before she died, she said, "When I get out of here, I want to send something to Dr. Edwards for the hospital." And also in Mexico, we got a mural out of tile of Our Lady, to put on the front of the hospital. Unfortunately, after five years there, my mother was in a nursing home in Washington. MT: In Washington. LFE: And that broke my heart. Also, my son had been ordained and was in South America. And while there he developed hepatitis. And between his hepatitis and my mother looking like somebody who nobody cared for, in a nursing home, I had a coronary. Which I weathered through very well, because I've always been a nut on pathology, and I knew that if I didn't die from a hemorrhage into the heart muscle, that all I had to do was rest, and give it a chance to heal. But I had proof of the fact that I had, because a few weeks later I came back to Jersey City and my daughter took me to a doctor, and the doctor said to her, "How in the name of God did your mother have a blowout like that and survive?" And my daughter said to her something which she knew. "My mother prayed. And that's why she..." But I thought that that was a little warning to me to slow down. By this time I was sixty-five. And I did everything in that hospital. From the laundry to the cooking to the professional work at times, because we had to train the people. I was determined when I went there, I was going to make some of the migrants have an opportunity to be something beside a migrant. I took one little fellow who had gotten a job delivering packages in a grocery store, and when he finished—I persuaded him to finish high school—I paid his tuition for four years in college. As I said, I think, we got five young women from the fields, and taught them to be nurses' aides. When we built that hospital, I'd organized a group of the migrants for our board of directors. And they made me treasurer,﻿12 LFE: (cont.) because they said, "People think we steal. And we don't want to handle money." But with few exceptions, like the very technical labor, they built it. Because they knew I believed in it. Some of the things I had to help them do, because they'd never done before, like laying the tile on the floor. But my kids had always done odds and ends around the house, so I was able to show them about the waterproofing of the walls, and various odds and ends which I like to get into, housework anywhere. But we went on and by June of 1965, I made up my mind I had to come home, and get my mother out of that nursing home. Because it worried me to see a woman who had sacrificed her life for her children in a nursing home, instead of in my home. So I went back to Washington, got her out of the nursing home, then finally moved her to Jersey City where I was fortunate enough to be with her at least in the last year and a half of her life as her private nurse and doctor and housekeeper. That's why I left the mission. But when I left, there was no doctor that they could get to come there. MT: And do what you had done. LFE: And do what I had done. They told me that they'd find somebody else. They never did. MT: Well, what has happened to the mission? LFE: A nurse that had been there for quite some while came back. And she carried on with telephone help chiefly, or transportation, the doctors in town... There are moments, that the time and energy and money that I and all the people who helped me put into that hospital was wasted. I felt that if just one woman had first-class service, after giving her life and service as a migrant, it was worth it. And some people said to me, "And now it's closed, after all that money and all that time." I said, "Those are not the things that are important. The things that were important were the people that I made feel like they were somebody, and helped, and loved." MT: That's very... LFE: So after I came back and took care of my mother, while I was in Washington, they found that I was back there for a while, and I put in a few hours with Head Start. From which agency or in which field or region did you work with Head Start? LFE: I worked with the main Head Start chief in Washington, D.C., District of Columbia. ^T: Yours was more administrative, or directory, than actual? LFE: I told them, "Look, I will help you. But I'm not a pediatrician. I will coordinate your program, and we will get the examinations done. I will give﻿13 LFE: (cont.) you a worksheet of what exists, and then I will not continue, because this is a pediatrician's job." And medicine is so specialized now, that you have to stay more or less in the field that you are in. But what I did was very helpful. And somebody got the credit for it, but that didn't matter, that's the way it is in the executive departments all the time. Some flunky does the work and some big shot gets the credit; but I don't work for credit—I work to do what has to be done. And when I came back to Jersey City, they had a good Head Start program going there, that I helped with, and did the thing which I love to do as one of my sidelines: parental guidance. Because the whole program of Head Start is for making a better relationship and education of parents, how to help their children grow up to be useful citizens. And to this day I'm still working with parents in Head Start. I got off the advisory board just a month ago, because I told them they were sitting there, wasting time talking, that I wanted to see, and see parents. I was told that you can't make parents participate in the program, and give their services, or come to nutrition classes, or classes in child training. The federal government does not let us make people do anything. I said, "Well, I will not be working for the federal government. And darn it, if I have to do Outreach, and go to their houses to see them, I'll work with the parents in Lakewood." Because I'm tired of people feeling that parents are not good, when there's been no definite effort to give them credit for being something, and training them in things which they have failed to have. So now I'm still working, but right here in Lakewood, with Outreach. I finished out my second retirement in '65, and went back, after Mother died, to practice in Jersey City. In the meantime my daughter, who had taken over my practice when I went to Howard University, had decided that she wanted to do some graduate work now. When she finished Cornell, I begged her to be a family doctor. I said, "I'm so sick...the Lord made the body in one piece, and medicine has divided into so many pieces that the person who treats one thing doesn't know what's going on someplace else, and in order to be a good doctor, you have to know the whole body from gray hairs to ingrown toenails. And to me, that is the real doctor." And she took my advice, stayed there for fifteen years as a family doctor, and became president of the Hudson County Academy of Family Practice. But with five children, and a busy practice, she's getting a little tired, too, and decided to go into a specialty. So she accepted a fellowship, University of Vermont, in psychiatry. And so when she left in 1968, I went full time into the office, and delivering patients at the hospital. But by 1970, I started getting a little dizzy running from one building to another. And this old leg, because of the compression of the sciatic nerve, used to drop me in the street once in a while. With the advice of my family I decided to slow down. So that was my third retirement. And I moved to my country home, which had been up in the beautiful Watchung Hills of New Jersey, where my children went the day after school closed.﻿14 LFE: (cont.) This is interesting. I leased my house that I had there when I went to Texas. When I bought the house, it was farm country, and I had about a two-acre farm. In the meantime, Western Electric in Murray Hill came out there and built a plant, and the engineers and the suburbanites moved in. And I was the only fly in the pail of milk. When I got the house vacated and was getting ready to move in, it burned down. I knew the answer. But I rebuilt, even though I knew that I wouldn't stay there forever. So I rebuilt the house and had that to live in. But they heard that I was around, only twelve minutes from Lyons Hospital. So they wouldn't let me rest. They asked me if I'd come in and work at Lyons. That's the veterans' administration hospital for the neurologically handicapped. So I went over and I saw the head, and told him, "Doctor, I'm not a psychiatrist." He said, "I know your reputation. There's nothing that has to be done in this hospital that you couldn't do." I said, "Okay, I'm restless, I can't sit still. So I'll work part time." So I worked part time there until 1975. Ml: That's just two years ago. LFE: I worked from 1970, that's right. Five years ago...yeah, I worked five years. Well anyway, then my children told me I had to slow down, after my seventy-second birthday, and move near one of them. I bought this little cottage here, and moved into it, and used to commute back and forth to there, and also to a senior citizens' program, a diagnostic program that I worked with at the Model Cities health clinic in Plainfield, which was also near my country home. And since I've been in Lakewood, I rested for a few days, few weeks, couldn't sit. So I found the same situation here, miserable lack of interest in early diagnosis, preventative medicine, poor people, senior citizens...because this is a great senior citizens' community. And so once again I went to the health department and told them that the health conditions of Ocean County were lousy. That I didn't want a job for pay, but I wanted to work full time in any clinic or any organization that would help me get poor people better health. Because that's what I was dedicated to. Well, I didn't get a very favorable answer, so I had to do it myself. I went to the housing department where they have two high-rise housing things for senior citizens, and I go every week to each one of them, and sit and talk with senior citizens. MT: You're doing that now. LFE: That's right, and about two or three other things. The senior citizens, and I will not prescribe for them. Because I'm an oddball here, I'm a freebie. But I will do what I can to help them. And now I have five groups, one from a church, one from a black community in Toms River, and one from a very middle class and low class, one in Jersey, in Lakewood, called Crossroads. So I see in a month an average of more than 150 people that I just sit and talk with. As I told the man at the housing authority, I want to give them my ear. Because nobody has time to listen any more. MT: And they are delighted, I know, to see you. LFE: It has been a most interesting experience. I could write a book on the lack of interest in the medical care of senior citizens in this affluent country.﻿15 MT: I think you have a visitor. LFE: Yes, that's my daughter. MT: Just before we stopped for dinner, your review of your many activities I found extremely interesting. And I wanted to ask you if there had been influences in your life from people other than your father. LFE: Yes, there have been. Ordinarily I do what I like to do and think I should do, and I'm not one for writing. I don't even like to be written up. But when I went to Texas to the mission, it was rather unusual. So I got a telephone from Chicago one day from Gerri Major, who's associate editor of Ebony, asking if they could write a big story of my work. And I told them I'd just started it, and maybe I'd never finish it. And therefore I'd rather wait for her to see me two years later. And she says, "No, we want to write it up now." And we had quite a little discussion back and forth that I didn't want to do it, and she said I should. Then she said to me, "You must have at some time read something about people that also had some influence on you." And it did come to my mind that there were two people in my life who did some of their very outstanding work when they were around my age. And one was Eleanor Roosevelt, who did most of her public life after she was fifty, and the other was, when I went to one of the International College of Surgeons' meetings, I saw an exhibit on Albert Schweitzer, and that's how I really had originally got into the idea of doing missionary work. Because I thought that by the time you're sixty, nobody wants you, but I found that I could. Now. So she wrote this article in Ebony—I think it came out in February of 1962—and it went all over. But in that same journal there was a story of Nat King Cole's daughter's coming out party. And President Kennedy had gone to that party. He read my story also, and became very much interested in what I was doing. So I had already written to Washington about the unfair practices with the labor bureau that was in Hereford, not even trying to do anything for the migrants. And I think it was through him that I got this letter from the secretary of labor at that time, Arthur Goldberg, asking me if I would be on the Advisory Council for Employment Security. And from there on I was active in Washington with various labor problems, for about seven years. MT: Were you always in one department or one agency, or were you just in two or three agencies dealing with some of the labor problems? LFE: Well, if you remember, in the early sixties, this was the time of the new programs for the poor people. And they figured that in order to get rid of some of our poverty, and get employment for people, good employment, they would have to have training in education. So it was about this time that HEW, under John Gardner, and the Department of Labor, at this time under Willard Wirtz, joined hands—they called it a marriage—and we had the 0E0 program with Shriver. So soon after that, I was also appointed to the Manpower Committee, which was headed up by Eli Ginzberg, head of the Department of Human Resources of Columbia University, and that was a﻿16 LFE: (cont.) very active committee. I was very outspoken in some of my crazy ideas about how you're going to help people. I* ve never felt that giving a person a dole does them much good. The Chinese saying is, "If you give a man a fish, he eats once. If you give him a fishing rod, he eats for a long time." And I thought that our federal efforts should be made toward preparing a person to work, rather than saying, "Here's something for you that you can survive on." But it was not improving the condition of the people in whom I'm particularly interested, the black man of this country. And I've been continually yelping about that. And little by little, some things happen; most of the time they don't. But I still feel that the solution to the problem is changing the whole dole system, and putting just like Social Security on those who definitely are unable to work. Not some of these SSI people whom I see sitting around, doing nothing and drinking. But definitely if there's some real, serious handicap that cannot be cured, because many of the people that I see on SSI are people who could be cured if they would follow the doctor's orders and take care of themselves. And then the rest of the people who were able to work, and I believe that most of them were willing and able to work, should be hired on training programs. Our fortunate college graduates that are in urban planning and whatnot that have all these big jobs in the government could still keep their jobs. But instead of saying, "We have 100 cases under us, and we don't have much chance to get around to see them," take the people in that community and give each of them ten people for them to direct, and that way you can cover 100 people thoroughly. Plus I'm definitely positive that in Outreach work, you get better results if you have the Outreach workers come from the community which they're supposed to serve. Now I'd get that from a Senior Companion Program, which is another of my pets, I'm on the board of the Senior Companion Program. And that's how senior companions are picked, as far as it's humanly possible, for two reasons: first of all, transportation—they can walk to the people in their neighborhood; and secondly, they're known in the neighborhood. You take a person from one side of the tracks, and send them to the other side of the tracks, especially in the lower community—they don't do much work, they're afraid to. They'll sit in their offices and telephone. But they don't actually go and see what goes on. And we're not going to get rid of our poverty programs until we have Outreach workers from those communities that have had special training, parasocial workers, paramedical people, parateachers, any condition under which they can be trained to work. And get the same money that they get from welfare, by putting in an equivalent number of hours at the rate of three dollars an hour. But as things stand now, we're not going to go anywhere, because the federal government does not let you say to somebody, "You must do something. Here's a job. You must take it." They can say no. Or frequently,, the worker himself says, "I don't think you need to take it." So I don't think I'll ever get over starting out with my original goal, to help poor people, but help them in some way that they have better health from the standpoint of what I'm trying to do. And better citizenship from the﻿17 LFE: (cont.) standpoint of employment, and housing, and all these degrading things that they have to accept whether they like it or not. MT: That's a very fine consideration, and summary of influences and attitudes. I know you've had many, many awards. The one I remember was the award that called you back to Howard on Charter Day. Have you in mind enumerating the various awards and honors that may have come to you from time to time? LFE: I'll show you less than half of them on the wall of my room. In the last four months, I have received three plaques. MT: You're going backward, not forward, now. Starting with the latest ones. Is that it? LFE: That's right. MT: Last three months. LFE: Four months, I have received three plaques. MT: Three plaques. LFE: Much to my surprise, after trying on four different occasions to find a place that I could live near the lake in Lakewood, I finally found one. After being quite a curiosity in most of the places that I go, the board meetings and whatnot, and being very outspoken about things that are needed in the community, the last part of May, the Chamber of Commerce of Lakewood voted me the Woman of the Year and gave me a gorgeous plaque, and a great banquet. MT: Woman of the Year, in Lakewood... LFE: In Lakewood. MT: ...where they probably didn't want you. LFE: Definitely they didn't want me. That is, to live in this area. And I wasn't running from my people when I moved in this area. I wanted a little farm, a little piece of land that I could work, and because of my handicap I have with my legs, I wanted to walk or ride a bike around the lake, and that's the reason I wanted this area. And after I got my bike, I didn't ride it around the lake because I'm afraid of dogs. And people take their dogs out for a walk with the leash in the hand and the dog running wild. And so therefore, I have to ride a little bike in my bedroom, for my legs, instead of riding around the lake. ^T: You named one, the Woman of the Year. You said there were... LFE: Oh, the other one was the Monmouth County Business and Professional Women's Club. Gave me a certificate... stop it a minute. I've forgotten already. You see, these things don't mean anything to me, and they don't register.﻿18 LFE: (cont.) I received an award, a beautiful plaque, the Greater Lakewood, New Jersey Chamber of Commerce Service Award, presented to Dr. Lena Edwards, "for outstanding meritorious contributions in terms of volunteer service to the Lakewood community." MT: That's fine. Now here's another beautiful one. LFE: This is the 1977 Sojourner Truth Award, "to Dr. Lena Edwards for unselfish services to the Roman Catholic Church and our nation's culture, presented by the Baltimore and Washington districts of the National Black Lay Catholic Caucus and Our Lady of Charity Faith Community of Brooklyn, New York." That was on Sunday, September 9, 1977. Then on October 16, again in New York City, "Dr. Lena Edwards, physician, surgeon, and humanitarian, who served her fellow man with unselfish devotion for more than fifty years, presented by the Susan Smith McKinney Steward Medical Society." Now that society's very interesting, because it is all black women doctors from the New Jersey, Connecticut, and New York area. And they decided to honor six women, black women, who have been in this community for more than fifty years. MT: Fine. Now those were your latest. There were many before that time. As I say, I remember the award at Howard University, and I have a copy of it. LFE: I guess the best way for me to get them for you...most of the plaques are hanging on my wall. Can we go back into the room and see them, and I'll read them off for you? MT: Yes, if you would like... Dr. Edwards, looking at this side of the wall, in what was formerly your office, 1 see so many plaques, so many that you couldn't have carried them around to another room, so we will just record from here. I notice that in 1962, you were named Citizen of the Year, by the Hereford, Texas, Lions Club, for unselfish service to humanity. LFE: That was after I had been in Hereford only two years. And when they made that award they said to me that I had done more to help solve the migrant problem than anyone else had done in ten years. MT: Well, in 1969 the Jersey City State College in celebrating its fortieth anniversary awarded you a plaque for the lifetime of service to your community, stating, "Dr. Edwards represents the highest ideals our college hopes to attain." LFE: I think that was a beautiful one, because it really says what I believe. MT: In 1973, the National Black Catholic Convention awarded you a plaque for upholding and striving to maintain the values of Kawaida. What is the meaning of that? LFE: That's an African term that they use to represent the Black Catholic Caucus. MT: I see. In 1966, you became an honorary life member of the Black Catholics. In 1974, you received an award for dedicated service from the Howard﻿19 MT: (cont.) University Medical Alumni. That represented the Class of '24, after fifty years of service. LFE: That's right. MT: But you also received another award from Howard University itself. LFE: In 1950, the Board of Trustees...1956, or something like that...the Board of Trustees at Howard University gave me an award for outstanding services. MT: Yes. I noticed also that you received in 1964 a plaque for meritorious service in promoting community health, from the Women's Auxiliary Medical Society of the District of Columbia. LFE: That's true. MT: The National Association of Negro Business and Professional Clubs, in 1976, presented you with a plaque for meritorious service. LFE: That was the one they call the Sojourner Truth Award. MT: I see. In 1975, the Minority Coalition of Ocean County—that's obviously New Jersey—for outstanding contribution to mankind. That's your own community, isn't it? LFE: That's where I live now, and that was at Ocean County College. MT: Yes. In 1977, Saint Peter's College, the Black Action Committees, for continuous service to the college community. That was an award of an unusual nature? LFE: Well, the Negroes of nearly all of our colleges now have their little black caucuses. And they decided that I had done a lot of good for them, and that's how I got that. MT: I notice here there's one in 1960, from the Salvation Army, for service to home and hospital for unwed mothers. LFE: I worked there for a number of years. MT: Moreover, you received one from the New Jersey Federation of Colored Women's Clubs... LFE: That's right. MT: ...in 1975, the board and staff of the Plainfield neighborhood presented you a plaque for health service. LFE: Yes, I volunteered and went in even after I came to Lakewood. I used to commute back and forth two days a week to do health examinations, especially cancer checkup, for the people of that community.﻿20 MT: In 1967, the Medical Women's Centennial Committee of the Howard University Medical School presented you an award of merit. LFE: That's true. MT: In addition to these plaques, I noticed there were many certificates on your wall, and we might just mention some of them. LFE: Well, some of them are the...well, some of them are memberships. We'll discuss the fact of memberships. I'm a Fellow in the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, I'm a Life Fellow in that now. I'm a Life Fellow in the International College of Surgeons; a Diplomate,, an Honorary Diplomate of the Pan American Medical Association; a Diplomate member of the American Board of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; a life member of the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority; Howard University Medical Alumni; American Medical Association; American Medical Women's Association. And for seven years, I was on the Federal Advisory Council for the United States Department of Labor, Security—Employment Security. MT: May I ask a question about that board? For Employment Security—would that be in consideration of the rights of minorities? LFE: Well, I was a minority member of that board, and I was the one that spoke out very much for the inequity of employment, and the need for training people for better employment. And during that time—it was during Johnson's administration, it started out with Kennedy but he died soon after—and we found that in order to get better employment and more security in employment for people, they needed to be trained. So as a result of that, the Department of Labor under Secretary Wirtz, at that time, and the Health, Education and Welfare, under Secretary John Gardner, thought there should be a marriage, out of which came the 0E0, with Shriver, and I was very active in their meetings also. And then soon after, they picked up another one, which was the Manpower Development and Training Program of the federal government. I was on that board, which was headed by the famous Dr. Eli Ginzberg, who's in charge of Human Resources at Columbia University. We became pretty good friends; he autographed and gave me some of his books, because I was so interested in the work. I also belong to the Third Order of Saint Francis, which is a religious order. Now, some of the honors we probably have missed was that in 1947, I was selected one of thirteen women doctors in this country for my outstanding work, in a book called Women Doctors, written by Sally Knapp, which was a book used for career development in women. In 1948, that's when I received the Board of Trustees Howard Alumni Outstanding Award. In 1954, I was the Woman Doctor of the Year for the New Jersey Chapter of American Medical Women's Association. And in that same year, I received another award from Howard University for outstanding work. Also in 1954, I was in the second class, as they call it, of the Women of Achievement for the Jersey Journal of New Jersey, where they select twelve women each year for outstanding services. And I've been going to their meetings annually since then. Even this past year I went to it. I told you about the Citizen of the Year, Kiwanis Club.﻿21 MT: Oh no, there wasn't a plaque, but you were chosen as the Citizen of the Year by the Kiwanis Club, is that true? LFE: That's right. MT: Well, that's good, because... LFE: That was in 1963. Then, I guess possibly the most outstanding award that I have received was the Freedom Award Medal. MT: Freedom Award. LFE: Of the United States. Nominated by President Kennedy, but because he died, it was given to me in 1964 by President Johnson. And that was a very memorable experience. MT: And you went to the White House to receive it? LFE: Yes, I received it with my family. I was the only one there with family. And I have a great regard for President Johnson, because that little Joe that you met here today was about a year and a half, maybe two years old, and his mother had brought him with her because his father died, and they go together everywhere. And President Johnson reached down to pick him up and give him a hug. And they snapped his picture. And some months later, Joseph West got that picture enlarged and framed from President Johnson. He had gone to the trouble of finding out who his name was, and had signed it, "with love from President Johnson." I thought that that showed the humanity of a man that most of us thought was kind of hard-boiled. But I grew to think an awful lot of him because he had a big heart under that big Texas manner. MT: Yes. And he did more for rights for Negroes, I think, because he could get on with Congress, than Kennedy would have been able to have done if he had lived. LFE: Yes, because Kennedy was kind of in the category that Carter is in now. MT: Yes. LFE: And he had been a senator, however, and Carter had not been in Washington. MT: That's true. LFE: But they still looked at him somewhat with skepticism, because he was rich, and... MT: Catholic? LFE: Catholic. But Johnson, I think, seeing what has happened in the last ten years, even though he had this program, I think he worked with plans that gave more dignity to man than the dole that has been going on recently, telling people, I think that sort of says, "Here's something to keep you﻿22 LFE: (cont.) living; shut up and don't worry us about a job." Because the jobs on our present dole system, really the jobs that are paying the money and getting most of the appropriation are the administrative people, not the poor, who have to pick up the crumbs. Now I have four honorary degrees. MT: From which institutions, or... LFE: In 1964, I received an honorary Ph.D. in Laws, from Saint Joseph's College in Indiana—that's just outside of Chicago—for outstanding medical work. In 1965, I received an honorary degree in Humane Letters from the University of Portland. In 1966, I received an honorary Ph.D. from Saint Peter's College, and in 1970, I think it was, I received an honorary Ph.D. from New Jersey State College. MT: Interesting. Now in addition to these plaques and certificates, you had some mementos that you wished to show me; we got sort of excited over those, but I wanted to finish the plaques and certificates, honorary degrees, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.' LFE: I'm showing you now the Freedom Award Medal, which is a beautiful thing. You're not supposed to wear it, but it says, "The Presidential Freedom Award Medal—Lena F. Edwards." There's a little one here that we can use on special occasions, and I received this just before the inauguration of President Johnson to his own term—you know, he had the unexpired, and we were all invited as guests to the inauguration. That's the only time I wore this big one. I have a little eagle pin that I wear in the lapel of my coat, which is our trademark. MT: Oh, now I'll realize that, an eagle in the coat? LFE: A left-handed eagle that you can put... MT: And it's the trademark representing this award. LFE: That's right. MT: Well, one can learn something every day. LFE: Now this I prize an awful lot. As I told you before, I am a Franciscan. MT: A Franciscan. Do you belong to a Franciscan monastery? LFE: No, the Lay Order of Franciscans. MT: oh. LFE: They are the religious order. MT: i See. LFE: And I belong to the lay order. Now in 1967, I received this Poverello Award from the College of Steubenville, in Ohio. Which reads, "In recognition﻿23 LFE: (cont.) of great benefactions to humanity exemplifying in our age the Christ-like Spirit of Charity which filled the life of Saint Francis of Assisi." If you'll notice, it's plain. It's made of stainless steel, which is durable but inexpensive, because Franciscans have an oath of poverty. And I love that because of that, because I more or less feel very much about this oath of poverty is something that I have a great love for. In 1969, I have a medal from Saint Peter's Institute of Industrial Relations. Now the interesting thing about that, that was an institute of labor and management, and all the faculty—they called it the "million dollar faculty"—gave their services, in order to keep a good relationship between business and management, and labor. I have two of these, that I received one in one year, and one in another. MT: That's a double award, then. LFE: Yes. Now this is the Howard University Centennial Award, which I received in 1967. "In appreciation to your gift to Howard Centennial Scholarship Fund"—gosh, I had forgotten I did that. Because just the other day, just this past year, I finished off a $15,000 donation to the Howard Medical Alumni, which they have invested at seven and a half per cent, which will almost complete one o: my dreams,ever since I was teaching there, that I wanted to have a halfway decent scholarship for a young woman, young black woman, who was poor and needed the help. Not some doctor's daughter, but a poor person. And even though it would not pay for all of her tuition, it would help her to go to medical school, and I want it to be for someone who is interested in family practice. I hope to get that up to at least $25,000, so that the tuition, the interest on that, would amount to going on to $2,000. And this is an endowment, this is not one that anybody can mess with, and lend it out or spend it. It's supposed to stay there, and if anything happens to me, they still will get that scholarship. Now, this is the 1967 Achievement Award for distinguished postgraduate achievement, from Howard University. MT: Those are beautiful medals. LFE: That's from the trustees of the university; I think I mentioned that before. MT: Yes. LFE: For achievement in the fields of medicine and community service, Charter Day, 1963. MT: I was present when that award was made. 1.FE: Yes, and I was very pleased, because I was in line with some very prominent people since then. The mayor of Washington. Senator Brooke of Massachusetts. And the other one was a dentist, Dr. McLain, who's done very well, but someone else was big in politics at the time...I don't even remember, but I was in good company. MT: Oh yes, yes. And they were in good company with you. Dr. Edwards, I recall among your plaques, there was one from Saint Peter's College, from﻿24 HT: (cont.) the Black Action Committee for your continuous service to the college community. But here, you have your picture with the president of that college, who is not by any means black. And what was the occasion for this picture taking? LFE: Well, this was Father Yanitelli, a Jesuit, who is the president of Saint Peter's College. And this picture was taken at the graduation exercises, where I was taken in as a member of the board of regents of Saint Peter's College. Up until recently, the Jesuit colleges had only Jesuits on the board of trustees, and the board of regents was made up of outstanding people in the community. And every year we'd march in the academic procession with that gorgeous cap and gown that you see there in the picture. Father Yanitelli and I are very good friends. And we're good friends for one reason: as you know Jersey City's one of the "inner city" cities; it has become a slum town, so to speak. And there was some agitation among various of the alumni to move it out of Jersey City. And Father Yanitelli said, "This is where it's needed. And this is where it will stay." And because we were both champions for the same cause, we've become quite good buddies. MT: Yes. How do you spell the Father's name? It's an Italian name? LFE: Yes. Y-a-n-i-t-e-l-l-i. MT: I could note that it was Italian, but I wanted to be certain. LFE: His first name is Victor, and they all call him "Vic." MT: Now, that was the picture that was outside the family. You have many here that are of interest to me. This was taken when, and who is represented there? LFE: This picture was taken in 1905, right after my father's father was buried. MT: Your grandfather. LFE: Grandpa Edwards lived to be 107 years old. I can remember him well; he looked like an Indian with the long hair like Frederick Douglass. He used to go around to the marketplace and stand out there and talk with people. After the funeral somebody came around and wanted to take my mother's picture. So we posed with her—hah, this is interesting—on Linden Street. Next door to our house, because our steps had been painted. [laughs] It was a high stoop house just like this. And the people in this picture, this little pouting person is me. MT: About two or three? LFE: No, I was four then, going on five, because it was in 1905. MT: Yes. LFE: But I never liked to sit still, if you can notice, I look kind of glum in that picture.﻿25 MT: Oh, definitely. LFE: People said to me, "What are you looking mad about?" That's because I had to sit still. And I didn't want my picture taken. This is my sister May. She is the wife of a former dean at Howard University, School of Religion. MT: That's Daniel. LFE: Yes. And this is my mother, and this is my older brother Elmer, who also was at Howard University. He was a dentist like my dad, too. And my two brothers are dentists. My younger brother wasn't here, then. MT: He hadn't been born, you mean. LFE: Because I was fifteen, almost fifteen when he was born, and there were none in between. MT: Did you resent him? LFE: Oh, no...oh, my gracious me, no! MT: At fifteen, sometimes it's just a matter of years, so — LFE: I was going around the neighborhood taking care of everybody's babies anyway. When that boy was born, if I hadn't been in school that day, I think they would have sworn it was my baby. [laughter] But I was at Dunbar High School the day my brother was born. And I remember Gertrude Curtis and I kept running to the phone, to find out, had he come yet. MT: You knew all about it then. LFE: Oh sure, by that time I had wised up a little bit. MT: Now, these represent what members of your family? LFE: That's my dad and my mother. MT: Your father and your mother. Your father looks like he's a very intelligent man; that's a high, broad forehead. LFE: That's right. My father was a brilliant man, but a humanitarian from the heart. I remember he used to always say to us—he was a dentist, and he also, as I said, taught at Howard University... MT: He was at Howard University? LFE: He taught at Howard. MT: Oh, he taught at Howard. LFE: For a number of years in dental school, for over twenty-five years. MT: yes.﻿26 LFE: And my father used to say to us, "That man you see on the street may be drunk or he may look like a bum, but he's your neighbor. And you never know whether he's the one that's paying me fifty cents to pull his tooth, to send you to school." MT: Fifty cents a tooth? LFE: At that time. Back in those days that's how much it cost. MT: Mmm...what I'd have to pay now! LFE: Yes. You pay your whole Social Security for one tooth to get out, huh? And the other one is my mother. As you can see, she's rather distinguished looking, one of the oldest inhabitants of Washington, D.C. MT: Yes. Did she realize it, and act as if she were? LFE: Very proud, but a very lovable woman. Highly respected. We have a way of teasing, we said my mother was always 'Mrs. Edwards." You know, I grew up not calling anybody by their first name, unless they were in the family. My mother said that was rude, and to this day I still have a hard time calling people that I'm not intimately related with by the first name. MT: But the tendency socially is about the second time you meet. LFE: Now. But it didn't used to be. MT: Yes. I mean, not only among colored, but whites. I mean, it's more common with whites than with colored. LFE: It didn't used to be, but it is not, that's quite true. MT: Yes. LFE: But I still perk up a little bit when some of the people in these various clubs I belong to, and I'm introduced as Dr. Edwards, they'll say, "Well, what's your first name?" And I say, "Well, that's my business." The next four pictures are going to be my reason for my existence. And the reason you see them like this is because I preferred, I have many pictures of them, but I preferred to frame the pictures of them like this because they were mine then. Now they belong to somebody else. This is Marie, she's the oldest. She is now Mrs. Victor Metoyer. He's from New Orleans French background. But he's a mulatto, Metoyer, came from French ancesters, one of whom was an artist and he too is now an artist. Well, she is the one that finished Cornell as the first black student in twenty-five years there. MT: Now, in any special field, or just a black student? LFE: No, they did not then have black students at Cornell University Medical School.﻿27 MT: Oh, medicine, that's important to mention. LFE: They did not have black women students in the medical school. And they didn't have many women in those days. She finished in 1951. MT: Finished in medicine. LFE: And the day she graduated from school, and we were driving home from Cornell, I said to her, "Marie, I've never meddled with your education, but you're taking a rotating internship; nearly everybody in your class went into a specialty. You're not ready for a specialty. No doctor, nor am I, is ready for a specialty until he knows something about the humanities of medicine. Be a family doctor for me, please, for five years. Then you can go back and take a residency in anything you want." When she graduated she was married and had two children. When she became pregnant with her first child they wanted to put her out of school. And I went over and saw the dean, and told him, "For what? She's a married woman. She and her husband are both healthy. If she were running around with fellows and having illicit relations she could be a student. If she aborted this baby, she could be a student. But because two married people that are healthy are having a baby, I don't think there's anything wrong with it, that's the way the Lord made it. And I read your catalogue before I came here, because you're giving me a hard time, and you have three conditions under which a student can be discharged: poor average, and she was in the first quarter of her class; nonpayment of fees, she's paid her fees; and the third is misdemeanor, and I don't think a married woman having a baby is a misdemeanor." So she stayed in school. MT: Wonderful. And finished. LFE: And finished. By the time she finished she had a second one, there was no trouble with that one. MT: They didn't even mention it! LFE: Now this is Genevieve, the one you met tonight. MT: Oh, yes. LFE: She opened the dormitories of the College of New Rochelle for black students. Because I told the nuns that if she's accepted in the school she would not be a dayhop, she would live on campus. And she did and she did beautifully. She finished her work there and went on to Boston College and took a master's in psychiatric social work. She worked in Menlo Park here in New Jersey for a while, because she only wants to work with children, she loves children. And then she married and moved to Pennsylvania, but her husband died two and a half years after they married, and she had a little boy. So she came back to Menlo Park, so that she'd be near her family. And while she was there, one of her buddies from Menlo Park got into the school system of Lakewood, and they said, "Gen, you should come down with us, and get in the school system so that when your little boy is in school, you'll be in school and when he's out, you're out." And so she's been now, for about﻿28 LFE: (cont.) twelve years I think, in the school system of Lakewood as a psychiatric social worker. MT: There are not too many of them here? Of her color? LFE: Not in that system. MT: No. LFE: And incidentally, she is the first black person on the faculty of Georgian Court College. It's a part-time evening course that she teaches, because she has a full-time job. But that was a new opening, so both of my daughters have opened doors. MT: Yes. They've been pioneers. LFE: And kept them open. HT: Yes. Well, those are the daughters. LFE: Now you come to my sons. They say a mother spoils her sons, but I didn't. MT: No, you didn't.' LFE: This is Edward. Edward graduated from Seton Hall...oh, Edward was the first black in Saint Peter's Prep School, in a number of years, I think in twenty, thirty years. And when he finished there he went to Seton Hall College. But then he was, so to speak, a dropout. He went into the service. MT: In which war? LFE: Just after World War II. And they were still drafting, but he wasn't drafted. But he went in, he volunteered to go in, got married when he was twenty years old, and when he got out of the service, he was going back to school, and I said, "You're going to the same one you dropped out of." And he went back to Seton Hall, finished, and went to Howard University Medical School. Graduated in 1955 from the medical college of Howard University, came back to Jersey City and did an internship at the medical center. And then went back and did a pediatric residency at Freedmen's Hospital. And now he is a pediatrician in Jersey City, and he's the one who had eight children, so he had a ready-made practice. This is Tommy, you met Tommy, he drove you here. MT: Yes. LFE: He's the priest. He was five when this was taken. I used to laugh and say I never had a good picture of Tommy taken till he was five because he had a big head, but by the time he was five he had grown up to his head. But I guess there was something in that head, because we had him tested once, and he had a very high I.Q. He's the one, that instead of being a roughneck like the other three boys, used to read the Encyclopaedia Britannica for pleasure, and draw.﻿29 MT: There's much in it. LFE: And draw. And several of the pictures that you see here, all the pictures in my house, were drawn by my family—Marie's husband, and Tommy. I entered him in a private art class because he loved to draw, and he did some very lovely paintings, some of them we gave different people. He was interested in architecture when he went to Seton Hall Prep. He won a scholarship from the eighth grade, because, as I said, he was the top student. When he finished Seton Hall Prep, he was accepted at Catholic University in the School of Architecture. And after being there for three years, he decided he wanted to be a priest. So he joined the Franciscan Friars of the Atonement, upper New York State, and he was ordained in 1962, a priest. And now, we're very proud that he is at Newman Center at Howard University, because it takes a tradition that goes back from my dad when he graduated there first in 1887, and now Tommy is there. Gosh, that's ninety years later, isn't it? And I think he's going to make out all right, and the reason I say that is because Tommy... all of my children went to parochial schools, and in some of them, they were the only blacks. Then they went on through college. And once they live in an environment like that, it's hard for them to adjust to their own black environment. MT: Yes, I know some cases. LFE: One of his buddies, from the black Catholic caucus, that has done a lot toward getting our four black bishops, and the other advances in the Catholic church, told him that he needed to get with his people. So for three years before he went to Howard, he was priest in a parish in East Harlem. MT: East Harlem. LFE: So he learned a whole lot that he had not learned in school. And therefore when he went to Howard, I think he has adjusted himself very well. This is John. John and Paul went to Don Bosco in Ramsey because by that time their dad and I had divorced, and I wanted them to be in a boarding school for boys. John and Paul were both great athletes. John wanted engineering, and that's right, he went to Catholic University for engineering. But the interesting thing about this...John could have had an athletic scholarship to Catholic University, and as you've probably heard me say, I'm a nut about education, but I told the priest that John could not have that scholarship. With the grace of God, I was working and able to pay his way through school, and he'd have to give it to some poor boy who wouldn't have a chance to go if John took it. They thought I was a little touched in the head. And they said, "After all, he won it, and he may not like it." I said, "But this fella...he understands." He's the one who said to me once when I had my boys all dressed up, and getting ready to take them to the Howard-Lincoln basketball game, in Orange, which was one of the features of North Jersey. I had these three all ready, and the phone rang—we were in the car already, and they came running to the door. "What's that, Mother? Somebody sick?" I said, "Yes, there's a lady that's very sick and has to go to the hospital. But I'm going to get another doctor to take care of her because I promised you this for months." Ten years﻿30 LFE: (cont.) old, he turned around and he said to me, "Mother, no. You go to the hospital and take care of the lady. We'll stay home and look at the television. Because you're doing corporal works of mercy." And that's how all of these children have grown up, with a keen sense of duty toward God and their fellow man. So anyway, he finished engineering at Catholic University as a mechanical engineer. And then he was in the air force, and while he was in the air force they trained him as an aerospace engineer. He worked on spaceships. And now that he's out, he's working as a civilian, as an aerospace engineer with NASA in Washington. This is Paul. Paul shocked us all, when he was finishing Ramsey...no, he didn't finish Ramsey, because I went to Washington to Howard. These two grew up like twins and he missed his brother. And so I had him come to Washington for his last year in high school. I think he's at John Carroll. And when he finished there he said he wanted business. He went to the American University. Because I was in Washington then and incidentally, all three of us went to Washington together, at that time. He finished business, and was one of the guinea pigs, 1960. He got a very good job at Newark and Essex Bank and Company in Newark, New Jersey. And after he'd been there about three months he told me he just didn't like the job, because he didn't want to do what the boss told him. I said, "Paul, when you're working for someone you have to do what they tell you." He looked at me, he said, "You taught me to be honest, and I think what he's telling me isn't honest." I said, "Well, Paul, in business, there is usually a gray area, somewhere. If that's going to bother you, then go back to school and take something you think you would like and have no worry about. Because that's going to be a good job, but if you spend your life on that, you'll wind up on either drugs or alcohol. Because you would live a life of frustration, and would be running away from it all the time." I was at the mission at the time, and I got a letter from him—"Dear Mother, dear"—they used to call me "Mother, dear"—"I have decided what I'm going to do. I am going to Saint Peter's College to take courses in education, and stay in business because I like it, but I am going to teach it the way it ought to be." And so he's been teaching ever since. MT: And where is he teaching now? LFE: At Memorial High School, in West New York, New Jersey. Which is just out of Jersey City. MT: Yes. LFE: I lecture all over the country, on various aspects of career development; especially I like to lecture to mothers and children about their children. Because I feel that my most important degree is my "MA" (Mother). Because we have lived together, we grew up together. Because from the time they were knee-high to a duck, they could discuss with me something, rather than just be pushed around to do it because I said so. As a matter of fact, that Joe, my grandson that you saw in here today, said to me when he was six years old, "Grandmother, do I have to do what my mother tells me to do and you, always? I have a head of my own and I think for myself."﻿31 LFE: (cont.) I said, "Good, Joe. You're growing up. Certainly you do not have to, but we're going to have to talk about it first. Sometimes we give in, sometimes you give in, but whatever we do is going to be for the best of your development." And that's how I've grown up with my family. I think that's one reason they've turned out pretty well. Out of this whole bunch, there were nineteen grandchildren. MT: Nineteen grandchildren now? LFE: Well, one died. I won't mention. But there were nineteen. And altogether in the family I counted thirty-two of us. MT: In the family? LFE: That's right. So of course you can tell what we think about the population... MT: ...explosion? LFE: Explosion. That's for the birds, so far as I'm concerned. MT: Dr. Edwards, I see some type of silver-like floral arrangement with a "50" in the center. It isn't a plaque, and it isn't a medal, but it must be a memento of some sort that means something in your life. LFE: That was the top of a cake. For the fiftieth anniversary of the Jersey City College Women's Club. In 1925 when I came to Jersey City to practice, I had been in my sorority, in the College Women, and in so many activities in Washington. I said, "Well, let's have a College Women's Club in Jersey City." And I found out that even though they had several teachers here, there weren't ten women that had college degrees, boy, your college degrees...So I said, "Well, we're going to have a college club, anyway," because if you're a woman in those days, you only had to have two years in order to be a teacher. And so we got ten women together and we organized the College Women's Club, in October of 1926. And the reason I remember it so well, it was just a month before my second child was born... MT: And you're out organizing? LFE: And I'm out organizing. I had my six children, and when I came to Jersey City, midwifery was the custom. And I moved into a community where they had a lot of women from Europe, and they were used to having midwives. And we did home deliveries then because they didn't have hospital facilities. So I found out that instead of staying in bed after your baby was born, eight days like they would do when I finished school, and like I was supposed to do with my first child, because she was born just a couple of months after I got here, those women were out of bed the next day. And they were hale and hearty. So I had children and ten days after my baby was born I was out climbing stairs in the tenement houses, and I worked until they were born. My membranes ruptured just before my child was coming, just before I had my office hours. And I went in the office and finished my office hours, I didn't go to the hospital. I'd been in the hospital a few weeks before because I was in heart failure, for it was the only way they could slow me down, but when I came home I got back to﻿32 LFE: (cont.) work and I stayed home and had that baby. The family grew up together, but this had always been one of my prize packages, the College Women's Club, and so we got together. In those days, our dues were five dollars a year I think; that money went directly for a fifty dollar scholarship. MT: Oh, that's why the 50? LFE: This is the fiftieth anniversary. MT: Oh, I see. LFE: See, 1926, and this was in 1976. So it was the fiftieth anniversary, last October, a year ago in October. We had a rule that you couldn't serve a collation that cost over two dollars. All of our annual meetings and important meetings that would bring culture to the community would be in churches. And we'd go from one church to another and have meetings, and that's how we got to be known. When College Women of Jersey City had this big affair in my honor in 1976, fifty years after it was organized, they were giving as much as $6,000 in scholarships. Since they have lots of entertainments, the dues had gone up, the scholarship fund had skyrocketed from what we originally started. I take great pride in that, because it represented one of my main ideas in life: to give people a chance and let them make it. And we helped many young persons. They came to be prominent people in the community. We encouraged them to go to school and get a college education, then we'd have lots of teachers, both in the college and in the schools. So that's why the floral-like arrangement is there. MT: Today, November 14th, is a beautiful autumn morning. We are continuing the interview of Dr. Lena Edwards in her home on Woodland Drive in Lakewood, New Jersey, with Merze Tate interviewing. Dr. Edwards, I think you mentioned last evening that there were four more or less basic community activities which you continued after leaving Texas. Would you like to summarize these for our recording today? LFE: After I left Texas to take care of my mother and after Mother died, I wanted to return to Texas, but the children did not want me to go back. So I returned to my practice in Jersey City after Marie left, until 1970. And then I moved to my country home up in Watchung Hills, which was near Lyons V.A. Hospital. I think I told you that. While I was there I became involved with the Model Cities Health Program in Plainfield, New Jersey— I barely touched upon it—and I used to go there every day for a while, because I was the physician in charge. But then when president Richard Nixon came in, the funds were cut. So I told the Model Cities Clinic I'd still come as a volunteer. I went there every day until I moved to Lakewood, then I went twice a week to take care of the examination of patients in order to try to make early diagnosis. It was in the field of preventative medicine. They had another doctor to treat patients. I continued at﻿33 LFE: (cont.) Lyons, where I became very much interested in the AA movement. Because about fifty percent of the people who were in that neurological veterans' hospital were there really for alcoholism, acute and chronic. When I left there and moved to Lakewood, I picked up again my association with Head Start, where I'm chiefly involved with trying to do something about getting parents to come to meetings on nutrition and child training, so that we will not have battered children and those whose health has been neglected. Now that doesn't mean that all children who are in Head Start have such parents. But there're enough of them so that if you have a group of sixty people, you're lucky if you get ten or twelve mothers out to a meeting. And that's a very poor percentage. I was on the policy council; last month I gave up my position on the policy council because the members sat there and talked about budget, and things that I wasn't interested in, and I told them that instead of being on the Ocean County policy council, I would concentrate my efforts on the parents of Lakewood, and I plan to go there and have regular talks. I hope the parents will come out; I've met several of them in town, different places and they said they would like to hear me talk, so maybe they'll show me what they mean. We need to do something about child training and nutrition. I'm terribly distressed when I ride through town and see little children going to school with a bag of potato chips and a bottle of Coke , which is their breakfast. Last year when somebody from the church gave me ten dollars to do something for somebody in poverty, I went to the A & P store, and bought a five-pound bag—two five-pound bags—of oatmeal, two fourteen-ounce packages of powdered milk, two cans of Hershey syrup, and two jars of peanut butter. And made two boxes of my homemade cookies, and prepared two packages for people on welfare. I am almost afraid to go back to those houses this year, because they want to kill me for trying to tell them how to feed their children breakfast before they leave home. But I hope they caught on. Because sooner or later people need to. The cost of that bottle of Coke and a package of potato chips could give five children a good nutritious breakfast. And we've got to learn those lessons. Then there are two things which I think are very important. Parents must give their children a lot of TLC—tender loving care—but along with it, they must have discipline. They must teach them how to conduct themselves, and it has to be a two-way type thing, the parent and the child communicating with each other. It's not a matter of whamming a child because it does something wrong. But I learned this, when my Edward was just four years old back in the late twenties, I spanked him once because he told me a lie and I hate lies. You can hit me and beat me, but don't lie to me. And so he cried as if his heart was broken. He couldn't have been more than three years old, because I don't spank big children. And so I went over to New York to the Child Studies Association meeting to find out what was wrong, and the one thing I remember that I'll never forget, and I tell it to parents, "Never hit a child, never scold a child, never correct a child, without first asking it what it did and why it did it." That has two features. One, by the time you talk with him or her you've cooled off a little bit yourself and you're less apt to strike and hurt﻿34 LFE: (cont.) them. And secondly, it makes a communication between you and the child, which enables that child to feel that it has a partner, rather than a boss. That has been, I think, the greatest secret of the success of my six children, because we talked things over. Even now at my age, I don't do anything without consulting with my children, because they are part of me. So this is the type of thing I want to get over to the parents of the Head Start children, for the original idea of the Head Start program was to create a closer relationship between parents and the education system early in the child's life. It is between the ages of birth and five that the child does his greatest development. I'd say, between five and twelve you can help them along, and after twelve you can barely turn around anything that has been misdone. We want parents to realize that being a parent is a serious responsibility, but should be a very pleasant, and enjoyable one, if it is assumed in this manner. We also want parents to understand the extreme necessity of early diagnosis of problems that may be the reason why Johnny can't read: their eyesight, their nutrition, their anemia and various things that keep them from catching on. So that's the reason I'm back again with the Head Start program. After leaving Lyons, the people of Lakewood found out that I had worked there, and used to talk to the alcoholics and the AA's that brought them in, because I was on admissions there, to a great extent. And they asked me if I would be on their advisory council for Lakewood, and finally called Ocean County. That has not been very active since they changed the director, because the person who was directing it had been years and years ago an alcoholic, and she was really giving her life, as most of the AA people do, to trying to see that nobody else gets in the rut that she was in. And after years of very successful work, they put on someone who had recently been to school and studied something about alcoholism. This country's making a serious mistake in this procedure: turning out wisdom and experience for book learning. They don't even know how to talk to people, much less help them. So we haven't had a meeting, so far as I know, in about six months, because the people don't come out when we invite them. We had planned to have a de-tox center for women in Ocean County, but the community didn't want the place which the pastor of the Episcopal church had designated. We had planned to operate it there with volunteers, we'd started taking a collection of furniture and rugs and things to furnish it. MT*. That is a definite house, a community house? lFE: A big house right near the church, for de-toxing women. A de-tox is a day stay, and then they go on to the AA's which are for follow-up. But that fell through. And that's because the community did not want the house? LFE: Because of the hypocrisy of people in the community. They did not want the house in their community. LFE: That's right.﻿35 MT: It's a fine idea, but we don't want it near us. LFE: And the thing that's so sad...the same thing happened up there in Morris County, around the corner sort of from where I had my country home, a man who had been a very severe alcoholic, a businessman who had almost lost everything, went into the AA's and he was so grateful for what they did, he got...a beautiful home And the people objected to it. And one of the greatest objectors was a man whom he had taken into his home for two weeks when his family had put him out for alcoholism before he had this home. But he didn't want them near him. The businessman finally won out, because there were enough people in the community who knew what he had done, and what he was doing, and they voted this committee down, that didn't want them. And he has now a very successful treatment center. So far as alcoholism is concerned, even as a doctor I was really dumb about alcoholism, as we name it now. I always thought that an alcoholic was one who was on skid row, that was a drunken, no-account bum. But little by little, working with doctors and lawyers and what we call the big shots of the country, I have seen so many who are dependent upon alcohol. I've been to conferences with very outstanding people, who have to have their cocktails at lunch, and then another when they go home, and another before they go to bed. That is an alcoholic. This is alcohol dependency, and alcohol dependency is alcoholism. Even at one of the big conferences that I attended at Lakehurst, conducted by the navy— after sitting for half a day, and hearing all these wonderful papers on alcoholism and its effects on the body, on the community, on the family, we had a lunch---some of the leaders drank as many as two and three highballs at lunchtime. [laughter] So it's quite interesting to see how generalized it is. And the interesting thing about the alcoholic that is not the bum on skid row is that he or she are beautiful people in their community, but the trauma is in their home, to the ones they love. And the people of the home endure it, because they don't want the community to know that such a situation exists. The alcoholics get away with it, and just keep going down and down, until finally it gets them. So I'm very interested in alcoholism, and I am now an advisor on the New Jersey State Council on Control of what was formerly Alcohol and Drugs, but now called Substances. MT: Oh, yes. LFE: I represent the aged, or aging, on that committee. And we feel that it's an insult to tell an older person that you're an alcoholic or a drug addict, but the thing that bothers me is that they are. When people retire from a very active life, they go into deep depression and boredom, and they get out of their boredom by retreat from reality, and alcohol is a wonderful one. And then when they go to the doctor, he doesn't want to be bothered answering all their questions and doesn't have a lot of time to talk to them, so he gives' them tranquilizers. The Librium, and the Valium, and the "snipes", alcoholic drinks, are killing people. And the strange thing about it is, that doesn't show up in the statistics. That woman that was found dead in a chair from smoke inhalation, who died because she dropped a cigarette on her upholstered furniture, because she washed down her sleeping pill with a drink, was an alcoholic. That isn't in﻿36 LFE: (cont.) statistics. She died of a fire from smoke inhalation, because they cover these things up. From eighteen to twenty, or twenty-five percent of our outstanding people —doctors, lawyers, religious, in all walks of life, business people—are alcoholics. And the thing that is worrying us now is the young people who are involved. I talked to a young woman who at fourteen had an alcoholic mother and could outdrink the average fellow her age. And these were affluent people; these were not the people on welfare, that are depressed and get their six-pack or their little, cheap vodka. I call that stuff they drink sneaky-pete because it's poisonous to their system, better than your high grade liquors. And there are the groups of three or four men standing on the corner and not infrequently you see a woman come up and hand them a piece of money. One goes in the store and comes out with a bottle wrapped up in a brown bag; with the bottle still unwrapped, they pass it around. You can drive around the block a few times and when you come back, they're on the curb, flattened out. Now that's not the quantity of liquor that they have drunk, it's the quality. And the board that controls alcholic beverages does not seem to care about how many liquor stores can go into poor neighborhoods. But they can't get into the affluent neighborhoods. They don't care about the cheap stuff that is sold to people in poor neighborhoods, because they know that a person who drinks the best liquor can probably drink at least a fifth every two days and not get sick from it, but the man who drinks that cheap stuff, can drink one-fourth of a bottle and pass out. So there again, it's the establishment that I'm fighting when I work with the AA's, because the AA's, I think, are the only group that really is doing anything about alcoholism. I don't think even our psychiatrists have as much control over the situation as the AA's. There again the people have something in common. And they're dedicated because they have been victims, and they don't want to see anybody else victimized. The other organization with which I'm working, and have been ever since I came back from Texas, is the Cancer Society. MT: Yes. LFE: Soon after I came back to Jersey City, the Cancer Society had a big meeting on the Pap test, at the theater, and I was asked to talk after the picture. Thereafter I went all over the county talking behind the picture on the Pap test. The society, they talk about deaths from cancer being higher among poor people, young people who start in early sex relations, and people who have many children, and people who have become victims now, they claim, of a venereal disease called herpes. And yet these are not the people they get to those meetings. So along with the beautiful cooperation from the county society, we decided to go into the low-income housing projects and the sweatshops. And north Jersey is full of sweatshops, whose managers bring people from the West Indies and the South—and work them at minimum. So we went into the nurse's office of the sweatshops, and ran the film at the same time that we were doing examinations. So they would see employees, someone would talk to them, give them literature, and get the examination. We had good cooperation from the leaders. We﻿37 LFE: (cont.) could use the nurse's office, or if there wasn't such an office, we'd borrow a table from someplace and set it up in a room. And their employer would give them fifteen minutes to half-hour off. In 1972 the national program of the Cancer Society was that every woman in this country should have a Pap test, and the campaign was to last for four years. The New Jersey State Cancer Society named me as chairman of that committee due to the outstanding work that I had done with women in the low-income bracket, and they wanted to reach them. I kept the chairmanship of the state for two years, but I'm the type of person who thinks that a leader should not remain the leader too long, that they should give other people an opportunity. So I told them I was only going to keep it two years instead of the four years and have somebody else be chairman, but I would be very active, not only for the four years but as long as I was able to do so. During that time we covered most of the twenty-one counties very well; we had good committees and had regular meetings. But I was not satisfied with only the Pap tests, for it's my nature to be very thorough. And I couldn't see putting a woman on the table and examining her with a little smear, or Pap test, when cancer of the breast was killing people, cancer of the interior of the uterus—what we call endometrial cancer—not just cervical cancer, was killing women. Ovarian cancer, and intestinal cancer. Now, in that one time with the patient on the table, in just two or three extra minutes all the above could be checked. There are many doctors who objected, saying it was a waste of time, and wasn't necessary. All we should do was a Pap test. So, with my rebellious attitude, I told them, "Well then, I'll quit. Because I will not be guilty, or have guilt on my mind, that a woman whom I examined with a Pap test had cancer of the breast that was missed." It took me almost two years to convert some of the medical personnel of this state. And there are a few doctors that we haven't yet convinced. During that time, the Cancer Society provided us with the materials and literature for screening programs, and I worked with them in as many counties as possible to talk and also to do the screening of patients. I couldn't tell you how many hundreds I've done, but I know I've examined many women for the Cancer Society. And so when I gave up the chairmanship, they named one of the doctors who was a very fine gentleman, Dr. Green, who was head of the department at one of the medical schools... MT: Which medical school? Of the state of New Jersey? LFE: State. New Jersey State Medical College. And he has connections with some of the others. The big problem again is getting to the people who need it and don't come. Now I'm a great advocate of localizing clinics in our existing hospitals, instead of having these little store-front clinics that have sprung up since Medicaid. But I also realize that some people will not go to these programs. When we had the last meeting of the task force ending the four years of the service that the Cancer Society was giving, I said to them, "We've had a wonderful program. We've done many, many, many cancer tests, some just Paps, and some total, like I recommended. But we have not changed very much the death rate from cancer. And it's because we have not reached the undesirables." And I call them﻿38 LFE: (cont.) "undesirables" because the reason so many poor people do not go to clinics is due to the manner in which they are addressed in clinics. They're made to feel...pretty cheap. And some of them do not feel that their dignity is maintained when they go to clinics. When I came to Ocean County, Ocean County was one of the counties that did not have an active task force. We managed to get one meeting, or one screening program, but Jackson, which is part of Ocean County, had a young health officer who was efficient. He was just as adamant as I am about seeing to it that something is done about the poor health conditions in his community. And I was fortunate enough to have opportunity to serve the Jackson area with four big health fairs. We finally got a health fair in Lakewood in 1976. Now at a health fair, unlike just a plain cancer screening program, you call in all of your organizations like the Heart Association, the Diabetes Association, and so forth, they do not only the genital screening, and examine the breasts, they talk about the cigarette hazard. I have a number of awards from the Cancer Society, the certificates and the annual awards. They also gave me a beautiful chain, gold chain, bearing the insignia of the Cancer Society. And at the present time I'm on three committees for that Society—the medical education committee for the state, the task force for the state, and on the board of managers of Ocean County Council of the Cancer Society. We are moving along slowly but surely. I shall always have a keen interest in cancer, because we have cancer in the family. And I know that it's curable. At seventy-five, my mother, because she had been taught how to examine her breasts when she was taking a bath, felt a little lump in her breast. She only had to have a simple mastectomy because it was an early diagnosis. And she lived to be almost ninety-two, without any signs of metastasis. MT: You say a "simple mastectomy," explain that. LFE: It means removing the breast without going into the axilla and all the muscles of the chest, like they do in a radical. MT: Yes. It leaves the outside configuration of the breast? LFE: No, no, the breast comes off. MT: It comes off? LFE: That's right. MT: And it's...I see. LFE: But you see, in a radical, they take all the muscles off, they strip everything down to the bone and go into the axilla and take out all the glands they can find. MT: Yes, I know that.﻿39 LFE: Because then they have those glands analyzed, and usually one of the first places, the cancer of the breast is metastasized in the axilla, although sometimes it goes behind the breastbone, into the glands there, and of course that often is concealed. But, with early diagnosis, it's one of the easiest cancers to cure—and the easiest to find, so therefore it should be controlled. MT: Therefore if I should have to have what the doctors call a simple mastectomy, I shouldn't be quite as worried as if it were... LFE: ...a radical. That's right. Now a doctor can't tell you whether or not you have cancer until they perform the operation. MT: Oh, I realize...not even a biopsy? LFE: Well, what happens, you see...I used to do simple breast tumors myself, but always with a team ready to go in for the radical mastectomy... MT: Yes. LFE: Because you operate and you take out a section of the tumor, or sometimes a section of the breast with the tumor, and send it to the laboratory and they do the frozen section and send you back the report while the patient is still on the table. MT: Yes, that's true. LFE: Then the serious one is done, the total is done. MT: If it's malignant? LFE: If that comes back malignant. MT: I have been through it three times, Doctor, that's why I'm asking you. But I have a way of knowing when I'm in recovery, whether I still have my breast. LFE: How long do you stay in recovery? MT: I don't ask them outright. I'll say, "What time is it?" LFE: That's right. You'll know how long the operation took. Because if the operation took half an hour, so then you'll know it was simple. But if it took a long time... MT: Three hours, or four — LFE: Then you know they did the total. MT: And that's all I need to know and I go back to sleep!﻿40 LFE: That's right. So, you know better than I do that early diagnosis can keep you living. Okay. So I am now insisting, since this year and last year the Ocean County health department nurses asked me if I'd be the doctor to give them their annual physicals, and as I see them, I ask them if they are doing their self-examinations and you find a few that don't. But I say to them, "Look, keep these things in your bag and, please, everywhere you see a woman, every time you go into a house where there's a woman, ask her, please do her monthly self-examination of the breasts." And also watch whatever secretion comes from her vagina, to see the first tinge of blood, and go annually to have her pelvic examination. So that is my story of my cancer love. Now you have the AA, the Cancer, and the parenting. In connection with the AA, I guess I'll mention that I am also on the Ocean County Council on Aging, due to the fact there I talk so much about the deaths of senior citizens from washing down their tranquilizers with their schnapps at night and not waking up, they asked me if I would go to the State Council on what used to be called Alcoholism and Drugs but is now called Substances, to represent the aging. Now I am not a consultant, consultants are paid, but I'm an advisor, because my work is volunteer, on that committee. After seeing stacks and stacks of paper that are studies over a period of years, and yet no direct contact with patients, the last time I went to a meeting in a beautiful suite of rooms with the air conditioner going in July so cold that I needed a sweater, with lights burning in the offices, in spite of the fact it was a bright, sunny day, and thinking of all that the president is talking about conservation, I became furious. And then when the man showed me a stack of papers that had been stapled together, showing the— "We had called you here, because now we have the statistics on the deaths of our senior citizens due to the substances,"—I hit the ceiling. Because I saw nothing but a luxurious office in a high-income, middle-class section housing place where they had rented space. And I just saw tax dollars being wasted, and still not reaching people. So I told them I could not serve on a committee that wasn't reaching the people. And finally when I went to the next meeting of the regular group, not this special committee, they said to me, "Well, Dr. Edwards, you made enough noise at last to be heard. I want you to tell us exactly how you feel about what's happening to senior citizens." I said, "Okay, I'll give it to you in a nutshell. Tranquilizers, because the doctor doesn't listen to them. It's a good way to get rid of them. And they walk around in a daze." Most older people feel that they need a little drink before going to bed because they've been taught that. So they take the tranquilizer and then they take the schnapps to wash it down. And that is no good. The mixing of so many drugs...one reason I stopped practicing medicine, the poor devils would come in to me after having paid anywhere from twenty-five to one-hundred-fifty dollars for an examination, depending upon how many X-rays and tests they got, with possibly five bottles of medicine, saying to me, "Doctor gave me this medicine, but I don't know what it's for." So this is what I do when I go to see the senior citizens: I take out my PDR...﻿41 MT: And what's that? LFE: That's a physician's desk reference for drugs. MT: Oh, yes. LFE: It's a book with thousands of drugs in it, with pictures of some of them. And I will not tell them what the drug is myself, for fear they'll go back to their doctor, and tell them I said they shouldn't have it. I read to them what's in the book; that keeps me from being sued, I hope. They get tranquilizers...nearly every senior citizen---many of them, I'll say—will get from their specialist, a tranquilizer, what they call a water pill, diuretic, many of them heart pills, and many of them a sleeping pill, and vitamins. They tell me that as much as thirty-five dollars a month or more goes for pills. And I still say, I'm seventy-seven, and I've lived with my older aunts and mother and grandparents, and I know that if we cruld teach people by the time they're forty to live right, with the proper diet and nutrition, the simple foods of life, the proper exercise, and most of all the proper interest in themselves and the community in which they are living, in other words, the desire to live, that they won't need all those pills. I don't even take anything for my rheumatoid arthritis, which I know nobody can cure. All the Coakleys and the Beckleys and the ancestors of my parents on my mother's side have had it, and I'm going to have it the rest of my life. Chances are it won't kill me unless the sciatic nerve that's been involved now from herniated discs of the spine gets me to the place I can't walk, but even then you can still get around with a little walker but you can't say it kills you. Usually pneumonia or something else kills one. Filling myself with all the drugs that are being put on the market now for these ailments...when I'm old, and different parts have deteriorated, and the new fancy operations, so far as I'm concerned, are for the birds. I will not deny the fact that they help and prolong life for a little while. But I'm not interested in prolonging my life for a little while. I just want to fly around like crazy. And ask God to let me live to the end singing and working, like Bing Crosby. MT: Dr. Edwards, you were once requested to meet with the committee of the March of Dimes. LFE: Yes, that was a very interesting affair. In the mid-sixties, the March of Dimes decided that they had fairly well controlled polio. But it was such a famous organization, they wanted to go into something else that would be helpful. So they were interested in birth injuries, and they had a brainstorming session in New York City, to which they invited fifteen people from this country to meet and I don't remember the names of all the people, but I recall one who was important in obstetrics. That was Dr. Virginia Apgar, who is responsible for the Apgar Gradation of the newborn baby, so far as respiratory system is concerned, and she too was interested in me. She was an anesthesiologist who graded the effect of anesthesia at the time of the birth on the child. Now the reason they called me was that I had quite a reputation for advocating natural childbirth. I used to explain everything to my patient about it, used to tell﻿42 LFE: (cont.) them, "That's the way the Lord made it, and it's a natural thing. It's not some big event that you are martyr for. And if you want me to be your doctor I'm not going to fill you up with drugs or anesthesia unless it's very necessary. I'd rather have a crying mother and a crying baby than a quiet mother and a quiet baby. Because that baby may have brain damage, and I don't want to feel responsible for it." So they know that, and that was one of the things that they were very interested in. Much of the brain damage that we see in children comes from too much sedation and anesthesia in the mother, and forceful deliveries. And there we really discussed these features for two or three days in New York, and after that I was not any more involved with the association. But I have followed its work and it is doing a wonderful job. MX: I know after you received the Freedom Award Medal there were many, many requests for you to speak or to participate in health activities. Did you not once appear before the World Health Organization, and was that in Geneva or elsewhere? LFE: No, they had their meeting in...I won't say whether it was the entire world or the United States section of it, but they had a meeting in Chicago. I had this experience with the migrants; they wanted me to speak on the children of the developing countries. They had conditions similar resulting from nutrition disturbance to what the children in Mexico suffered. That was a very interesting session, and I enjoyed being there. MT: Dr. Edwards, closely related to the activities that are tied to your medical background, you have also served on the Senior Citizens Companion Program, which should be related somewhat to your medical background. LFE: Yes, it is. You know, I practiced in Jersey City, and I'm here in Lakewood because I'm retired, so I do feel that I owe something to Jersey City and I go back there for various affairs. So I'm on the Senior Companion Committee Advisory Board. That is a program run by the Action group to have senior citizens who are in better health go to the elderly enfeebled ones, and talk with them, maybe do some errands with them, take them to the doctor, take them for a walk, and be just what it says, a companion to them. Now in the process of doing some of the studies of the servants and recipients, as they call them, in the process you find many senior citizens that are able to get out only by ambulance to a doctor or to a clinic. And yet there's no doctor or there are few doctors who go to their home to see them. So we have been emphasizing for two or three years the necessity of having some type of service in their home for senior citizens who are markedly disabled. They've been in the hospital and they're out of the hospital, but they don't want to go to a nursing home. I remember when my mother went to a nursing home while I was in the mission, that's why she got there. If I'd been home she wouldn't have gone. She lost seventy-five percent of her life the day she was put there, because she felt that she was no longer needed and useful. And you find that this depression hits many senior citizens who go into nursing homes. Some of them go because they want to go. They want the service that they can get and everything, without the responsibility. But many a one put into a nursing home becomes depressed and is very unhappy and interested in getting out. So we want to provide some type of service for them.﻿43 LFE: (cont.) When I talked in Jersey City about it, I forget his name now, who was head of that program from Washington, heard me and he invited me to come to the national meeting which was held two years ago in Atlanta, Georgia. He wanted me to speak on this very subject of taking unwilling senior citizens out of their home and placing them in nursing homes, or sending them to a hospital where they really are not getting much further treatment; a lot of examinations, but no progress in their physical condition. And we have been working on this now for more than two years. We even went over to New York to a program they had associated with one of the hospitals over there. They're parts of the staff of the hospital, they didn't need a bus or anything. All we want is a station wagon, where we could put in a laboratory technician, who can do an electrocardiogram and also take blood tests, a social worker, a nurse and a doctor, to go to the home and check up on the patient who can't get out unless they're taken on a stretcher. So they are beginning to make a little progress. I expect to go to a meeting this month with the mayor of Jersey City in order to get this program clinched, because I told him I'm tired of working without seeing progress. I had the pleasure in the past month of making visits to four of the senior recipients. One of the ladies that goes to the senior recipients was hospitalized herself, and I went and visited her, and she was lying up in that hospital. She just can't get out soon enough to go see the man who's blind that she takes care of. And then I went to several of the people who were in the homes, and I was very pleased last week when I went to one of them, a lady said to me, "I knew you, child, when you first came to Jersey City, I lived down the street from you. And I knew you'd have gone places, and I'd said then that girl's going places, and you have." And she was just as lively as she could be, but she does have to be taken out wherever she goes. But very happy in the low-income housing where she had lived for years. Now by saying I don't want to see them moved, I don't mean that a person has a big house like I had with ten rooms and full basement shouldn't move into a smaller quarters. But they should move into something that they know and feel is theirs, where they have their own furniture, and like I have, the pictures of their children all around the place, and it's home to them, even if it isn't palatial. I think that our government should concentrate on providing more of what they call the visiting homemakers to help them. I think they should take the people that are on welfare and whose children are in school, and give them training in home nursing for the elderly. Because after all, when I was in the hospital two years ago to get some diagnostic tests done, the person who did the most for me was a nurse's aide, not even a vocational nurse, an LVN—licensed vocational nurse. And those young people, and older people too, can put their heart and their love into helping to take care of somebody because they needed service, and when they are picked as the ones to give service they do it with an approach which I think is beautiful. And this would help some of the welfare problem, help the senior citizens to stay in their home as long as they do not need continuous medical care. They're happy, and many of us and them, even when we need care, want to stay and die in our homes.﻿44 LFE: (cont.) After all, the prolongation of life in misery for a little while with the terrible expenses incurred by medical examinations and tests, and now these new units that cost $1500 to have this examination, the various heart surgical methods which just within this past month in one of the medical journals is described as prolonging life for a little while, but the ones who got medical care did almost as well as the ones who had surgical care. I think we're running wild on specialization, and not spending enough time on the patient, and what can be done medically for the person. Do you know when I go to see these senior citizens, they say to me, "Well, doctor, you say I should have my doctor and go to my doctor—what doctor should I go to?" "Well, I'm an obstetrician/gynecologist, that's the reason I'm not going to treat you. But if you can find a family doctor, go to him." In this particular county, less than 19% of the doctors are family doctors, they're all specialists. I've met a woman at one of the low-income housing units, who said, "I won't be able to come in to get my blood pressure today, doctor, because I have to go to have this boil lanced. You know I had my gall bladder out, and while I was in the hospital I got that strep infection and I've had these boils all over my skin, and this is a very big one and I have to go to the doctor to have it lanced." So I said to her, "Well, you needn't worry about that because I'm sure the doctor that did your gall bladder will be kind to you." "Oh no, he won't do this, I have to go to another doctor to get that done." And this type of thing to me is inhuman. And it's ruining the health and welfare of people, because we're not doing enough early diagnosis. Do you know, our senior citizens who have money taken out of their social security check for prepaid medical care have to pay when they go to the doctor's office? At least the ones here, that are under Blue Shield. MT: But if they don't, they do not have to pay the full fee. If they do... LFE: If they have paid...that used to be $60, went up to $120, and now it's going up to $144, and many of the senior citizens that I see in this place where we are going this afternoon, say, "Doctor Edwards, I don't have $144 a year out of my small income to pay the doctor to look me over. Because it's only after that has been paid that I get my services without having to pay the full amounts." MT: That's true. LFE: So something has to be done. MT: Dr. Edwards, in addition to your medical services in several different areas, you've also contributed to mankind and humanity in the educational field, have you not? LFE: Well, my biggest contribution in the educational field is of my savings and earnings. I contribute nearly eighty percent of it to pay for tuitions for people who need it for their college education. And the last one was the endowment fund for a Howard University medical student. But in my actual work, I'm interested in the EOF program. MT: And what is that?﻿45 LFE: That is the Educational Opportunity Fund, which is what some people speak of as the open admissions. Giving the people in the low-income bracket opportunity to go to our large private colleges. And I have spoken to those groups as a guest speaker at banquets, and also at Saint Peter's College I act in somewhat an advisory capacity, but I prefer to call it "rapping" with the students. Students don't appreciate the word "counselor" much any more. MT: Oh, you haven't...What word did you use? LFE: "Rap." MT: "Rap?" LFE: That's the term they use. MT: Now how do you spell it? LFE: R-A-P. You talk to them and they talk to you. They tell you what to do, and you tell them what to do. And that way you're really communicating, and you become what I have a way of calling a big sister to the college student. I remember some years ago I was so much in love with the dean of women at Howard University, that I used to think of her, I said, "You know, when I get too old to run around, wouldn't I love to be a dean of women in a school." So the students come to me and ask me all kinds of questions. Like we used to go to Dean—I forgot her name—and I mentioned that at the board of regents meeting and told them, "Now I'm not trying to get to be dean of women of Saint Peter's College, but I want to be a big sister to students who are frustrated, and these students who are coming in from very poor cultural backgrounds are frustrated, whether you want to admit it or not. And some of them are dropping out. I don't want a single one to be dropped before I have talked to that student. " Because it's hard going into a school that has been known for its high culture and admitting only the top people's children, and suddenly be thrown into contact, even though they do very well with trying to integrate them into the program. But to me there is a tendency for them to be there on this side of the street and the others on that side of the street. And I think they should be melded, now that's a two-way street. There are some people in the school who are used to this type that they deal with who are not too pleasant, and the person who's always been stepped on still feels unwanted even though they're there. And they do not take the advantage of participating in the programs that have been made in order to meld the two groups. So when I sit and rap with the students, I let them know that this is ah opportunity not just to learn how to count and speak English correctly, but to develop your whole body, your whole culture, your whole life to make you a better person in your community. Not that you were not a good person in the community, but a mature person, a person who's never been opportuned doesn't mature very well in the line in which he's going to be making his contribution to society. And this is what your college education should mean to you. And just last year, they appointed me to the advisory council of the EOF program of Georgian Court. And I was guest speaker at their annual banquet.﻿46 MT: Georgian Court. LFE: Georgian Court College, here in Lakewood. MT: Oh here? LFE: ...which was one of the very, very select colleges for women in this country, and some of the foreign countries, on the former Jay Gould estate. I may have a minute to drive you around through there, it is a gorgeous place. And now they are asking for the EOF students to come and live there, if their family income is less than $10,000, as boarding students and get their entire education free. I keep in mind that I represent the poor. And I say to the good people, this is wonderful. But you need them as much as they need you, because our private schools would not be in existence without this program. They need the federal money from it. MT: Yes. LFE: And we want you to be conscious of that in your dealings with them. And don't make a lower standard for the student that comes in with the low entrance requirements. As Father Yanitelli says, he loves me because when he asked me what I thought of the program, I said I believe in open admissions to let them in, but 1 believe in closed graduation to make sure they're properly prepared when they go out, and not judged by a lower standard than your former standards. Because with the proper tutelage and inspiration and guidance, I think any student that gets into college can become a good student. You've taught for a long time, don't you feel that way about it? MT: To a certain extent, yes. LFE: I know I taught too. MT: Yes. LFE: And I know I used to go sometimes at eight o'clock in the morning and have my private sessions with a poor student. MT: Yes. LFE: And one of my poor students is now on the faculty of one of the big medical universities in this country. MT: That paid dividends. LFE: It paid dividends. MT: You mentioned your relationship with one of the deans of women. You meant at Howard University? But you didn't recall her name. Would it be Dean Slowe? Dean Lucy Slowe? LFE: The one that came after her.﻿47 MT: The one who came after her, yes. Dean Elliot? Not Elliot, because she was more recent. LFE: No, before... MT: Yes. Oh yes, I remember that name, I remember that dean of women, but at the moment, I don't recall the name. LFE: She was beautiful. MT: Yes. LFE: She was a beautiful woman. MT: Yes, yes. Now, Dr. Edwards, in addition to all your medical contributions and those in the field of education, I know you've made some in the field of religion. Particularly in the Lay Franciscans? LFE: Yes, I became a Lay Franciscan after I made the forty-year pilgrimage to Europe with my son and daughter. The National Conference of Catholic College Students and Newman Clubs had a pilgrimage in 1950 and Genevieve and Tommy, the one that's a priest now, went. And they told me I needed to take a vacation, which I had not taken in years, so I finally decided to go with them. That song came out, "It's later than you think!" at that time, and one time when Genevieve came home I said, "Gen, I've been listening to 'It's later than you think!' so I'm going with you." And they were very happy, because I really was a volunteer physician for the group that went to Europe at that time. And while I was on the trip—there were several Franciscans, twenty-one priests and a number of sisters and I said to one of the Franciscans, "You know, I've always wanted to be a Franciscan, but I'm not good enough." He says, "You don't become a Lay Franciscan because you're good enough. You become a Lay Franciscan because of the things for which we stand: poverty, chastity, and obedience." I said, "Well, I can take care of the poverty and the chastity, but I don't know too much about the obedience, because sometimes I have to rebel." He says, "That's okay too, as long as you talk about it to the proper authorities." So when I came back, I went over to New York because I was living in Jersey City then, to the Franciscans over there, the OFM's, Friars Minor, and became a Franciscan. And I've been very active in them since. When I left Jersey City and went to Texas, I used to travel sixty miles each way to Amarillo to go to meetings there, and then I was in the community of the Franciscans that had, every three or five years, a meeting, and this time in 1965 they were meeting in New Orleans. And one of the chief priests came up from Cincinnati to interview me at the clinic, and I thought he had just come to see the clinic so I was showing him around. He says,"I'm interested in what you're doing here, but I also have another reason for coming. We want you to be the guest speaker at our banquet." I was shocked and startled, but very happy to know that a black person was going to New Orleans to be the guest speaker at a banquet. And that was in August of '65, because it was after I had left the mission to go home and take my mother out of the nursing home. And I went down there, and it was lovely; I enjoyed it.﻿48 LFE: (cont.) But it was around the time that they were having housing problems there. Do you know, when I speak of Christianity, I speak of the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man, those are the only two commandments that are very important—to believe that God is the father and that your brother is your neighbor. And I mentioned to them that here you are grumbling over people moving into a neighborhood, when all over this country this housing situation is destroying the country. Because one Negro who has to be making as much money as people in that community, most of the time has a better job and a better education than his neighbors, moves into the community, your real estate brokers go around and ring doorbells, and tell the people that your property is going to lose value, because this person is there. If they were real Christians, they wouldn't even have to speak to the people because that's happened to me, in that community. Because they rent to live in a house, and not in anybody else's house. And they're usually very satisfied that way. But if you want to be a true Christian you could say how-do-you-do to them. And you would find out that they were very fine people. And you would tell that real estate broker, "No, I'm going to stay here." And your communities would not be deteriorating. And if they were not satisfied because you were very hostile to them, that one would move out, and you would still have your good neighborhood. So don't tell me that Negroes are ruining neighborhoods. Your real estate brokers are the ones that have been ruining the neighborhoods. And the other thing I told them is, when I was in Texas, I learned this, talking about brotherhood and charity. Don't think because people come from a different country, you're going to have to make them like middle-and upper-class Americans who live to keep up with the Joneses and have more than anybody else. Respect their culture, and respect their attitude toward their lives and their family, because many of them have better family ties than we have in our modern culture. So those were the two things that I emphasize, that Franciscans are brothers and sisters to their neighbors, they're not interested in keeping up with the Joneses, because poverty is our pledge. We are interested in the humanity of man, the brotherhood of man, and kindness to one another. In addition to, this was one of the big events, I have given talks as guest speaker to the Rosary Society meetings of other Franciscan groups also. I remember some years back I was the guest speaker at the annual banquet of the New York Fraternity of the Franciscans, and I've been to Rosary Society meetings in some of our most affluent communities of the Catholic church, as guest speaker at their annual luncheons or banquets. And it gives me an opportunity to let them know that I believe that the black man has a place in the Catholic Church—that was before the black caucus was organized. I have a little story that I read in one of the magazines once, that I tell them. A black man wanted to attend church and they wouldn't let him in. But he kept going and he kept going, because he thought that that was God's church and he wanted to be there. And one day while he was out there standing, trying to get in, a white man came and stood beside him, and asked him, "Well, why are you standing here and not inside?" He said, "They won't let me in." He says, "Well, I'm Jesus and they won't let me in either if they don't let you in." And I've used that as my speech for refusing to leave the church as so many of our black Catholics have done, because of the attitude toward them. And instead of making streams I have made bridges everywhere I go, in the Catholic church.﻿49 MT: Now you're saying many blacks are leaving the Catholic church. Many joined in the thirties. It was true in North Carolina, because the Catholics, before we had Social Security, before we had various aids from the government, the Catholic church in the time of the depression gave clothing and food and so on, and there was a great increase of Negroes joining the Catholic church. Now you say they're leaving. LFE: At that time, if I remember correctly, because my Genevieve was the first one christened in the black Catholic church in Jersey City, they were setting up more or less separate but equal churches for the blacks, which I resent. They should put them in the ones they have. But they did grow, they did grow then, quite a bit. MT: I thought so. LFE: But it was separate but equal. And they did get a number of people in the Catholic church, because Christ the King Church opened in 1930 in Jersey City, when Genevieve was born. And because they knew that I was a very active Catholic, they wanted me to have my child as the first one baptized in that church. But I objected to the fact that they could go to the schools, and everywhere, and why couldn't they go to the Catholic churches, and the Catholic schools in their neighborhood. But they said, which is true, that the colored came from places where they had been in the Catholic church in the South, that they didn't like going into the white churches. And that's why, they at that time set it right there in New Jersey, one in Jersey City, one in Newark, one in Montclair, and one in Orange. Now they didn't say "You have to go to that church." And that white people couldn't go to the black churches. But they set them up really as sort of mission churches. MT: In certain areas that were primarily black and thus by geography... LFE: In those areas that I've just mentioned. MT: Well, I think some are in Washington, maybe in Greensboro, the church would be in an area that would automatically draw the blacks and not the whites. LFE: That's right. MT: I see. LFE: But then came along in 1970 or '71 the National Black Caucus. MT: I know. Catholic. LFE: The Catholic Caucus. MT: Yes. LFE: And I'll never forget I read in the West Texas Register—the Catholic paper from Texas—which they still send me, because they had so many articles in there about me, when I was at the mission that they knew I was interested﻿50 LFE: (cont.) and they still send it to me every year, every week. And I read in there that this black Catholic caucus was having a meeting at Catholic University, and Bishop Perry, who had not long been ordained, was going to be the speaker. So I got in touch with my son John, that was possibly in '72, or '73, and—'72, because I was not here—and I said, "Call up and make arrangements for me." And he called back and said, "Mother, guess what they asked me when I called to make arrangements for you? They said, 'Is she black?' And I said yes. He says, 'Because if she isn't black she's not going to participate in our program.'" And so since then I have been black. MT: So blacks can be just as discriminatory as white? LFE: Oh, yes. Blacks are finally getting to the place where they are practicing discrimination in reverse. MT: "Oh, yes. Attempting it! LFE: So, this is very interesting, and it's a little off the subject but in this prejudiced community of Lakewood, to see the black men going around with blonde women is interesting, because the theory behind it is, "You took advantage of my grandmother. Now I'm going to take advantage of you." And that is something that's happening, when you talk about discrimination in reverse. But the black Catholic movement has done a lot of good. I followed them around, to their meetings, and was on the executive board for a while. Since then they've had three more bishops, we've had black pastors, we have been very well integrated into the existing churches, and I think it has been worthwhile. The only thing that bothers me, though, is that we haven't had our national meetings like we used to. We have regional meetings. And I hope it's not going to peter out, because we need it. When I first heard of the Black Catholic caucus, I said, "What do you mean, 'Black Catholic caucus'?" And I suddenly remembered that we had the ancient order of IIibernians,we had the Italian Catholic organization, the Ukrainian Catholic organization, the Polish Catholic organizations, and they organize for the same purpose of getting representatives in the church. And so we have a just cause. And it's for that just cause that I work. MT: They use the word "caucus." Is that copied from the black men in Congress? LFE: No! The word "caucus" started with the blacks, with the dark glasses and the fist. They had caucuses. MT: I know. Yes... LFE: And so therefore that word "caucus" was—black caucus—was repugnant, we didn't like it. But it is a word that has been used with the Catholics, with the Congress, meaning that we are getting together for our welfare. MT: The black congressmen and women call themselves the black caucus.﻿51 LFE: That's right. It's the getting together of people for their welfare. And so it's going on all over. So I think we're making progress in the church. We're certainly getting much more recognition. Just two weeks ago my son Tommy said mass in the crypt of the big shrine. MT: The Catholic Shrine of America? LFE: Catholic Shrine of America in Washington. He was the one that said the mass for a group from this area of Lakewood that went down, and he and I were the only blacks there. When I first got on the bus going down they looked at me as if I didn't belong there. But coming back they were all hugging and kissing me, because my son had said such a beautiful mass. MT: I know he could do it. LFE: He did. MT: His voice, his intonation, his approach is so superior to many that it's heart warming. LFE: Last night when you came, I gave him a letter from one of the persons... Tommy says mass here when he comes in that church where they looked at me as if I didn't belong there when I came. Not only does he say mass but the pastors always say, "When's your son coming? We want to arrange for him to say our mass." And last night I gave him a letter with a check in it for twenty-five dollars from one of the parishioners that I usually meet at the 8:30 mass in the morning, wanting him to say masses for some people who had died, because the calendar in this church is full for nearly two years. When Genevieve has a mass said for her husband, she has to make the date two years ahead of time. So they asked him. I'm always sending a letter to Washington, to Tommy, to ask him to say a mass for somebody who died in this parish. MT: That's fine. LFE: So we are making headway. MT: Now this leads up to a question I had hoped to ask about how you managed to get this cozy cottage, you call it, this home here on this drive in Lakewood. That is another story. LFE: Well, I'll tell you. When I had my seventy-second birthday, I had a family reunion at my place up at Watchung Hill, a big house, ten rooms, and a full basement, which was my summer home. And twenty-nine of my family were there. Almost all of my family, there were two that were not. One woman from Morristown, who had no family, and had a birthday the same as mine. So I had her there. And her friend. So, which was a little reunion. And as you saw when you came in yesterday, I always try to make for my children the things they love. And I had baked and cooked and had this big affair, all my preparation, no caterer. It was home to me, it was home, not bringing in a caterer, or going to a restaurant. A family﻿52 LFE: (cont.) reunion if you can get them together—I like to see them at home. So after it was all over, I was so exhausted I could hardly stand up. And my children swept and cleaned up the dishes, then they said to me, "Mother dear, it's wonderful for you to have a place like this, and you can sleep fifteen of us, because you like us to come home, but we all have our jobs and our work and our families. And you are really stretching yourself too far." And he and Genevieve particularly said, "It's time you're recognizing the fact that you have had six children, that want to do something for you. We want you to move in a small house of three or four rooms, near at least one of your children. We know you're going to be independent, but near one of your children. So that the day may come when we may have to help take care of you." So I said, "Well, I always told you that when you were little the dog wagged his tail, but now that you're grown the tail is wagging the dog. So you find a place, and I'll live in it." Genevieve and Tommy got together, and said, "Well, I think it would be nice if you lived near Genevieve, she's a widow and has a little boy, you can help her and they can help you." So I used to come down to Lakewood, on Sundays, because I was still living up there at Watchung Hill, took a look around to see what we could get. This was the fourth place that I saw, and almost was rejected here, except when the young man who had called up from the real estate agency came to the house, and Genevieve went to the door,she said, "Hi, Joe." And he said, "Hi, Gen," adding, "What do you want?" She says, "My mother's been looking for a place around here and you know the situation, she's having trouble finding what she wants to be near the lake. So that she can walk around the lake for exercise." So he says to her, "All right. I'll take care of your mother." And he brought me over and I saw this place — MT: [laughs] Outside or in? LFE: I saw this place, and I looked in that backyard and saw the houses that this man, the owner, had built, workshops, and I said to him, "Now we'll go in?" He says, "I can't take you in because I don't have the key, but next time you come down I'll have the key to let you in." So I looked around, and I saw all this, I call it, the Grandma... MT: Grandma Moses, you mean? LFE: The Grandma Moses woodwork, because he had done to crude wood many things which I thought were crude but beautiful. There was a windmill in the yard, that was all carved wood, with a little man that sawed when the wind blew. There were these statues, and the pagoda, and the log cabins made by hand, one with stained glass windows in it, and his workshop where he had all these things that he had made. And in one shop he made bird-houses, and sold them for a dollar and a quarter each. I peeked in the window and got an idea of the size of the rooms. And I said, "I'll take it" and gave the agent a check for $1,000 for fear he'd change his mind like the others had done. I came down the next week and went through the house. And then I saw the large rooms and the country kitchen, and the steel beams﻿53 LFE: (cont.) supporting the place, and I said, "This is the place that I'm going to get." And I decided to buy it. They weren't anxious to bring me back to look at it, until I had paid for it. I had to pay cash. But fortunately I've always saved a few pennies. And just before I came down here I had two jobs. I was working part time at Lyons, and I had worked part time before I came here at the place in Newark, in Plainville, inner city, to commute there. And some weeks I was working fifty hours. MT: These hours were in clinics? LFE: I worked some weeks eighty hours. Because I worked weekends and holidays at Lyons. And the weekend is twenty-four hours for Saturday and twenty-four hours for Sunday. And in between is sixteen hours, because you work from four in the afternoon to eight in the morning. And I saved all that money and I got it together with cash from my savings account, and paid them $26,900 for this house. MT: And then when did you move in? LFE: I moved in after I had paid for it and had the deed. And when I did, the neighbors looked at me and they gazed and they looked. So one day the people across the street, they were looking at me, and I decided to say how-do-you-do, and the woman looked up and came across. "Oh, you're Dr. Lena Edwards from Jersey City, you used to treat my family." She spread the news around the neighborhood. And after that, "How do you do, doctor? Which is something I resent. If you can't accept me as a plain, black person, don't hand me this crap about being a professional. Because a professional to me is just another human being, and I don't like special courtesies because I am one. If I was just struggling I expect just as much as you're giving me. MT: We are now adjourning the recording here at Dr. Edwards's home, to go to the John Currey low-income housing project for senior citizens, where Dr. Lena Edwards takes blood pressures and listens to the problems related chiefly to health and medication, but does not treat the patients, because senior citizens do not need an obstetrician, and today medicine is special ized. [Patients line up outside in the hall in chairs.] LFE: ...And he comes in occasionally to get his blood tested, too. How've you been feeling? Patient: Good. LFE: Good. No more trouble with the diabetes? P: No. LFE: How's your blood sugar?﻿54 P: Oh, it's...the last time I went, 110... LFE: Oh, that's very good. That's very good. But you've lost some weight. P: Sure, had to lose some weight. LFE: Oh, they wanted you to lose weight. P: Sure, you see I got up to 185, I went to 195 pounds. LFE: Oh, and how much do you weigh now? P: Now I weigh 175. LFE: Oh good, well you still have good weight. Though you've got to lose a little more, huh? P: A little bit, about five pounds more. LFE: Now are you still taking the insulin? P: Yeah. LFE: How much do you get now? P: I'm taking now twenty. LFE: Twenty units. P: Only twenty. LFE: Just once a day. And you feel good. P: I feel...I know, sometime I working too hard, you know, I'm tired sometime. LFE: Those leaves keep you busy out there now, or was a boy to do that? You still have the young man that helps...? P: Yeah. LFE: Uh huh. P: Yeah, he working here. Wes. LFE: What's his name? P: Wes. LFE: Wes, uh huh. I know I've seen him; he's a young fellow. Very nice guy.﻿55 LFE: Once when I was closed up he came in here to get his blood pressure taken, I said, "You're too late, come eleven o'clock!" P: He's a nice guy, very nice boy. Yeah, not bad. LFE: Of course you don't have much trouble with high blood pressure. You have 124 over 80 today, that's pretty good. P: Pretty good? LFE: Yes. Now you don't go and tell your wife it was low and have her scared to death, you remember that time? [laughs] It was sort of down and you went and told your wife...it was 120... P: 124 not bad. LFE: Oh, over 80. And this is all right. P: It's good? LFE: Yes, that's good. Oh yes, once it was down to 114, and that's when you worried. P: 114. LFE: But you don't have to worry, that's good blood pressure. P: Sometime it going up, sometime going down. LFE: But it's always within normal, so that's the important thing. P: Oh, yeah? LFE: Right. It's bound to fluctuate, as I often tell you folks, if I have this on your arm and I'm taking your blood pressure and the telephone rings, it will jump up a little bit. P: Oh... LFE: That's the upper part, what we call the systolic pressure. Diastolic one, the one that's at the bottom, is the constant stress and pressure, and that's the one we like to keep down, and yours has always been down, okay? You want to see if anybody else is out there? P: Oh yes, I can see... LFE: And let Mrs. Bookman know I'm here. [laughs] P: Who? LFE: Bookman, you know, the old lady down the hall... P: She died.﻿56 LFE: Bookman? When? P: You know what happen? LFE: When? Her name is on the list. P: Yeah. A car killed her two weeks ago. LFE: Oh___Bookman? The lady that lives right down the hall here, that always comes in with her pills? P: Yes. LFE: Got killed by a car. P: She died last week. LFE: It must have been last week because her name was down here for today. P: Yes, she came over here all the time. LFE: Yeah. Oh boy, that's too bad. P: Yeah. You know what happen? Her daughter took her for shopping? LFE: Yes. P: She parked the car and said, "Ma, don't go away, I'll be back in a minute.'" Well, she get out of the car, and run after another car. LFE: Yes. P: It killed her mother. LFE: Yes, I know, she had gotten to a place where she was wandering a bit. P: A wonderful lady. LFE: Yes, she was a nice old soul! P: A wonderful lady... LFE: She was a little bit...she was quite senile. P: Yes. So Friday, Saturday morning, I think. LFE: Yes, a week ago Friday. That's too bad, that's too bad. Well, gradually... P: You see what happened... LFE: You're here then, you're gone today! Okay. All right. See if anybody is out there. So, we'll put her on the bottom of the list. Every year we lose about two from this house, and it's Ida Bookman. She came regularly. Come in!﻿57 2nd P: Good morning. LFE: You want your pressure taken too? P: No. Did I have Dashefsky on that paper? LFE: Yes. P: Yeah. I forgot all about telling her about it, because she wanted me to put her name down. LFE: Okay. P: Let me get in touch with her. LFE: You tell her, and Mrs. Carlbutt's name's down here too and she's just down the hall. P: Yeah. Okay, I'll knock on her door. LFE: Okay, thank you. MT: What did he say happened to the lady who died? LFE: Automobile accident. MT: She got out... LFE: She got out of the car and her daughter told her to wait. And she wandered off, and a car came along and knocked her out and killed her. MT: Yes. LFE: And this is the thing that happens so often. In the first place, she had very poor vision. She came in here to me but she could hardly see. And I used to have her bring her bottles of pills, and I'd have to make a mark on them, something big that she could see, so that she'd know what each one was for. Because her eyesight was too bad to read the label. But she kept stirring around. MT: I know her daughter feels remorse. LFE: I'm sure she does, because she probably feels that if she hadn't taken her out, it wouldn't have happened. But that's the way life is, and you can't feel that way about it. Because I'm sure she was doing the best she could for her mother. MT: Yes. And admonished her to remain in the car. LFE: We run anywhere from four to ten, twelve people here. I'd say we make an average of eight. But they have a new program here now, we've had the Senior Companion Nutrition Program all along, but a number of the people﻿58 LFE: (cont.) in this particular project are Jewish. And finally through the Board for the Council on the Aging, that I told you I was a member of, they got a kosher meal... MT: Oh, yes... LFE: And the Jewish people go to the kosher meal. And that's what the first lady was talking about, that I saw. She was waiting for her bus, to take her... MT: Oh, they go outside the building. LFE: All of the nutrition programs are centralized someplace. Like for the general...for here, it's at YWCA. But this is at one of the Jewish synagogues. And those are the programs for Lakewood. But each one is set in a building someplace, not right in this house, in the house where the people are. But they bus them to wherever they are to go. MT: Well now, do they have facilities for preparing their meals in their own homes? LFE: Oh yes, they have apartments, they... Come in. Come on in, Carlbutt. 3:ed P: How are you? LFE: Oh no, you're, uh, Beverley. Are you coming to get your pressure taken? P: Yes, uh huh. LFE: Tell me, you went to the hospital after I saw you. P: Yes, the day after. LFE: The day after, Lyons V.A. Hospital. P: Yeah. No, I went to Paul Kimball Hospital. LFE: I don't mean...oh, with Paul Kimball? I meant to say, in Orange. P: No, I went to Orange, they kept me two days, I think. LFE: And then you went to Paul Kimball. P: I was in Paul Kimball's the next day after you checked me. LFE: Well yes, I remember telling you... P: Yeah, you told me about it... LFE: ...that your heart was a little irregular, and you had better slow down and stop smoking, and you didn't do what I told you to do. P: That day I didn't smoke many cigarettes.﻿59 LFE: That day! MT: Many! LFE: Many. MT: [laughs] How many? LFE: Bad boy. P: What are you gonna do for pleasure? You got nothing to do, huh? [laughs] LFE: This is exactly what I have been telling the people, that when a person reaches the age where they are not needed, or feel that they're not needed, that is the worst thing under the sun that can happen to them. They run for all types of escape, and usually their escape is not good. P: That's right. LFE: They go to the doctor and they tell the doctor what's bothering them, and very frequently the doctor gives them Valium, which I think you've had—you've had Valium, haven't you? P: Yeah. LFE: What are you taking now? P: I got three kinds of medicine, all of them are pills. One kind I take three times a day; one in the morning I take twice a day; the other one I only take when I need it, which is a nitroglycerine. LFE: Oh yes, that nitroglycerine you've had to take because you have had a coronary, right? You've had coronary, haven't you? What did they say was wrong with you when you went into the hospital this last time? P: Oh, a gas build-up from my heart. And my heart wasn't strong enough to pump it away, pump it off. LFE: Mm hmm. So, what have you got there now? P: Oh. I just can't sleep. I taking one out of there today. The white one I taking out, but those are what I have to take. LFE: Now the white one is nitroglycerine, that you put on your tongue? P: No, that's the one, the little white one there, that's the nitroglycerine. LFE: That's what I said, that little tiny white one is a nitroglycerine that you put on your tongue, when you get the pain in your chest. P: Yeah, when I get the pain. But this yellow one I have to take three times a day.﻿60 LFE: And what is that one? P: It's a heart pill. LFE: Take one out and let me see it. P: Yes, ma'am. I have to take two of these at a time. LFE: Now if I can see the name on here, I can identify them in my book. But I can't see a name on it. P: I got a bottle upstairs, I'll bring it down and let you see it. LFE: That'd be a good idea, after we get through. P: Yes. LFE: You bring the bottle down so that I can tell you what you're doing with that. Okay? P: Yeah, and then they gave me one water pill twice a week. LFE: So that makes the heart pill, the nitroglycerine for the angina, and the water pill... P: Water pill, and then another white pill with a little split end, something like this, but it's white. LFE: What do you take that for? P: Twice a day. Take that twice a day. I'll bring them down... LFE: Is that a tranquilizer? P: I'll let you see. It don't act like a tranquilizer, no. LFE: Just keeping a record of what I'm doing. Okay. We'll see what your pressure's like today, then. How's the wife? P: Fine. She went on the bus. I don't know whether she got back today. LFE: That's right, she works in the afternoon. P: Yes, she works in the afternoon. LFE: She likes the work too, doesn't she? P: Yeah, oh yeah. LFE: It's better than taking SSI and staying around the house, because then you have two of you 'round there moaning and groaning because you weren't working. [laughs] Mr. Dudley used to be the super here, but because of﻿61 LFE: (cont.) his heart condition he had to retire. But he still lives in the building because it is a building for senior citizens. Well, you have 150 over 78, which is not too bad. P: Not too bad. LFE: How about the cigarettes and smoking? P: Well, I don't do any of that so much as I used to. LFE: Any at all? P: I say, "As much as I used to." LFE: None at all. P: None at all? LFE: Definitely none at all and you know it. And how about the schnapps? P: Oh no. No, I never went for that all my life, so help me... LFE: A little bit, when you're up there with your friends playing cards? P: No, now wait a minute. Don't you know that the doctor tell me, my wife'11 tell you the same thing, to take a couple of gills of brandy every day and if there's any drop in my house I got a gallon, then. LFE: So you do take it. P: No, I don't... LFE: Oh, you don't. P: No, it's something I never went for all of my life! LFE: I know you haven't gone for it all your life. P: I'm telling you the truth, I never went for drinking, never. LFE: Well, that's good- P: Never, no sir. I have other sports that I love and I think it's much better for me than drinking. LFE: Uh huh. How do you make out with walking now, do you still get tired? P: That's what I was getting ready to tell you now. I have to walk from eight to ten blocks a day until I walk up to two miles. LFE: That's right.﻿62 P: Then you know, they get after me, they say, I got to walk two miles. LFE: They told you that after you had that cardiac catheterization, and they did a good analysis of you. P: They told me...yeah, they told me last Tuesday, a week ago tomorrow... LFE: They told you again to walk. P: ...and they told me to make sure and walk every day. LFE: Well, you know the heart can't stand too much. P: But, they told me one thing to do. That when the wind blowing real hard, walk with the wind, not walk against the wind. LFE: And did they say anything about covering your face? P: No, they didn't say anything about that. LFE: You know I've had a heart that acts up and I've had trouble with it for forty years. And if I get out in a severe wind, I have to pull my collar or something up around my face. P: Since you said that, I was going to the hospital one morning, going up for my checkup, and you know when you go up to the hospital, there's a hill you go up? LFE: That's it. That's on Orange... P: Orange, East Orange. And that wind was so strong...you know, when I got in that hospital, they started checking me, before they started checking on me, I had to go and lay down, not sit down, I had to go and lay down, but the doctor grabbed me right way and he said I changed color. And they told me it was from the wind. LFE: You still should walk your eight blocks and then finally two miles a day. But when you have your heavy winds, you walk up and down that corridor in here, instead of going out in it. Because it's not good for you. And then you won't fight it. P: But the wind really has something to do with it. LFE: Definitely. P: I'm telling you the truth. I mean I'm like this, I should do everything... LFE: How long have you known that you've had trouble with your coronaries? The first one I had was in 1969. LFE: That long?﻿63 P: In 1969. And the real bad one I had was in '70. LFE: Mm hmm. P: Real bad. That one was real bad. LFE: And the first time you came to me was in April of 1974. And at that time you had been to the clinic? P: That's when you sent me, right away. LFE: You had been to the clinic and they'd given you the once-over and sent you out, and I sent you with a note right straight back to the hospital. P: I went right back that same day and look, they kept me in the hospital, I think, around four weeks. LFE: That's right. And this is the type of thing sometimes senior citizens get—pushed over, right? P: That is the truth there, you got a point there. LFE: That's right. P: Well, my main trouble is this. I always had a job all my life. You understand me, for all my life, I worked hard, and it's so boring! I figure that that had more to do with me...after I quit work I didn't do anything and it was so boring just sitting around the house, and when I was driving my wife and I used to take little small trips and things like that, to get myself together, you know what I mean? But now I don't drive, I gave my daughter my car. LFE: Oh, you don't drive now. P: No. LFE: You feel like I do, huh? I'm not too safe at the wheel! P: Yeah, I feel like...because you never know when anything's coming at you. LFE: I know! I can tell you, I've had four of them. P: You understand me? And I know I can drive and I don't think that nobody my age is any better on the highway than I am. I've covered, I think, something like twenty-nine states. I mean covering with trucks and automobiles, you understand me, because I was a butler and a chauffeur and then I drove trucks for fourteen years. LFE: Mm hmm. P: Do you see what I mean? And that I know I can do, I know, but I'm just... done come to me, said, "Now sport, you have one of these like yourre going on home down to Virginia" or down to see my brother and Merle and something like that...﻿64 LFE: That's right. P: And nobody there, you see what I mean? 'Cause sometime my wife... LFE: Well, the thing that bothers me, the reason I won't drive, I wouldn't care if I felt bad and pulled into the curb and dropped dead, that wouldn't bother me, but if I hurt somebody... P: That's what I'm talking about. That's the only thing.' LFE: Because if I went and dropped at the wheel, my car kept going, that's what bothers me. P: Me, myself, I don't worry about myself, I worry about the other person even when I was driving. You know you have to drive for yourself and everybody else out there, you know what I mean? So I gave my daughter my car last Thursday, a week ago, and that following Saturday she went down to Norfolk to get her son's clothes, because he went to college down there, and bring them back. LFE: Well, you know what you have to do to get your trips in now? Ride with her. P: Look, I can call up right now, she'll come off her job and get me, you know what I mean? LFE: Good. That's right... P: She'll come, "What you want? Where you want to go?" You know, either her or one of the children'11 come and pick me up, yeah. LFE: That's great. P: So I told my wife, you know, "We should let the car go," like I bought it brand new and everything and the car wasn't damaged. I said, "Let's give it to her." She said, "That's just what I wanted to do." LFE: Because she doesn't drive, does she? P: No, she don't drive. LFE: Your wife's afraid to drive. P: Yeah. And then she don't drive and she don't want me to drive. LFE: Okay. P: You see? So I went to her first, you know?... LFE: Mm hmm, sure, you must ask your wife first. P: I said, "Let's give it to her." She said, "Yeah, let's give it to her."﻿65 LFE: Good. P: And I gave it to her the same day she said, "Let's give it to her." LFE: Good. Well now, you take care and drop in again to see me, and see if anybody else is out there waiting. P: Yeah, I'm gonna...I want you to see these pills. LFE: All right, but I want you to send the next person in while you're getting them. Because you live upstairs now, don't you? P: Yeah. They gave me a home here the rest of my life... LFE: Yeah, but you pay for it. P: "Not as much as the rest of them, you know. I could have got a pension, but I wouldn't take the pension because they give me... LFE: Oh...instead of taking the painting here you'd rather have the home... I don't blame you because you've had your bedrooms painted. P: That's right. I've had my bedrooms painted and my kitchen. LFE: So you don't need it. P: I don't need that. So the days I work here they give me a good break. So they ask me! They asked me which did I want? You know. LFE: Uh huh. That was when Mr. Goldberg was here, wasn't it? P: Yeah, but you see if I'd have done that, I'd have been paying for it $117 a month... LFE: For rent. I thought you only...that's right, they take out one fourth of your income. P: Yeah. Now I only pay two dollars a month. LFE: Good for you. Well you send the next patient in. P: All right. So long. Next! LFE: Hello, come on in. Have you been here before? 4th P: Oh, a long time ago. LFE: Long time ago. And are you Mrs....? P: Dashefsky. She spelled that wrong. It's D-a-s-h-e-f-s-k-y. LFE: ...e-f-s-k-y. Okay. If you've been here at all I should have your card.﻿66 P: Oh, it's a long time. You should have it. LFE: Oh, 110, I don't throw away records. P: No, I says, you should have it if you... LFE: Because a lot of you folks, you know, dropped out, and I put them aside. P: Yeah. Uh huh. LFE: And then, when they started coming again...Julia? P: Celia. LFE: Celia, that's right. Okay, Mrs. Dashefsky. How do you feel? P: Well, I've been out... LFE: What happened to your arm? P: I broke my arm about eight, nine weeks ago. LFE: Oh, boy. P: You know, I broke it in Asbury, and they took me to the hospital there, I was there twelve days, and at that time the pressure went up and the sugar went up with it... LFE: Oh... P; See I'm on, the sugar, on the borderline, you see? I don't take anything... LFE: Mm hmm. P: But now my pressure don't, I imagine, isn't so good lately. LFE: Okay, well we'll be glad to check it for you. Do you know, you haven't been here in three years. P: Yeah, a long time. 'Cause I've been going to the doctor's... LFE: Well, that's right. P: You know what I mean? LFE: You see, I don't take the place of your doctor, I just let you know in the meantime how things are. P: Yeah. I mean, I was going to him, in the past now...you know, I got trouble with my legs, and when I came home I can't sleep in the bed. 'Cause I sleep on the right side and I'm afraid I'm gonna hurt the arm. When I had the cast off I couldn't sleep at all, I used to...so my feet﻿67 P: (cont.) are bad, you know, now I got water coming out there. You see, I was by the doctor Thursday, he says don't do nothing until the water ...you see, it's this one, I got to march it around... LFE: Oh boy. P: You see, now, I'm... LFE: You have a lot of swelling in your legs. P: Yeah. There's a lot of swelling in the legs. LFE: Mm hmm. And you had varicose veins. P: Yeah, well you know, years ago I had an operation but they didn't do a good job on it. LFE: Yes. Well, you know, I used to do the injection of the veins but, you see, you have to have veins, and you try to eliminate the ones that are enlarged, and then you get some more circulation, and then they get enlarged too, and there's nothing you can really promise to get rid of it. P: Yeah. So I was there Thursday, he says he can't do nothing about it, he says put a band, you know, around it... LFE: Ace bandage. P: And so I took it off, you know, before, and... LFE: What do you bathe it with? P: He told me nothing, just plain lukewarm water, wash it off. LFE: Mm hmm. Well now, I haven't seen you in these three years but I notice that then you used to weigh 240 pounds. P: Yes. LFE: I don't have my scale any more... P: Only I'm ten, about ten or twelve pounds lighter... LFE: What do you weigh now? P: About 228, something like that. LFE: Well, hasn't the doctor been trying to get you down? P: Well, I've been trying to, on and off, on and off... LFE: You don't stay on your diet. P: I mean, that's it, but now I've been on, you know, I've been trying.﻿68 LFE: You're not taking insulin. P: No, I don't take insulin. LFE: And, you're taking blood pressure pills? P: Yes, I have the one with the... LFE: Do you know which ones? What's on the bottle, did they write the name on the bottle? P: Yeah, he did, what was the name...High Potention, potention something? LFE: Hydropress? P: No, not Hydropress, it's...I don't know... LFE: Well, I tell you what you do. You live here, and it's no trouble for you, so in the future, you come in at least every two weeks and let me at least tell you how it is. P: Yes. LFE: You know I'm not going to treat you. And you've got a good doctor and you stay with your doctor. P: Well you see, I have another... LFE: But at the same time, you need to know whether or not you're doing the right thing with your diet. P: Tuesday I'm going to instruction for the arm, because he's got to give me therapy. LFE: Uh huh. P: Wednesday I'd made an appointment for my doctor. See, Wechsler is my foot doctor and Geraldi is the medical doctor, so I have to be there Wednesday. LFE: For the blood pressure? P: For pressure and sugar, you know. LFE: Uh huh. Well you be sure to do what they tell you to do, and I know darn well that if you were on your diet, you should be losing more weight than you are. P: But I'm not losing because I'm slowing... LFE: Ah, you like to eat, huh? P: No, I'm not a big eater.﻿69 LFE: Your blood pressure now is 184 over 94. P: It's been going down, then. LFE: It's going down? P: It was over 200. LFE: Oh boy. Do you use salt at all in your food? P: Not that I know of. My friend does the cooking, she says she don't use it. LFE: Does someone live with you? P: Yeah I live with a friend. We share an apartment. LFE: Because you shouldn't touch salt or food prepared with salt, or canned foods unless they're dietetic, because they all have salt in them. P: They all have salt in it. LFE: Mayonnaise dressing... P: I don't use mayonnaise. LFE: Any kind of salad dressing that's prepared has salt in it. P: Well, I don't use that. I don't use no salad dressing, I don't eat no salads. And the boxes of frozen foods. LFE: The frozen vegetables are okay. P: That's all right. LFE: They should not have salt in them. They have some chemicals in them, but they don't have so much sodium. P: No. Well, it's 184... LFE: How about your diabetic foods? P: Well, I mean, I don't eat no candy or cake or all that sort... LFE: How about bread? Most of you diabetics are bread eaters. P: I have maybe a slice or two a day of toast. LFE: Is that all? P: That's all, absolutely.﻿70 LFE: Good. That's good. P: I was never a bread eater. If I have a meat meal, I don't touch bread. It's like now, in the morning I get up, I just have coffee, I can't eat anything. Or sometimes I have a juice. And then about one o'clock I'll make myself a scrambled egg with margarine, and a piece of toast and coffee, and that's it. You see I don't eat no big meals at all times. LFE: You don't eat eggs more than twice a week, do you? P: Yeah. LFE: Because they're high in cholesterol, and that's not good for your blood pressure. P: I don't know about my cholesterol though, I have to take a test on that... LFE: Uh huh, well you ask the next time, see how it is. P: I'll ask them when I go there. LFE: Because they say that, when you've had any hypertension... P: Yes, hypertension... LFE: ...you shouldn't eat cholesterol, eggs, more than one twice a week, because of the cholesterol that's in them. And fats, you stay away from fatty foods. P: Well, I don't have no fatty foods. LFE: What do you eat beside your main meal? P: Like I have a hamburger, you know... LFE: Your main meal. P: A hamburger, or I'll have steak broiled, a piece of fish broiled... LFE: And some kind of green vegetables? P: A green vegetable, you know, I don't get the canned ones. LFE: What do you have for dessert? P: I have, I got the diet foods... LFE: Oh good. p: ...peaches, pineapple, and then sometimes I take a banana. In the hospital they used to give me a banana, but I don't eat no desserts.﻿71 LFE: Grapefruit? P: Grapefruit I'm not so crazy about. LFE: Don't like it much, huh? P: No. I have orange juice once in a while, because orange juice is a little acidy for me. I know years ago I couldn't take acid in my system. That's what it was. But I want to ask this. Is that dangerous like this if this is open? I mean I'm going to put the... LFE: No, I wouldn't say... P: You see, he wants some water to come out. LFE: I don't think there's any immediate danger. P: No? LFE: Did he tell you to sit with your legs up? P: Yes, I have to be with my legs, when I sit,up. But the only thing is, when I lie down like on my easy chair there, I put my foot up and my legs but then during the night I got to take it off, you see. LFE: You have difficulty lying down in bed. P: You know why, because... LFE: Now why, is it because of your arm, or do you get short of breath when you lie down? P: No, no, I'm not short of breath. LFE: Your heart seems to be acting up okay. P: I mean, half-in-half, you know. But the thing is this here so when I sleep for two hours, or an hour and a half, and I get up, you know, 'cause the only way I slept all my life was on my right side. If I could turn around I would sleep on the left for a while. But as soon as I get up, I can't turn, I get up and go sit down on the chair, put a pillow and prop up, sit up and sleep. LFE: But, when you're sitting on the chair, you've had your legs up on something. P: I've had it up, but during the night, you know, I got to take them off. Because I get up, and I feel that they're off, you see. LFE: Well, in the future if you want to sit up, why don't you prop yourself up in the bed, because your legs should always be at least as high as your hips. And that's how you get some of that swelling out.﻿72 P: Uh huh. LFE: Plus, as I say, be careful with your diet. ...record of some of the things I was doing. Say, "Well, you can stay with me today but I got to see my old-timers." P: [laughs] LFE: Because you know I'm one of them. And the reason I come here is because I'm so used to being with patients. I'm lost without them. P: I see. LFE: So, it's much more important for me to talk with people than it is to sit in the office and make money. Because I don't need that now, when you get older you don't need much. Am I right or wrong? P: That's true, too. LFE: You don't need much. P: When you get much older you don't need as much as when you were younger. So it's mainly take care of that salt business. LFE: You're ten years younger than I am, though. P: Am I? LFE: Yeah. P: I feel like fifty years older! LFE: But any rate, take care. P: I could walk very well... LFE: Well, you take care, and you come down here every other week. P: You see I haven't had shoes on for about nine weeks. That's why I want to go and get myself a good pair of shoes. When I go to this doctor, we'll see if he tells me to take this out of my... LFE: Your shoes won't help you walk and you've got to get some of the weight off, and some of the water out of your legs. And you take some pillows, or have you ever seen a person turn a chair up in the bed like this? And put a pillow on it and prop themselves up? You can do that with an ordinary chair. You don't have an ordinary chair around here. P: Well, I have one upstairs...﻿73 LFE: But you may be able to open a chair, show her what I'm talking about, with one of these chairs... MT: [demonstrating] This is your bed...you put your chair like this, with that right back... LFE: Yeah, put your chair up in it like that...no, wait a minute, open it, and then put a pillow on it, and prop yourself up in the bed. Because you see your chair will have a back to it and everything. And prop yourself up in the bed. P: Yes. Well, we'll try something, we'll try something... LFE: Yeah, because I don't like the idea of sitting up at night, because you're not getting the circulation in your legs that you need, and that's the reason the water is coming out. P: Circulation in my legs, and I try to walk as much as I, you know, could, in the lobby up and down, and then back; then even when I'm in the house, you know, I walk from the bedroom to the living room, the kitchen. LFE: Yeah, to keep your circulation up. P: I march back and forth, back and forth. My friend says to me, "What's going on?" I says, "Well I got to keep walking, I got to keep going," I says, "because we never know what's gonna be, and..." LFE: Well this arm should be almost healed up, does it bother you much? P: Yes, it is; it doesn't bother me as much. The whole arm had a few cracks in it. LFE: Oh, this is just a sling cast now. P: Yeah. LFE: Just a sling. P: You know, I forgot all about today, the super called me... LFE: Yes. P: This is just a sling, see here is where it was broke, from here up to here. LFE: Oh good, a humerus. P: But today— LFE: You're lucky it was in this bone, because they could set that one.﻿74 P: And, he didn't have to set it, the cast did. And I had the cast on for about six weeks. Now it's about three weeks that I've been out. And I do exercise like, I take this off... LFE: And try to stretch it... P: Up, and I stretch it up, and then down. LFE: Did he tell you to put it up yet? P: He didn't tell me yet, but I imagine he will. LFE: Well, don't do any more than he tells you to do. P: You see... LFE: Don't do anything he doesn't tell you to do. P: You see, all I could do is this here, now... LFE: All right. P: This, I got to do it and I didn't do it today. I got up, I was upset. LFE: You need to put something like baby powder there. P: Yeah, I know I will when I get washed. LFE: That's from the sweat. P: I haven't been washed, or nothing, I was so upset today, I don't know why. Because of my leg, that's the only thing, and I figured the arm is going to heal. You know what I mean? LFE: Well, you can get that water out of your leg if you watch that salt, and watch the diet... P: But could I keep the what-do-you-call-it on, the... LFE: Bandage? P: ...bandage on"? LFE: Yes, that would help. P: And while it leaks out? LFE: Get the friend that stays in your house to wrap it, not too tightly. P: I could do this myself. LFE: Can you do it?﻿75 P: Yeah. LFE: With one hand? P: Yesterday was the first time I put it on in two days, I suppose, but I took my arm out of there, and I just sat and I did it because I never asked her to do much for me. The only thing I ask her is to just button my brassiere! LFE: [laughs] In the back, huh? Next time you buy a nursing brassiere, it'll button in the front! P: Yeah, and the thing is this year I didn't put my girdle on, you know, I never go without a girdle and brassiere... LFE: That's okay. P: First time in my whole life. And I thank you very much... LFE: You're welcome. And you come in in two weeks... P: You'll be here in two weeks? LFE: As a rule, every Monday, at eleven o'clock. P: Oh, so you mean now every two weeks. LFE: But you come in two weeks. Unless you want to come down next week because your pressure was so high. P: All right, I'll see, I'll be up. LFE: Okay. P: Thank you very much. LFE: Well now tell anybody else that may want to see me to come in. P: [outside] Does anybody else want to go in there? LFE: You're gonna get your blood pressure today? 5th P: Yes, please. Well, I want to ask you about that Pap test. They don't have it no place here? LFE: Oh, don't talk about that Pap test. P: What, what's happening? LFE: Well, they're not doing it like we want them to do it. I'm still trying to get a program going for here. P: Yeah, because I can't afford to spend much money.﻿76 LFE: Have you had it at all? P: I haven't had it now for about a year and a half. LFE: Well you know, we had it last year, in April. P: But I didn't know that. LFE: But you didn't know it. Well, if I hear of a place around here... P: Because you know between these doctors, and these fees, I do not know what to do, I have no vision here, you know. I was completely blind, two months ago. LFE: Why? P: I don't know. Something happened to my eye, and I went to Dr. Berkowitz, and he was giving me drops and everything, but nothing helped. So then I went to my husband's doctor, Dr. London, and he gave me medication for a little over a month and it's getting much better. LFE: Good. P: It's the beginning of a cataract, too, and then two other things. But he said I had... LFE: It's not glaucoma, is it? P: No, no. I don't know, two names, I can't...I don't know what it is. LFE: Well now, Mrs. Aveles is the wife of the first...the man that was in___ P: The Spanish fellow, the little one with the mustache. That's my baby! LFE: [laughs] You're his baby. P: Yeah, well, we're each other's babies. LFE: Yes. Okay. So let me check your blood pressure. His was okay today, I told him, now don't you go home and tell your wife it was low, because it was good—120. P: Yeah, that's good. LFE: And yours doesn't stay high either, does it? P: No, no. Only sometime when I get aggravation. [laughs] LFE: Well, you haven't had much aggravation... P: Only this morning.﻿77 LFE: What happened? P: A lady calls me up and she says, "There's a man trying to get in checking my television; I didn't order them." LFE: Oh... P: And he tried to get the foot in the door. LFE: Oh... P: Well, I said, "Let me see what's going on." So I see the man coming out of the elevator and I ask him, I said, "May I ask what you're doing in the building?" I see him at the door. So he says, "It's none of your damned business." I said, "Oh yes, it is my business; I'm the super's wife. And I like to know where you're going." So he says, "Well, call the office." I went over to the office... LFE: Did he go out? P: Yeah, he went out. But, so the man in the office, he says to me, "Yeah, there was a man in the building, I sent him over there." I said, "Mr. Welschlager, you might be the executive, but you don't know what you're doing. Because if you send a man by himself to the building, you got to realize that there's old people by themselves." I said, "At least you should let the super and his wife have the knowledge that somebody's in the building..." LFE: And let them get in by your doorbell so that you will let him in. P: That's right. See, they have no system here, no system. They do what the hell they want. They think they smart, they are not, they very dumb. LFE: Mm hmm. P: Because we are supposed to know who the people are. LFE: Of course, especially if somebody's coming to work. P: They have no system. No system. LFE: If someone pushed at the door and saw the man with something in his hand... P: So he says, "Well then, next time," he says, "I going with him." I says, "That's the way it should be done." LFE: That's right. Somebody from the office... P: See, I'm not afraid of them. Because I know... LFE: ...should either come with him or call you and tell you to let him in.﻿78 P: That's right. LFE: That's the way it should...well, that's good, I'm glad. Well, I don't guess your blood pressure went up too high, because of that, we'll see. Little bit. You have 140 over 82, and you don't usually have quite that high. P: No. LFE: But it's not high, it's normal. P: I'll live.' LFE: It's still normal. P: Yeah. LFE: Well, that's right, you keep on taking good care of these folks here. P: Oh yeah. I have to. Because look, the rapist, he is not gonna say, "I'm the rapist," with a big sign, right? You don't know who he is. He doesn't dress any different. That's what I'm trying to say. I'm trying to protect people if I can. LFE: Sure, I don't blame you. P: But if people don't help me, if the executives, if they don't work with me, they work against me. You can't work that way. LFE: That's right. You know, isn't this something, Mrs. Bookman's name is on this list, and she had it for last week, and she died the week before. P: Yeah. Oh, I was so sick about that. LFE: Yes, her husband was telling me...the little lady down the hall. P: Yeah. LFE: She was so sweet! P: You know, sometime she would come for any little bit. Sometimes she ignored me because, you know... LFE: I know, she was always asking for someone to do something for her... P: You know, "Open my can," and "Open this," and sometime she come down the hall and sometime maybe I'm rushing to the bathroom and I couldn't get in the toilet, just because she was...you know, sometime people knocking around. But when that happened, I couldn't sleep all that night. I said, "Oh my God, look, sometime I was short with her," you know, "oh please, God, forgive me, for it, you know, because I didn't mean to." I couldn't sleep all that night, I was drinking tea at three o'clock in the morning.﻿79 LFE: [laughs] Well, see if anybody else wants to see me. P: Yeah. Okey dokey. LFE: Tell them to come right in. Oh, here you are! I thought you weren't going to make it here! 6th P: Yes ma'am! I went to eat a little dinner. LFE: You took a walk...oh, you ate first, huh? P: Oh yeah. LFE: Well let's see now. It's not twelve o'clock, so, that's okay. How are you doing, Mr. Deveron? P: Oh, pretty good. LFE: Did you finish painting that house? P: No, ma'am. I'll be there till next spring. LFE: Well, you take your time. P: Oh, I'm doing it. LFE: Mr. Deveron likes to work. He doesn't like to be unemployed. So, he gets little jobs painting, because that's what his work was. And so he was painting the house across the street... P: Yeah, I've been painting that a long, long time now. LFE: Hmm? P: I'll be there till next spring. See, because she wanted all the inside painted. LFE: Oh boy. P: But she wanted to wait till after Christmas to start the inside. LFE: Yeah, because, gotta get things straightened up, huh? P: Uh huh. LFE: Okay, we'll see what your blood pressure's doing. P: Then I got a house up on the boulevard, old lady wants me to paint, but that's outside, see... LFE: What boulevard? P: Up on the, what's the president's name who got killed...﻿80 LFE: Kennedy. P: Kennedy Boulevard. LFE: John F. Kennedy. P: Yeah, yeah, that's right. LFE: I think I know where that is. P: But it's too cold up there now, it's outside, see. And the paint she use would freeze, that latex. LFE: Yes, it does. P: "If it was oil paint, it would be okay. If it was oil paint, I wouldn't mind if I was working today. I haven't worked many days outside as cold as this. LFE: Well, you take it easy. P: I'm taking it easy. Yeah, I just... LFE: You just do enough to keep you active. P: Sometime I work six hours a day, sometimes seven, eight, sometimes... LFE: You work that long? P: Sure. LFE: But you rest in between, don't you? You take time out for dinner and sit down and rest? P: No, I don't rest. If I go there like eight o'clock, I work till four and come home and eat dinner, and stay there. LFE: And no lunch? P: No, I don't carry no lunch. LFE: You shouldn't skip a meal. You know that. P: Well, I... LFE: You know you're not supposed to skip a meal? P: Now the lady, the lady...so, I can fix my lunch right there because she's in school every day, and nobody there but me, with her working and the boy's in school. But I just don't start to fix nothing. LFE: Well, I'll be.﻿81 P: You know what I do? Now I cooked my dinner last night for today. And today I just warm it up, see. LFE: Well, I do that too. I live alone and sometimes I cook enough meals, food for four days and just warm them up. P: Oh yeah, sure, I do. LFE: Because I don't live to eat, I eat to live! P: Right, sure. LFE: Okay, Deveron, let's see what your pressure is. 150 over 58. P: Hmm. Well how is that, pretty good or what? LFE: Now let's see what it does compared to the last time...the last time, it was fluctuating to around about the same. P: About the same? LFE: See, some of your beats... that's the reason I don't want you to work too hard. P: I don't work too hard. LFE: You see, some of your beats come through stronger than others, which means there's some little weakness in your heart muscle. And you don't want to push it too hard. P: I don't push too hard, no, I don't. LFE: And be careful climbing the ladder. P: I don't climb high, just... LFE: You're tall enough so that you don't have to do much climbing, huh? P: I don't go up a bit high on a...oh, about like here. LFE: Mm hmm. P: Just about like here. For most of my work I was down on the floor. Now last time I painted, I painted all the outside, way up there, but I was way up there. About five years ago, I was way up. LFE: Didn't you do some outside painting this summer? P: Uh yeah, over there? LFE: That house across the street. P: Yeah, but I didn't go up high.﻿82 LFE: How did you get that up high? P: I didn't go up high. I only went up about...I only had about a ten-foot ladder, see. LFE: You went up to the second story. P: Yeah, went to second story. [laughter] LFE: That's very high for me. I'd be so dizzy I wouldn't be able to stand up. P: Well, I'll tell you. Now I'll tell you one thing. If it weren't for my legs, I would've gone up and paint. But my legs are so bad, I'm afraid I'd give out on 'em. See, I don't walk...if I walk as near as the store, got to stop two times, sometimes three. LFE: That's not all your legs either. P: What is that? LFE: Your whole circulation, that's what I'm trying to tell you. Some of your beats come through hard, and some of them come through weak... P: Well, you know what... LFE: I want you to exercise. P: Yeah, but... LFE: You just don't push yourself. P: No. Now when I walk, feel like I'm walking on ice. LFE: Mm hmm. P: There's no blood going to my feet. LFE: That's what I said, circulation. P: Now the doctor told me he could operate on my leg, and bypass a vein in there, to make blood go down to my feet. But he says it wouldn't be necessary, but I think it would be, because I don't want to walk crippled all my life, the rest of my life. LFE: You can walk, can't you? P: Walk, yes'm. LFE: If he says wait, you wait. [laughter] Don't worry about the operation if the doctor says you don't need it, now. Okay?﻿83 P: Well now, I'll tell you. Now you'd be surprised. Now if I walk from here to the store I feel like I'm walking on ice, my feet. And catch the cramps so bad at night in my legs... LFE: Yeah, I know. P: But that's all poor circulation. LFE: That's circulation, that's right. P: Now I got all those big pills, but I don't take those things—they're too big. LFE: Well, why don't you take what the doctor gives you? P: Oh, that pill's big as my thumbnail. That's poor treatment for...a icy foot. LFE: You had a little red and white capsule... P: That's the pressure pill. LFE: Yeah, do you take it? P: Oh yeah, every day, one a day. LFE: And the big pill that you don't like to take is to improve your circulation. That's Vasodilan, and it's supposed to help your circulation—you should take it like he told you. P: Well, I'd better start taking those things. LFE: You take it like he told you. Okay? P: They're so large, though. Bigger than... [laughs] Almost bigger than... LFE: That's all right...anyway, you take them like he told you, if you can't get it down whole, break it in half. P: They got a crazy... LFE: I know. But you take those. That's what he gave them to, for the circulation... P: Yeah, he did, he did, but I haven't taken any in over a month. Well... LFE: Well, you take them and get yourself better. Okay? P: Well, I guess I'll start, I'll take them. LFE: See who's next. P: Well I ought to, but, when I tell you, it's so large...﻿84 LFE: [laughs] Break them up. And take them. Okay? P: I can break them in half, like...I'm going to start them. I've got to take...four a day. LFE: Oh my gracious me. Well, you get back on taking them, huh? P: I will. Thank you. LFE: You're welcome. Get the next one. P: Okay. [There were no more patients. The clinic was over.] MT: Dr. Edwards, I'd like to ask you a question that has nothing to do with medicine or my condition, but how can a man, who goes out to walk in the wind, follow the doctor's instruction to walk with the wind? How would he get home? LFE: That's right. [laughs] MT: Can you answer that question? LFE: No, I can't answer, that's the sixty-four dollar question. That's the reason I tell him...for instance, if I had on this coat that you have on, I would do this—I'd cover up my nose. I'm doing that all the time that I'm out, and I get caught in the wind. MT: Thus ended the morning of November 14, 1977, at the John Currey low-income housing project for senior citizens in Lakewood. Here Dr. Lena Edwards, one of the most distinguished lay missionaries of the twentieth century, continues at the age of seventy-seven to minister to the elderly, both white and black. The concept and ideal of mission, Dr. Edwards apparently transmitted to one of her six children, her tall, handsome and soft-spoken son Thomas. (May I interject, all her sons and her two daughters are attractive.) Thomas, in becoming a member of the Catholic priesthood, adopted the name of Saint Martin, a mulatto priest of South America who was canonized in the eighteenth century. Father Martin Madison is now director of the Newman Center of Howard University, named for the renowned John Henry Newman, English cardinal and writer of the nineteenth century. END OF INTERVIEW﻿LENA F. EDWARDS..