 Derria Byrd: Derria Byrd interviewing Joyce Richardson--March 22, 1995. What were your life experiences which led to your decision to attend Brown? Joyce Richardson: Uh, life experiences. Well, I don't know if they were life experiences. But I was attending a progressive boarding school and the advisor sort of wanted to know what I wanted to do for college, and I didn't really know. So he and some other people suggested Radcliffe, Holyoke, Bennington, and Pembroke. The wife of the head master was instrumental in getting me to apply to Bennington. And the others really I didn't know anything about 'em so I was going somewhere to college and I was attending that boarding school on scholarship. Did you ever hear of the National Scholarship Fund for Negro Students? DB: Yes. JR: Okay. Well, they were very instrumental in getting me to go to the Putney School, which is where I went. And to show you how childish I was at the time, I know they provided some funds for Pembroke but I really never knew the details. They came and visited me sometimes but they just basically provided support. And they were a little bit like the ABC Program in that they scouted out talented students. But, I mean it wasn't really the life experiences that were that important. I can tell you why I went to Pembroke instead of the others if you want to know. DB: Sure. JR: (laughs) I didn't get into Radcliffe. Holyoke and Bennington were both out of the city and women's colleges. And at that time I didn't have the enlightenment to be (laughs) interested in that. So I am from Washington, DC which sort of a little small town (DB laughs) and Providence is a little small town. But the main thing that turned me on about Pembroke was something called the IC [Identification and Criticism of Ideas] courses. Do you know what that is? DB: No. JR: Well, I think it was a Carnegie. This was sort of "pre-new curriculum." I think the Carnegie Foundation paid them to have freshman and sophomores actually be taught by professors as opposed to teaching assistants. And so these were small, I think there were maybe sixteen students in a class, but with real professors freshman and sophomore years. And they were discussion classes and they were really very comparable to the kind of education I was getting at the progressive Richardson - 2 school. And Holyoke seemed very nice and friendly except that they went out of their way to show me this new Phys Ed complex ... DB: Yikes. JR: With a huge swimming pool and I was deathly afraid of swimming so I thought, okay, all things considered, it is Pembroke. And then when I got to Pembroke and they had these...you know, there was required physical ed. It was just like you had a choice. You had to have a team sport and an individual sport and dance and to my horror you had to pass a swimming exam. (DB and JR laugh) DB: Could have gone to Holyoke. JR: (laughs) Exactly. And, in fact, every semester when I signed up for these sports, I tried badminton which was nice. And I took field hockey and that was dreadful. I hadn't developed any.. .! was the opposite of a jock. I wasn't into aggression at that point. That was a repressed part of my personality. (DB laughs) And they kept saying: "Well, what about your swimming, what about your swimming?" So finally I took swimming. And I was terrified. Someone had nearly drowned me when I was 12, but anyway, I got over that. And it was senior year in the spring time. And the question was was I ever going to graduate from Pembroke at that point. So they .. .! went for my swimming test. By that time I had learned to float. DB: Yes! JR: (laughs) So the assistant gym teacher yelled down to the chief gym teacher, "What should we have her do?" And she yelled back, "Anything she can do." (DB laughs) So I floated for them and I don't remember what else. But that were quite merciful and I'm very grateful because I would be there 'til this day. So I think that pretty much covers how I ended up at Pembroke. DB: What were your expectations upon coming here? JR: Well, it's interesting ...the IC course business had me thinking that it would be very much like my boarding school. I didn't have much world experience so I think that is pretty much what I expected. Another woman from my high school, Sandy Wolcott--also class of '63, was going. And I guess that I must have thought that it was going to be more of the same. I really didn't think about it too much, you know? DB: When you were attending Pembroke how common was it for your immediate family members or relatives to have gone to college? JR: Very common. My... as I said, I grew up in Washington and ...have you heard of the Dunbar High School there? Richardson - 3 DB: Yes. JR: Well, it was a very important institution for preparing people for college, I mean it was a classical high school. And my grandfather had gone to that high school. My mother went to that high school. My two aunts went to that high school so pretty much.. .it is pretty remarkable when you think of it. I mean my grandfather graduated from Dunbar in, I think, 1911. And of course Howard University was there so that was an important college destination for people. He actually had a scholarship to Howard. My father grew up on the campus of Talledega College in Alabama. So it was kind of in the air. So it wasn't a question of if, it was a question of where. And until I went to Putney, I thought, "Oh I guess I'll go to Howard." I really hadn't thought about it that much. So it was pretty common. DB: When you came to Brown, how similar or dissimilar was your high school to the environment you were now in? JR: (laughs) I would say that it was so dissimilar that it was breath-taking. It was-­ how shall I describe this--what struck me immediately, and what my little coterie of snobbish friends would focus on was what we would call the Penny Pembrokers who we stereotyped as having.. .! mean we had several stereotypes. One was that the women at Pembroke were a lot smarter than the guys at Brown. The other was that the purpose of the Penny Pembrokers was to come to Pembroke to catch the men at Brown. And my little--I guess freshman year I was at Whittier, I don't even know if it still exists--it was one of those little houses, you know. And I guess if you had seen the expression on my face, it would have just been mostly horror. I mean, which I shared with some of my close friends. But it just seemed to me that they were...well it seemed to me that I had entered hell. That was really the extent of it. DB: YIKES! JR: No, because here I had come from this place where there were no final exams. You did independent studies; where people talked about books; where they sang; where there were no grades, so your motivation for doing anything had nothing.. .! mean that is sort of new curriculum. Your motivation for doing anything had to do with the fact that you were interested in it. And there were requirements, as there were at Pembroke at that time, but it was just a whole other world. I mean, to sum it up, the way I felt: "Oh my God, I am in a world where women play bridge." (DB laughs) DB: A little foreign to you. JR: So it was very foreign. But the other feature was that I really encountered racism for the first time, and I was like a .. .! don't think that you could be more ill­ prepared than I was for the experience. Because ... I mean, and as I have thought about it over the years, it was totally ironic. I grew up in a household where, you Richardson -4 know, my grandfather wrote the first play written by a black that was produced on Broadway. He was involved in a lot of the cultural activities sponsored by or encouraged by the NAACP and the KRIGWA Players. In fact my parents met in the KRIGWA Players. And as a kid we had...there already was, you know, black literature for children, encouraging racial pride and all of that stuff. But I don't know why they never.. .! mean, they didn't know this world of Pembroke and Brown and Putney and stuff but...and they lived in a racially segregated world which was--from my point of view--it was fine. I mean it was .. .! went to Banneker Junior High School in Washington which was a really excellent segregated junior high school. And I took lessons-music lessons--from the age of six at Howard University in the Junior Music School. So that, I guess, maybe they didn't...maybe they didn't know what to expect. They certainly knew about racism, for God's sake, in the more brutal and dramatic things like lynching and like the pictures... they received the magazine--I can't think of that name of it--put out by the NAACP where they showed these shabby little black schools in the South. So they knew about these things. But there was no current language, as there is now, to articulate what the experience is of racism or pseudo-speciation or however you want to understand these experiences. So here I was going into this world, as I say, now, I mean this saying this, it is easy to understand why I was so messed up. I really went in with the expectations that I had had with my experience at Putney, where if I encountered racism, I didn't know it. I just went there and did my thing just as I had done at Banneker Junior High School. You know, I mean, in elementary school I was president of the student council and, at Banneker, I was...you know I had always done well and I did well at Putney and so, you know, "what's the problem." Well, this was shock. To give you an example. It was a shock but I didn't. ..! was shocked into silence. I never ever discussed this with my friends or anybody. I don't think the culture had a language with which to discuss it. I was in a dorm and there was some person and I didn't know her. She was at Pembroke; she was in my dorm. I said hello to her, she said hello to me. That was it. And maybe we had said a couple hellos in the morning or something. And then one day, we were outside of the dorm and there were other people there and she wouldn't speak to me. It was the first time that it occurred to me that I was a source of stigma to their status or something. I mean I really didn't get it. Really, really didn't get it. So all of it was shocking. And what I would have to say about myself is that. .. you know... thinking about what the experience was like was...just sort of put me back a little bit into the kind of shock-depression--I guess that is the way I would experience it all until senior year. And then of course, there are the gender issues. Again, that nobody really identified. But I'll tell you this disgusting joke. There was a well-known sexual harasser--although we didn't have the language to say that--who was a professor who taught one of these IC courses. And the tables for the IC courses were put in a pentagon so that, you know, that everybody's legs were stuck--not stuck into the middle of the room--but there was this open area. So, he is reported to have said at the beginning of one of his classes, "Would all of you girls from Pembroke cross your legs." So, you know, so probably these girls that did this. And then the said, "Now--this is perhaps apocryphal--that the gates of hell are closed, we can begin." Richardson - 5 DB: Yikes! JR: But you see, it's so shocking because we have a language with which to talk about what that was. Well now, things like that didn't happen in any of my IC courses. But what I picked up was the expectation that the men would talk-.:. DB: And the women wouldn't? JR: And the women would not. And now I mean there are all kinds of studies and whatever about that. But, again, it's not. ..! mean, I didn't have.. .! was so shocked and demoralized by the racial experiences I was having, and then the gender experiences, and then you know they were probably criss-crossing each other, and then there was no language to discuss it, so I was sort of depressed. And basically my attitude about sort of being suppressed in class was... it just sort of fostered the snobbishness that my friends and I had. about the place in general. DB: How did you deal with all this? What type of support networks were you using to make it through? JR: Well, let's see--support. First of all, there were my friends that I have til this day. Do they still have freshman tea? DB: No. JR: (laughs) Well, they had lots of tea in my day. (DB laughs) And they would have tea in--let's see, there was Andrew's Hall and then there were these two wings sticking out--anyway, I don't remember what they were but there were dorm mothers and the dorm mothers would have tea. So anyway, there was freshman tea when the parents were supposed to corne and I met Joanna Rapf in my class who was from NYC and who was sort of a quasi-Bohemian like me. You know I wore black tights and clothes from LLBean even in those days and stuff...! mean I was what we might call avant-garde or something. (JR and DB laugh) So she and I struck up a conversation, in part, of course because she was from the West side of Manhattan and wasn't afraid of black people, and was dressed the way I was, and had no parents there. Now she had been to I think it was a Friends Service Work Camp in Kentucky and she knew Ann Coles who was in that class, who is one of my very best friends until this day. And Ann Coles--now see there was only one other black woman in my class, Roberta Mosley, who I'm also still friends with. Ann and Roberta were friends maybe--I am not sure whether they met at Pembroke or not--but anyway, they were very close friends. And then my other friends, still to this day, were Emily Park and Angel Haring whose.. .! think her family was in the State Department so she had travelled around and knew all kinds of people and stuff. But beyond not sort of being scared because there was a black person there, I think they had in common that they had had a lot of world experience. You know they were not corning from the suburbs with...! don't know. Let's say I would call them cosmopolitan. (laughs) Richardson - 6 DB: Okay. JR: So they were an important source of support and the wonderful thing was senior year all of us--we considered ourselves weirdos in those days--all the weirdos got to live together in the top floor of Andrews Hall. And that was really ...it was really the first experience I'd had of support. There had been a whole thing--oh, the other really supportive thing--group--were the Protestant ministry. Now, of course, I was Catholic and the priests were really great, but they were not tuned into my special condition or racism on the campus. They were very lovely to me, but they didn't do the things that the Protestant Ministry did like raise questions of racial segregation. When you applied to Pembroke you had to say what your religious...in those days, they segregated people not only by race but by religion. Did you know that? DB: I didn't know that. JR: They segregated them based on Catholic, High Church Protestant, Low Church Protestant, Jewish, and then there were two blacks, so we each had singles. We were.. .! mean, here you are a new person in an institution and you are the only one in a single. So the Protestant Ministry went to Nancy Duke Lewis who was the Dean of Pembroke at the time and said you know this is not really right. And she said, buh buh buh bha buh buh buh bha. You know her family was a southern tobacco family. That she could really see .. .! was a black person sitting across the room from her...that it might be difficult in terms of the adjustment of blacks etc. etc. "But Jews are different." And you know, I had done a major study on anti-semitism in high school, so that I knew a lot about anti-semitism and nothing about racism, right. But that was one of the most shocking experiences of my life. Anyway, so our little successful meeting with her meant that there were no blacks accepted--no American blacks accepted--for the rest of my time at Pembroke. DB: Wow! JR: (laughs) DB: That's pretty tough. JR: (laughs) I mean it's an amazing experience and I have to say all-in-all, I wouldn't want to have anybody else to have to go through with it in that way, and yet I think that I was better prepared for the real world by going to Pembroke than I would have been if I had gone to Holyoke or Bennington. I'm sure that I would have had these real-life type experiences at Radcliffe. I didn't get into Radcliffe. DB: So your entire four years at Brown, Pembroke? there were only two black women at Richardson - 7 JR: There was a ... my senior year, they... there was an African student; I think she was Sierra Leone. And they put her next to me in the Andrews wing and I have to say I wasn't very friendly to her. There were no structures of peer support or that encouraged it. And I was so thrilled to (a) be a senior and (b) with all my buddies up there on the 4th floor that I really wasn't very.. .! didn't reach out to her at all. I feel terrible, but that's just the way it was. It's the way I was. DB: What are the things that you remember fondly about your years at Pembroke? JR: Well, I have a lot of fond things. One was that whole claque of us up there on the 4th floor. If you woke me up in the middle of the night and said what do you remember, I would say the main things had to do with music. To me, still. .. you know, I had work study and stuff. Well Pembroke and Brown both had chapel. There was compulsory chapel twice a week at Brown and once a week at Pembroke. And I sang in the University Choir--or whatever the hell it was called. 50 I sang---I got paid to sing--three times a week and I think we rehearsed once a week. DB: Not bad. JR: It was unbelievable. And that exposed me to.. .! had sung. You know I'd had piano lessons as a kid and I sang at Putney, but I was exposed to this vast amount of music. It was just wonderful. I loved the libraries there. People were quiet in libraries then. People didn't cut out articles (JR and DB laugh). I mean, it was a real civilized world. I loved everything about the library. I loved the chairs. I loved the tables. Did you get the stuff I faxed you? DB: Yes. JR: Yea, in 1961--sophomore year--I won a prize--a DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution] prize--in colonial history. And I'd done all that research in the colonial history library and I loved all those dusty books. Anyway, all of that was just wonderful. They had lots of concerts and stuff. They had, you know, all kinds of famous people corne. You know statesmen and whatever, and I heard Malcolm X speak in, I guess it was the spring of '63. DB: They brought him to campus? JR: Yes, it was a packed audience. That spring... that fall James Baldwin had published one of his famous articles in the New Yorker. I think it was called "The Fire Next Time" but it had gotten a lot of discussion about race and everything going really for the first time, in a really public way. The Episcopal Ministry--this is really one of the best things--organized a trip to Atlanta in January and of course in those days, all the accommodations between Providence and the 50uth--the restaurants were segregated etc. etc., and there was only one place blacks and whites could go-­ called Stuckey's, I think. Anyway, we all got into these cars and we went down to Atlanta to the Atlanta University complex and we met a lot of the people active in Richardson - 8 the civil rights movements, SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee] I met the first black Muslim who happened to be a math professor at one of those colleges. So that was a great experience. It wasn't on the campus but it was great. You know, I guess it...! mean the history of Brown being connected to black colleges, I guess, sort of began then. My two favorite professors there were--I'm sure practically every alumni of political consciousness would say this-were first of all, William McLoughlin who taught a course in.. .! think I had him freshman or sophomore year in one of those IC courses and then he taught the course in American intellectual history where we read WEB Dubois and anybody worth reading. I mean that was the only place where you had, you know, any presentation--and of course that was very avant-garde in those days, we're talking '60/'61 or something--and then Hyatt Waggoner who taught American literature and whose teaching style was very much like the style that I'd experienced at Putney that involved discussion and exchange of ideas. And he didn't create that atmosphere like "the boys should talk; the girls should shut up." And he was very humorous, and very gentle, and anyway so the two of them were the ones who influenced me to major in American Civilization which was one of, I guess, two interdisciplinary majors at that time. I just am so avant-garde I don't know what to do with myself. (JR and DB laugh) DB: First LLBean and then this. JR: Right. (laughs) I mean I really chose the major in large part because it was my view that the best professors taught in the American Civilization major, so that's how I picked it because in those days you were restricted in that way. So have I told you everything I like? Yes, I think I have. DB: So, besides the trouble you had adjusting when you first got here, were there any other low points to the Brown experience? JR: Well, there were a couple. One of them, which I fortunately can laugh at now, is that any chance I gOL.! guess--he's dead, I can say it--I was in love with Bill McLoughlin. I thought he was just brilliant. I am sure I wasn't the only one who was. He was a brilliant teacher and totally uncompromising in his demand that you think welL.there was a real encounter with another person who made demands on your intelligence. So I had taken this IC course and I had taken the big intellectual history course with 6 zillion students in it and whatever. And I had applied senior year for an assistantship with him in history. I was in American Civ. So it could have been anything. And senior year I found out. .. I guess they told us in the fall that year whether you got the assistantship. I didn't get the assistantship with Bill McLoughlin. Well, the pain of it and I can remember it. It's like one of these real post-adolescent stabs in the heart that you think you'll never get over at the time. Part of it was hearing it from .. .! think I may have heard it from Sara Lee Silberman, the person who actually got it. DB: Yikes. Richardson -9 JR: . So I was just like...and I had, despite the many painful things that happened to me, I was not a person who was known to cry. I was known to be a tough broad. Or at least I tried to put up that little image. And I was blown away. Blown away. I must have burst out crying, because they must have called him up or something. But anyway. He called me at the dorm and, you know, when you are a loser, you don't want to let people know that they wounded you. But I couldn't help it, I just cried. Anyway. That was just one of those good life experiences. Then the truth of the matter is the woman who got it was much more worthy of it, because she was a real academic. She's now a professor some place at the University of Pittsburgh. I mean, it was a just thing, but it was just like one of those adolescent angst issues. Then the assistantship I got was with--I don't remember his name but he was retired really. He still had an office at Brown but it was in.. .it had to do with Civil War soldiers from the North and their letters horne. And it was...! can't say that I did an excellent job, but I did live in Washington so I went to the National Archives and I read all these real letters in my real hands. I don't think I did a good job, but it was a very excellent experience. Let me see. The other thing is. And nobody--again, there was no public discourse on this. But spring year 1963, Stephanie Stillwell, who is now married, was stabbed to death. Not stabbed to death--she was viciously stabbed. (She couldn't still be alive if she had been stabbed to death.) But she was viciously stabbed by somebody, and they never knew who it was, and I believe that it had to do with the fact--I had been on the student...I guess I had been on the student council a couple of...! was president of the freshman class and I was on the student council I think, a couple of years, I don't know how long. But anyway. Stephanie was involved with college student council at the national level which began to be more and more politicized, and were viewed to be quite radical. And we... the Vietnam War was heating up...secretly heating up, at that point. And I think it had to do something with that--her being stabbed. DB: So this happened on campus? JR: No, she was going between what we called Brown and what we called Pembroke. And she was...it was one of those streets. That was really a horrifying experience. Oh, I forgot to mention the other thing that I loved about being at Brown. That was Providence. I just walked and walked and walked around all those beautiful houses. Those beautiful streets and, I don't know, I loved the city. Or at least that part of the city. DB: Right. (laughs) But there is nothing to do here. JR: Oh, it's totally boring. I OR and DB laugh) worked ...The year I graduated from Brown, and then what was I going to do? I got a job teaching Catholic school in Providence--the other Providence. And these nuns were fabulous and the kids were great, and I lived in a residence for single women in, I guess, what they call the mafia part of Providence. And as an alumni, you get a library card and the clerk saw where I was living and she says, "Ahhh, you're living there?" OR and DB Richardson - 10 laugh) In that part of town, you didn't hit a pedestrian; they would cross right in the middle of the street. (JR and DB laugh) It was known that no pedestrian would be hit in this part of town. (JR and DB laugh) But anyway, as you say, I was going out of my mind with boredom. That's how I ended up in New York. I never..J had never had any interest in coming to New York. I though, "Yuck, New York." I mean, I was from a small Southern town, why would I want to come to New York? But I had to get the hell out of Providence; I was going crazy. Although, I think Providence features itself, as Washington does now: as some sort of civilized haven. Where are you from? DB: Buffalo. JR: Well, Buffalo. (JR and DB laugh) Are you going back to Buffalo? DB: Yea, I've got to get out of here. There's not much happening in Buffalo, but there is a little bit more than here. JR: Yes, when do you graduate? DB: '96. JR: Oh, you have a ways to go. DB: Yea, thanks. (JR and DB laugh) Were there any clubs or organizations you participated in? Besides student council. JR: I was in the Newman Club which is very good in... as I say, I was Catholic at the time, and what was good about it was there were a lot of..J think it was a less racist environment. And I met people--graduate students--from Ireland and undergraduates from Africa and so it had...you know, it was good. DB: Was it an exchange program? JR: No no no. They were just Irish graduate students and there was an African guy at Brown in applied math that I kept in touch with for many years after Brown. So you know, that was good. Let's see, anything else? Well you know I had all of these big work study gigs because, I mean, all that singing and stuff was great but it took up a lot of time. Then the student council was very vague; I was involved in that. DB: It was vague? JR: Yea, I remember maybe one meeting but I don't really remember (JR and DB laugh). Maybe it was a traumatic experience. Perhaps if you hypnotize me, I'd find it or something. (JR and DB laugh) That was about it. Richardson - 11 DB: Where did you work besides with the chorus? JR: I worked in the library. Actually, I was fired. DB: Yikes! (JR and DB laugh) JR: For the first time in my life. I mean can you imagine this? There was a little library at Pembroke and I had the key--this was my freshman year job in addition to the singing--no maybe I didn't sing...oh, I was in the freshman chorus and then I went to the university chorus. So I had the key to the library, and after dinner you were supposed to go up there, and let the people in and close it up at 9 o'clock and sign out books. I know all this sounds very ancient to you, but that's the way it was. And I got fired because I did things like show up late and people would be waiting there to go in. When I think of it now, I can't even believe it. People would be waiting and I would just waltz in like dah dah dah da dah. (JR and DB laugh) I mean it was passive-aggressive. I would be listening. They had a wonderful record collection. I can remember listening to a Kodaly cello sonata and they would be wanting to sign out books and I would be looking at them like, "Oh, why are you bothering me?" Eventually, they got fed up. I have to say that Pembroke as an institution was extremely merciful and kind, and God knows I needed it. So they fired me and I was shocked. (DB laughs) You know, I think no one ever sat me down and said, "you know this is irresponsible behavior, if it continues, you will be fired and you need this money to continue college." So I just continued in this outrageous, bad behavior. And then they sent me over to the big library at Brown, the John Hay, at the time. DB: So they fired you and then transferred you? JR: They just transferred me to where I could be properly supervised. So there, talk about boring. (JR and DB laugh) Signing out books for people was fine. That was okay. But there were two killer assignments and they tried to rotate them because they were so terrible. One was shelving books and the other was where you were supposed to make sure the books were all in order. Properly shelved or something. And then they had these cards in the back of the books when they were signed out and you put the cards back in the books. Well I think that I read more (JR laughs) in the library...if I think of, well, what did I read for my courses and what did I read altogether. I think I read more--supposedly working in the library--than I did (JR laughs) for my courses. I read wonderful things because you get down there in the stacks and in sections you wouldn't normally go in to, and you just find all these great books. So, the other merciful thing... and this is really the related to racism which I didn't understand at the time. Freshman year we took proficiency exams in English and our foreign language. If you didn't pass the proficiency exam, you had to take... like I had to take French and then you had to take English composition. And the English composition deal was a very interesting one. If you took it, what they did was at the end of the first semester, I don't know, maybe you could get out at the end of the...somehow they had a deal that if you brought your grade up. The Richardson - 12 grade that you got at the end of the second semester would be applied to your first semester. So I am in English composition and we're reading--and in a minute you will see why this is difficult-and we're supposed to write these essays. And I did all of the readings and I read all of the commentaries on the readings. And I didn't write a damn thing. DB: Yikes. JR: I wrote no compositions. Now this was a composition class and I was handing in no--zero--compositions. DB: Now how did you think that you could get away with that? JR: I wasn't thinking. (JR and DB laugh) No I mean it really speaks to the kind of stunnedness that I was in. Now here I am president of the freshman class. So this very nice young dean at Pembroke calls me in. So I corne waltzing in and she says, "So how do you like it here at Pembroke?" I said, "Oh I like it fine; it's fine." (DB laughs) And she said, 'Well if you like it here, and you want to stay, you'd better solve your English composition problem." OR and DB laugh) So I was a little shocked, not being a woman of the world at that point. So she said, "You had better go and talk to your English professor. Now this had .. .it's kind of interesting all these social, class, race things. My English professor was a graduate student was Catholic--I don't know how I knew he was Catholic. And he didn't have that nice Ivy League look, probably because he carne from a working class family. And so as a Catholic, I felt that he was--you know, you are quite beleaguered as a Catholic in those Protestant environments--so I felt that he was kind of letting the horne team down by slicking back his hair and whatever. But on top of that we were reading Huckleberry Finn and we were reading Huckleberry Finn and the Amherst commentaries on it. I, of course, was the only black person in the class, and I was extremely uncomfortable, probably not even aware that I was uncomfortable. You know, kind of just being a good soldier. But it's not surprising that I couldn't write anything. I heard a wonderful sermon about, and I am sure that people talk about this all the time of being "silenced." And that was really that profound silencing experience. But being thrown out of college would not have been seen with favor in my family, so I did go see him and he was actually very nice and he said, 'Well you've got to write me something." And we sort of OR laughs) bargained. (JR and DB laugh) Of course, he had all of the chips. II DB: Right. JR: And I wrote some lengthy thing summarizing what had been in my mind all semester then I got out with a decent grade in the end. Because of this merciful thing that having written nothing for the semester, I could make up for it in the second. So but that was.. .! don't...I mean now students will say, 'Well I won't read that racist material and at least they can have a name for it, and the uncomfortability can be discussed and acknowledged. The fact that I was a black person reading about Richardson - 13 this and how I felt about Jim was not on the table for discussion. So that was really awkward and difficult. DB: How were your strongest friendships developed and at what point during your college career? JR: Well I think I talked about that. Most, let's see, (pause) I guess mostly Emily Park, who also lives in New York, was in the freshman choir; and sophomore year I lured her into my room to sing some Bach with me, and we became friends after that. (DB laughs) And also her baseball team and my baseball team were in the bottom of our respective baseball leagues. And we were also ... we had similar backgrounds. You know, both her parents were dead and by senior year, both of my parents had been dead, so we had grown up as little orphans. We had this orphan identification. Then Joanna, I have mentioned. And Ann. One thing that brought the weirdos together--did you ever hear of Scut Day? DB: No. JR: Well, this was a ritual--it was supposed to be sort of a female bonding ritual-­ not that we had that language with which to discuss it (DB laughs)--but the freshman would walk around with these brown beanies, and all day--as scuts--we were supposed to do whatever the upperclassman told us to do. DB: Sounds like fun. JR: And then at the end of this ceremony of humiliation, (DB laughs) we were to light candles together, and we would be all cozy and friendly. Well, I had never heard of such a thing. And my other friends and I, we went through it and we lit the candles and we were just totally amazed. Anyway, we got rid of Scut Day. (DB laughs) And a lot of the people that I am friends with were some of the people who were just like, "What is this?!" (DB laughs) So most of us got to know each other mostly around Scut Day. DB: I'm just going to turn the tape over. JR: Okay. DB: Were the Brown students you associated with from a variety of backgrounds such as geographically, class, racial, religious? JR: Well, (pause) yes. (pause--Iaughs) DB: Well, alright! (JR and DB laugh) Moving on. JR: Moving on. I mean I think what they had in common. You know, Ann from Maine and Roberta from New York and Emily from Missouri and Joanna from New Richardson -14 York. That is very diverse geographically. And in terms of social class ... my own social class I saw as, I refer to as ...my social class of origin is lower middle class, although other people in my family were professional middle class. So I knew something about that world. And they, I'm thinking of them now, they came more from one father was a blacklisted film writer, another's worked for the State Department and Ann's father was the president of a liberal arts college. So there was a--I don't know, you might call that the intelligentsia, I don't know. So that in that sense, I think that we were quite alike although ostensibly, we looked different, you know. And certainly our religions were different. We had this skewed view of life from a Brown perspective anyway. DB: How was your Brown career affected by being an African American woman? JR: I think I really talked about that. I mean I think that whatever flavor of racism that was flowing through the veins of America at the time, and the limited experiences that most of the students--you know, men and women--had with people of color. I think of it, at that period, that it was a very kind of suburban college. You know Brown is now very fancy and desirable. Then it was known as the "drinking school of the Ivy League." (DB laughs) There was a lot of--I don't remember what street--but anyway, there's the Brown--the Quad right? And then there is the street that leads to what had been Pembroke and after one of these dances and stuff, or parties, you'd walk... the guys would be...did you know that we had curfew? DB: Yes. JR: Okay, I think it was at eleven and I remember senior year they made it til twelve. And the big deal is, a bunch of us went out to see--let me see, I know I am being tangential, but hey--we went out to see Black Orpheus and this is the big deal. And we were going to get to stay out until midnight, and of course I fell asleep in the movie. It didn't do any good for me. Anyway, there was this street and you'd be with your date walking back, and then on the sidewalk there would be, you know, every--I don't want to exaggerate--but there would be a whole bunch of guys sitting there vomiting up there guts. DB: Yuck! JR: It was like ... when I read the alumni magazine and I see all the work that is done on substance abuse, and really helping people understand that this is not a joke, and I work in substance abuse myself now so. But then it was, like, a norm for the guys to get drunk. And what was very interesting was, freshman year I went out with Bill Wood who was probably the class of '62. He was a wrestler for Brown and we went to some party. I don't think it was a fraternity party; I don't think I ever went to a fraternity party. And, of course, I was no drinker at that time. I mean I was 18 years old or something. And they were having a late--I guess it must have been second semester--having a late New Year's party and there was a lot of that cheap Richardson· 15 champagne around. He didn't drink; I mean not one drop. I don't know if it was because of his religion, or what, but he insisted that I had to have this horrible champagne. But anyway, so those parties--I don't know what those parties were...they weren't fraternity parties...! mean you know there were black fraternities at Brown then. Did you know that? DB: No, I was going to ask about that. JR: Yea! Well there was Omega, I'm sure. They weren't, maybe affiliated on campus... I don't know, maybe there was Omega and people from Providence College and others belonged to it" or something. But anyways, I know there was a black fraternity presence of some kind. So what was your question? DB: I was asking about how your career was affected by being an African American woman. JR: I'm not sure what you mean by career. I mean I think I described some of the difficulties and some of the pain. They didn't have this thing of exposing you to all kinds of different careers and stuff. They didn't have that kind of systematic thing, or, you know, letting you do a little apprenticeship with somebody. They didn't have any of that stuff. The only thing that they had at Pembroke, that I recall, is that they had a social worker corne in to talk about being a social worker. And I said to myself, "Oh, that's what I want to do." But I didn't...! mean theoretically, if that is what I wanted to do, I could have applied to social work schools, which I didn't do. And it wasn't so much...! was so happy to get out of college. To get out of Brown. To get away. To have it done, with that the thought of graduate work never crossed my mind. In those days, it wasn't like, uOh of course you are going to graduate school. What graduate school are you going to?" But anyway, the only thing we heard of a career, at Pembroke anyway, was a social worker, and I said, "Oh I'd like to do that." And in fact I am a social worker, so... DB: You followed through. JR: I mean I got my degree when I was forty, but it was an idea that came to my mind because of the presentation. Being a social worker is a woman thing, right? They weren't saying, "What about your MBA or going to law school or anything?" There were women lawyers then after all. DB: Right. So how was the dating scene for you? Do you feel it was affected by race at all? JR: Oh yea! There were more black guys at Brown than there were black women at Pembroke. But I didn't like too many of them. (DB laughs) One of them that I really like was Irving Williamson and he was lovely then and he is lovely now, but a lot of the reverse snobbery of my friends and of me, that a lot of those guys were there to get their prestigious degree and, I mean, to me they didn't seem like nice Richardson - 16 people. And they may have been perfectly nice people. But they didn't seem nice. And they seemed ambitious, the few that I knew. So, you know, I had very few dates and there was a question about interracial dating... Oaughs) Somebody who I think probably was one of these West side guys from New York City invited me to have coffee or something in the Blue Room. Does the Blue Room still exist? DB: Yes, it's still there. JR: (exhales) Whew! At least something still exists. (DB laughs) And he then began to talk about how somebody had put a sign on his door protesting him going out with somebody black. Well I was just in a rage because I thought, "Well how the fuck would they know"--well I guess for posterity I should watch my language (JR and DB laugh)--how did they know he was going out with anybody black? So I was just in a rageful funk for the rest of the time that I was with him. A lot of socializing I did, to the degree I was doing much socializing was with women. Or in some little Newman thing or just hanging out and seeing who you'd run into at the Blue Room. Or Pembroke had a little place to have coffee, and then some of those little shops along--I don't know what that street is--but that street where... DB: Thayer Street. JR: Thayer Street, yes. So you'd run into people there. But I might as well have gone to Holyoke to tell you the truth. (JR and DB laugh) DB: There you are back at Holyoke. (JR and DB laugh) JR: I mean I had to swim, and I basically lived in a women's world so ... UR and DB laugh) DB: Oh boy! So outside of the classroom, what type of interactions did Brown men and Pembroke women have? JR: (pause) As I say, I would say that mostly I was alone there. And I really wasn't that aware of what was going on. I mean I would say that one of my friends ... there was this thing you were supposed to get pinned. This was presumed that your sweetie was in a fraternity. You were supposed to be pinned Junior year and get engaged senior year and then get married right off of the campus. DB: Okay. JR: I mean that was the lifeline that they seemed to be wanting. And of my friends only one did. And of course she is divorced now--I shouldn't say, "Of course"-but... DB: I won't let her hear this. Richardson -17 JR: Right. No, she is the one who wrote to me. I told her that I was going to get my opportunity for fifteen minutes of fame and she wrote this very long letter saying, ''Don't sugar coat that horrible experience." But anyway, she was the one who got married right away. But of everyone else, either, like me, they never got married or they got married late. DB: To non-Brown men? JR: No, not to Brown men. Except for the one who is divorced. DB: Of course. (laughs) What do you think Brown tried to or taught you about the role of women in society? JR: Well, I am glad I thought of this name. I mentioned Nancy Duke Lewis. Nancy Duke Lewis died of cancer my sophomore year. And I think that there was no question that she was a racist. But she did have that old vision that women were supposed to do things. So, I guess, in these little chapels, they give you these little... they were like secular sermons. And she would always talk about that we were getting this fantastic education and it was our obligation to use it for good, and this, that, and the other. I mean I guess she was like an old-fashioned who also just was a racist, you know. I guess that from her. And then somebody, Pierrel, I think took over. Rosie Pierrel. She was in psychology or something. She was a dean right after that. She didn't seem to have a vision for--or didn't communicate anyway as far as I saw--a vision in the way that Nancy Duke Lewis did. That we were women and we were supposed ...now mind you all the girls were just trying to get pinned and married, but she had ... she herself was not married, so I guess that had something to do with it, but anyway. Her thing was, you know, you were supposed to get out there and do something good. DB: How influential were your classroom experiences on what you decided to do after graduation? JR: (pause) Well, for a while there, I was doing graduate work in sociology thinking I was going to be a sociology professor. And I did teach at Fordham. I thought I was going to have an academic career. My teaching style was .. .! think my ability to think well was really helped by what went on in the classrooms at Brown. But my teaching style was really based on what I had learned in my high school. In many ways, my high school education was better than what went on ...there were these huge three hundred fifty [person] lectures classes. I mean I don't know if that is education. And you might as well put it on video tape. DB: Some people do. JR: (laughs) Well they should. Richardson - 18 DB: My freshman year there was this bio class and everyday the professor would video tape his [lectures] so eventually just stop going and they would go and pick up the videos before an exam. JR: (laughs) It's great because then you can look at them at midnight. And write you papers during the day. DB: So that was that. JR: Yea, Jeffrey Campbell was my English teacher at Putney and he was really my model of how to encourage people, and engage them, and challenge them, and really get them reading and thinking and understanding their own intellectual power. But, I mean, obviously having gone to a good university.. .! mean there were a lot of really good teachers there, even some who lectured, so I am sure it had something to do.. .! mean being a social worker probably comes more out of being raised as a Catholic, when I was raised as a Catholic, and the kind of Catholics that I met. For example, I met someone at Pembroke--I think she was a year ahead of me or something--who knew about the Catholic Worker, and I think she introduced me to the Catholic Worker. And there was a Worker's Scholar Weekend down here in New York. They weren't institutional influences but it happened at Brown, let's put it that way. DB: Were there any courses on black issues at your time? JR: No no no. The only black content was what was in McLoughlin's classes but here's.. .! mean, it was as thorough as you get for that time I'm sure. I mean we were reading... we were not reading about DuBois, we were reading DuBois. And you know all the important people, at least in the early twentieth century. DB: Was that in the Am Civ department? JR: That was, well he was really in the American Civ department but also in the history department. American history. DB: So that was the whole integration of black issues into the curriculum? JR: [Yes]. DB: Were women's issues discussed? JR: Should I laugh now? DB: Go ahead. (JR and DB laugh) I gotta ask. JR: Well as I say, other than Dean Nancy Lewis saying you got to get out there and do something. I mean there was no history of suffragettes or anything. I mean no Richardson - 19 one said read DeBeauvoir or anything. No. Furthermore, why don't you ask me if I ever had a woman standing in front of me in the classroom? DB: I am going to venture to say no. (JR and DB laugh) Taking a stab at it. JR: Well, no, this might not. I mean after all Rosie Pierrel was...she was a professor in psychology but I don't...I may be lying, but I don't think I had a single woman. No graduate student. No, not one woman. But it is also interesting. I talk about the importance of the Protestant ministry. One year there was an Episcopal woman who was... You know there was an Episcopal minister, I can't remember-­ he's at Harvard now. But he's the one who organized this trip to Atlanta. But there was that woman and there was another woman--her name was Georgie Oudemans. She was in the Protestant ministry. She is one of my friends now. And she really kind of saved me freshman year, I have to say. Just by being a kind good person, you know. God, what a lost little creature I was. DB: Was there any sense of needing to assimilate into the greater Brown environment and to put your race into the background? JR: Well, there was no.. .! think there was no comprehension of what. .. (pause) See, I think there are two issues. One is the question of, if you are a person of color, what is it's meaning to you and what is it 's meaning to others? So the fact that the blacks ... the girls at Pembroke were in separate rooms freshman year. That's the institutional statement of what race meant. And...but nobody would articulate that. But we did get the dean to articulate it. In terms of assimilation as I say, I felt it was an alien culture. I grew up in a home where there was a lot of intellectual fervency­ -where I grew up with my grandparents--and they would read the classics. Not because they were classics, and not because of status, but because these were things that interested them. And so many of the people who were there, when I was there, because as I say, if you were going to the Ivy League, Brown was not what you would choose at that time. You know, unless you hadn't done well in prep school. If you were a middle class person who hadn't gone to a boarding school, and hadn't gotten gentlemen's c's, you'd think it was a good thing to get to Brown. But it wasn't a classy place except for the professors. So from my point of view, assimilating would have been to be a Penny Pembroker, which I couldn't be because I wasn't white, so I am not sure what assimilation really meant. I didn't feel as .. .if I were finding any aspect of my life, it was that I came from a lower middle class world. But then there is nothing much to hide about it. I don't know. I don't know how to describe that...to respond to the question. (laughs) Oh, I'll give you an example. I'll give you an example of pressure to assimilate, but it has nothing to do with race, it has to do with, I guess, class. I was president of the freshman class and they had mixers at different colleges, like, they'd take a busload of Pembrokers and take them to Harvard. So I had a friend at Radcliffe and they were pressuring me as president of the freshman class to get on the bus and go to Cambridge. And I did, in my sneakers and black tights and corduroy skirt. Richardson - 20 DB: Oh dear. JR: And I wasn't planning to go to the mixer, I just got on the bus and I got a free ride to Cambridge and I met my friend, Lucy, who was probably dressed in exactly the same way. We got together and we had a good time and then I got back on the bus and came back to Providence. So whoever was the supervisor really dressed me down for not dressing up. There's a proper lady's attire. And I think there was a certain pressure on us to be ladies. Do know about the lady classes we had? DB: I heard something about that. JR: Yea well, you know. Ladies sit in a certain way and this that and the other. I mean they were trying to turn us into ladies. DB: The nerve. JR: Well, but you see I think a lot of blacks at that point were trying to be ladies too. I mean you know, blacks of the middle class. So this class culture--this race culture. I don't know. DB: Were finances ...well, I am guessing finances were a large part of your college education. How did you pay for it? JR: Well, this is a pitiful story. I really don't know. I was treated .. .it's in exactly in the same way that we had a curfew and we never challenged it. My grandparents filled out whatever they needed to fill out and NSFNS [National Scholarship Fund for Negro Students] provided a scholarship. And I guess Brown or Pembroke did. Or whoever did. I never did ...oh I also got--at that point there were--federal scholarships for people to.. .I think that if you taught school, some of your scholarship would be written off. It was to encourage teachers and to help us beat the guys who sent up Sputnik, do you know? I knew that I had that, and I knew that I was a kid, and my grandmother really took care of it. And so that I say that NSFNS had something to do with it so they must have given money, but I didn't know. And to show you how childish I was, when I got out, of course I had taken out these loans. Having no knowledge of what the hell the loans were, my grandmother paid of those loans. Without saying one word to me. And the reason that I know the different experience is that I had to take out loans to go to graduate school, and I remember (JR and DB laugh) ten years later when I paid it off, what a relief. (JR and DB laugh) But, you know, I had no knowledge of the practicality of it. I know I had my little work study thing. But, you know, it was an innocent time and I was an innocent kid. DB: What social and political issues were discussed while you were on campus? JR: (pause) There was something called the Catholic Interracial Council and I was involved in that. It just comes to my mind. And there was a guy by the name of Richardson - 21 Father Robinson who was involved in problems of the poor in Providence. So in that circle, those issues were discussed. Woolworth's was being picketed in the South and in the North for not permitting blacks to eat at the counter. And I guess in '61, one time I went downtown with a very small group of people to picket Woolworth's. In McLoughlin's class he would discuss labor issues. And I would go when he would have his faculty hours. I would go tell him, "What the hell is he doing on a college campus, wasting his time with all these privileged people? He should be organizing labor campaigns. I must have driven him insane. (JR and DB laugh) And, let's see, the Protestant ministry organized this trip to Roxbury. It was sponsored by the American Friend's Service Committee and we lived in this crummy little lodge and we helped to do some physical labor in somebody's house. And could that be...oh! And the big issue, in fact, that was the reason I was elected as president of the freshman class. The big issue was nuclear disarmament and the nuclear threat. And that is what I spoke about, and all the weirdos probably voted for me for that reason. And that was a very major concern. The Cold War was hot, so I guess that's about it. DB: What do you think you came away with--from Pembroke--in terms of positive self-development and what do you think, if anything, was damaging? JR: (exhales) I think in terms of personal self-esteem, I was really undermined by that experience. And it took me a very long time and lots of therapy, to really understand that some of the silence ... because I can't say I was ever treated with any hostility whatsoever. I mean, there were no beer cans thrown or anything like that. But the silent shunning, (let's put it that way). I really misunderstood as something personal, and not racial and an issue of gender. And it took a very long time for me to separate out those issues, and not to take them personally, let me put it that way. In terms of having survived the social aspects of the experience, I think I really toughened up from being a little sheltered kid to, you know, I did survive that experience. It was a very difficult one. But in terms of education, I think it was really good. Perhaps not the best available education in America at the time, but certainly up there. DB: So if you had it to do again, would you come back to Pembroke or Brown? JR: Well, I think, if I had it to do again, I would never get in. (JR and DB laugh) DB: Yikes! What does that mean? JR: Well, you know, as I say, when I went there, Pembroke was considered to be a very good school. It was not like a back-up school or anything. Now, it's really a first-line school, in the way that Radcliffe and Harvard were in my day. I don't think. Let me give you an example. I went to the Putney School. In my class, the class of '59, there were fifty people. It was common that half of the class would go to Harvard and Radcliffe. It was expectable in those days. That no longer happens at Putney. And I don't know that I would have gotten into Brown. I would have been Richardson - 22 much more interested in it, because of the new curriculum, and all kinds of other things. It's much more like what my high school education was like. I would have been interested, but I am not sure they would have been interested in me. (JR and DB laugh) But I certainly think it would, if I had gotten in, I think it would be a positive experience because there is so much more recognition that young people need support. They need help in establishing their peer relationships, that they need counseling. There needs to be somebody to go to. If I had a substance abuse problem, there would be some place to take it. It sounds like a more supportive environment, by a lot, than it was when I was there. DB: What do you feel was missing from your education? or your experience of Pembroke? JR: Well, I guess, what I have been saying all along--the lack of political or social discourse about what was going on then, and the lack of language with which to discuss salient features of that experience, which had to do with racism and sexism. DB: When you look over your Pembroke years, do you feel good about them in general or are there mixed feelings? JR: (laughs) Have you been listening? (JR and DB laugh) DB: I mean it might-­ JR: No, no. I understand. (JR and DB laugh) No, mostly thinking about this is mostly painful. In some ways, I think of myself as a survivor of that experience. And it is interesting to me because Angel Haring who wrote to me and said you know don't sugar-coat it; say it like it really was. I wonder what...I wish you would interview her. I mean I would love to hear it, because she was...she once said to me­ -she was much more politically saavy than I was--she once said to me (we were going into the Andrews dining room and she had a waitressing job) you know these were served dinners and stuff. And they had uniforms. And she said to me, "Joyce, you and I are the people. We are the people who provide the experiences for the Pembrokers." I guess because she was a scholarship kid, you know. And I was black. So she had this identification. She must have really understood what she was experiencing much better than I did, you know? DB: I guess what I meant is somehow people even look back on things that were trying for them because of the development [that came] from it. So that because they went through it, they are a better person for it. That kind of thing. I wasn't saying that you loved Brown even though it was horrible for you. JR: Well, I really do. What I said before, I really think is true. I think that in terms of my.. .! think that I met real America because of the type of men and women who were going to Pembroke and Brown when I went there. I think I got to have a social experience that's much more--ultimately was much more--useful. I mean, it's Richardson - 23 useful in my work. I deal with racism in my current work in a city hospital. But the point is that experience somehow prepared me for dealing with these experiences. On the other hand, whoever paid for this education--my family and N5FN5, whatever--one of the most enduring aspects of the experience had to do with all that music. I mean I play the recorder now. I play three or four times a week. I am actively involved in early music. I just did a gig for somebody's 50th birthday, which was really totally a hoot. And you know, Hyatt Waggoner's course or McLoughlin's course. I mean the two of them--if I had just taken those courses I would have been so enriched by the literature that I was exposed to--the political literature as well as the poetry and fiction. I received one of my few A's at Brown for a paper I WTote for Hyatt Waggoner on e. e. cummings. But that is an enduring interest. I've read his poetry throughout the years and I just read a biography. I've been looking for a biography of cummings for years and I finally read it. And I was a little disappointed but hey. Hyatt Waggoner had us write...we were allowed to write a three-page paper on one poem. And that constriction really helped you focus on this literary work. That was really great. I still use the things I learned in that way. DB: 50 what have you been doing since you left Pembroke, in terms of graduate school and career options? JR: Well I have been a professional social worker since '81. I went back to school--I decided I wanted to be something by the time I was forty--so I got out of social work school by the time I was forty, and I've been working in a public hospital since then as a social worker. Before that I was doing odds and ends of what I call do-gooder work. I worked for the National Council of Negro Women in a very interesting project that attempted to...you know, a lot of the women who work in large corporations in New York have educational benefits that they weren't using. Women of color. 50 that was a project to encourage them to actually go back to school. And then this women's center opened in the middle of the recession of '72, so we just helped people to look for jobs and keep their courage up while they were looking. I taught in the night school at Fordham for five years which was really great. It was all kinds of mostly working class men and women--all different races and whatever--who had felt, from their crummy high schools, that they were dumb when they weren't dumb at all. And it was just helping them. Me teaching English comp! When I first got out, I told you I taught Catholic school for a year, I carne to New York. I worked for a Catholic school and was fired. DB: Yikes. JR: I worked for. ..well, it's interesting now when I think of it. DB: Were you showing up late again? JR: No. (JR and DB laugh) I had learned my lesson by then. I was offered a school near my home--within walking distance--racially integrated and I refused to accept it, because I had to work in Harlem. Well I went to Harlem and I--now, I also Richardson - 24 wanted to teach 8th grade--now I really didn't remember how terrible 13 year olds were, and I was not ready for 13 year olds. We were talking about a whole...not thirteen the way I was thirteen. Thirteen, where kids had walked down the street and seen their father's killed. We're talking 1964. So anyway, this was a black order that ran the school and the nun was totally crazy. And I had the nerve to tell one parent, "You spent all this money for Catholic school, but your son can't read and you need to do something about him." But it was such an overwhelming experience that when I was fired, I was happy and sad. Who wanted to be fired but, "Oh! I am out of here. How great!" Because I was not ready for Harlem, anyway. I ended up actually working in Harlem for Catholic Charities for a couple of years. So basically my career is sort of a do-gooder career and I don't have too many regrets. I may have regrets when it is time to retire and I don't have any money but (DB laughs) I don't...everything...so much of my religious and ethical formation pointed me into the direction of service, and so I don't think it's bad; I think it's good. DB: I agree. Are there any last things you would like to say about Pembroke or just a wrap-up in general? JR: No. I'm very impressed with myself that I survived the experience. (JR and DB laugh) DB: Well, congratulations. JR: Thank you. Thank you. (JR and DB laugh) And I hope that you have some of the same survival skills, right? DB: I'm trying to. JR: Does (JR and DB laugh) it sound like a very different place from the institution that you are in? DB: Well, interestingly enough, I'd say that it sounds more like what I see today.. .! spoke to people in the 70's and they all loved it. JR: Oh really? DB: There were about a hundred black people here then and they loved. Feelings of brotherhood and sisterhood with the men on Brown's campus. And all this wonderful stuff. There was so much going on. Happy happy happy and parties and chillin' and I'm like that never happens. Where'd you get that?! So it's interesting to hear, I don't know what was really going on with the '70's that made it such a great time, but I'm not loving it. So... JR: Well, to me, and I would say for the rest of my life, the critical thing is my grandmother was a very kind of stern and unapproachable person but one time she really helped me out. I was really crying my little eyeballs out about something-­ probably crying that I wasn't popular or something--and she said, "Oh, you only Richardson - 25 need three or four friends in your life. And if you have three or four friends in your life, you are very lucky." And I really have found that to be true. I would have loved to have been popular, and I would have loved to have... the social hey day of my life was junior high school, it had been downhill since then. (JR and DB laugh) DB: I can identify with that. (JR and DB laugh) JR: But I think if you think things are hard now, the hardest time in the world is right after you get out of college. And if I were to do it--are we on tape now? DB: Yea, do you want me to turn it off? JR: Yea. DB: Okay. (JR and DB laugh) [End interview]..