 Betsy Vincent Quinn: [00:00] OK, here we go. This is Betsy Vincent Quinn and this is an interview with Elizabeth Young (Jeffers) Winsor. [laughter] All right. On December 1st, 1986. And this is Elizabeth Young (Jeffers) Winsor. Elizabeth Young Jeffers Winsor: – Jeffers Winsor. BVQ: All right, only Betty Winsor. EW: Betty Winsor, yes. BVQ: Betty Winsor. EW: Right. BVQ: So we’re going to start and go through the information sheet and the first question is a doozy, which is the date of birth. EW: November 1st, 1902. BVQ: My goodness, all right. Yes, I should have said that you are class of ’24. EW: Nineteen-twenty-four. 1 BVQ: All right, very good. Your parents’ names. EW: Ah, Herrick P. Young. BVQ: Eric? EW: Herrick, with an H – H-E-R-R-I-C-K. BVQ: Oh, H-E-R-R-I-C-K. EW: Herrick, like Robert Herrick, the – BVQ: Oh, like the poet. EW: Yes. BVQ: All right, all right. EW: Robert – Herrick P. BVQ: Herrick P. EW: Young. BVQ: Young. Eighty-seven. [01:00] EW: Class of ’87. [laughs] BVQ: That’s all right. 2 EW: Eighty-seven. [laughs] BVQ: Very good. EW: And he was married to Suzy Howell, S-U-Z-Y. BVQ: All right. Howell, H-O… EW: H-O-W-E-L-L. BVQ: All right. Not class of anything? EW: No. BVQ: So your mother did not go to Brown. EW: No, no. She went to Cooper Union. BVQ: But she went to a university. (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) EW: Well, it was an art school. BVQ: Oh, an arts school. EW: At school Cooper Union. BVQ: All right. EW: Yeah, so she – BVQ: So your parents were both educated. 3 EW: They were both beyond high school. My father got his master’s or did his master’s work in Leipzig. BVQ: Hm. All right. So was he German? EW: No, no. BVQ: But he went to Leipzig. EW: (overlapping) – he just went to Leipzig to study, do his graduate work. BVQ: OK. Parents’ employment. EW: My father was a schoolteacher. BVQ: All right. EW: He had been head of the Latin department [02:00] at Furman University in this – in Greenville, South Carolina. But he got into public school work rather early and was a grammar, what they called a “grammar master,” you're in the (inaudible) for years. BVQ: A grammar master. EW: Grammar. BVQ: All right. EW: Grammar master. BVQ: All right. Very good. And your mom stayed home and took care of, took care of you? 4 EW: Yeah, she did. And she did artwork but not, not connected in any connection there, anything else. BVQ: Mm-hmm. And you are, it says, it say marital, and you are married, a newly married person. EW: [laughs] For the second time. BVQ: Right. But a newly, all right, just married. EW: Newly married, yes. BVQ: Newly married, yes. Right. EW: I don’t suppose you call three years newly but – BVQ: I don’t know. From an old married hand like me who’s been married almost 30 years [laughs] it would be just like you're just a young – EW: Well, I was married 42 before. BVQ: Before. Yeah. You've got a good record. [03:00] Yeah. Spouse’s employment. EW: Who’s –? BVQ: Your new husband’s employment. EW: Oh, he’s a lawyer with Edwards and Angell. BVQ: OK. And number of children? 5 EW: Well, none by him. [laughs] Naturally. BVQ: [laughs] Unless you're going to be a very feisty woman. And surprise us all. From your – EW: My first husband – BVQ: Yes. EW: Or do you want him in there – BVQ: Well, let’s put him in, too, oh, of course, of course. EW: He is very important. BVQ: Of course, he’s very important. No, no, no, no. OK now, let’s, OK, all right I’ll make notes and then go back. EW: All right. BVQ: This is the, this is the second husband. This is Mr. Winsor. EW: Knew him in high school. We were great friends in high school. BVQ: Really. EW: From the age of 14 through 18 we were best friends. [laughs] BVQ: All right, then that’s a wonderful, wonderful way to find someone to marry. 6 EW: And then he went his way and I went my way and we both each married [04:00] and here we are again. His wife died, my husband died about 15 years ago, his wife died just about three years ago, (inaudible). BVQ: Oh, that’s nice. That’s a very romantic story. [laughter] OK. Your first husband – EW: Husband, Theodore Roosevelt Jeffers. BVQ: Oh, I love it. All right. EW: Class of ’23. BVQ: Oh, of course. [laughter] Yes, yes. Jeffers, class of ’23. All right. So did you all meet at Brown? EW: Yes, I met him when he was a freshman he came out to our house with my brother, whom my brother was class of ’21 and so [laughs] he brought boys around and that’s how I met Ted. BVQ: That’s how you met Ted. I think we should, I think we should stick in at this point that you have a family that actually goes back at Brown, to your father. EW: To my father. My brother, Class ’20, ’21. [05:00] Ted, ’23. I was ’24. And daughter Betsy Lee Bishop was ’54. John Jeffers was ’56. And they each married – BVQ: Brown persons? EW: Brown persons. Ed Bishop, ’54 and Barbara [Carr?] didn’t graduate. She was the ’59 but then she got her degree and in the flower (inaudible). You know, they’re (inaudible) [in Florida?]. Then their son, David Jeffers graduated in ’82 and he’s a schoolteacher also. They’re all schoolteachers so far. [laughs] And David just had a little daughter. My first great grand – 7 BVQ: A great grandchild. EW: My first great grandchild. [laughs] BVQ: That’s wonderful. EW: So who knows about her. BVQ: Yes, yes. [06:00] EW: And then my young, Lisa Bishop, graduated in ’86. BVQ: Who is a Pandas star. EW: Pandas star. [laughs] Yes. BVQ: High goal scorer for the Pandas. EW: For the whole Ivy League. BVQ: For the whole Ivy League. EW: Yes. She broke all records for all Ivy League scoring. [laughs] And they were champions, of course, for two years. BVQ: For two years. Yes. Nothing like a proud grandmother. That’s grand. Oh come on. And you have? EW: Well, that’s all that I have. Well, I had a brother. Oh, and a cousin, and Ted had a cousin, but no need of putting them in. I think that does us a bit. 8 BVQ: Well, that’s pretty impressive, just all in all. All right. Number of children that you had. EW: Two. BVQ: You had two, a son and a daughter. EW: Daughter, Betsy Lee Bishop. And son John H. Bishop. BVQ: All right, OK. Betsy Lee and then this asks for – [07:00] Lee like L-E-E? EW: L-E-E. BVQ: All right. And then John. EW: John Herrick. BVQ: Herrick. All right. And it says children’s education and work and Betsy Lee was Brown. EW: Brown ’54. BVQ: Fifty-four. EW: John was Brown ’56. BVQ: Brown ’56. EW: And he got his MAT from Brown in, oh, around ’60 somewhere – ‘60s. BVQ: I’ll put “’60 more or less.” All right. Very good. All right. So that takes care of this nittygritty information stuff. And now we can go on to the really good, interesting stuff. Right. I 9 mean we've sort of gotten family background. Your father was in education. Lots of your family was education. EW: Both my son and my daughter. BVQ: Both your son and your daughter. EW: And my daughter-in-law runs [08:00] a remedial reading clinic in Florida, in Melbourne, Florida. BVQ: So was it always assumed that you would go to school? EW: Yes. BVQ: Of course. EW: Of course. I just did. [laughs] BVQ: And you just, but it wasn’t really all that usual. Or was it? Did all of your friends go to college when? EW: Pretty much all my high school friends did because we went to Classical High, high school, which was oriented toward college. BVQ: Toward going to college. EW: You didn’t go to Classical [laughs] unless you were thinking of going to college. BVQ: Right. And did many of your friends go to Brown? EW: Yes, there – 10 BVQ: Oh, Pembroke then, oh, wash my mouth out with soap. EW: It wasn’t Pembroke, dear. BVQ: Oh, sorry. All right. It was? EW: The Women’s College in Brown University. [laughs] BVQ: That’s right. Right, right. I knew I would not say that correctly. [laughs] EW: But you know, all the way along we get, we got [09:00] the Brown degree, which made it different from Radcliffe. Because we always had the Brown degree. And Radcliffe did not get the Harvard degree. BVQ: Oh, they just got a Radcliffe degree. Ah. EW: That was one of the essential differences and one that we were very, very proud of and made quite a bit of, which is why we don’t like to see nowadays “graduate from Pembroke.” You didn’t. BVQ: You didn’t. You graduated from Brown. EW: You graduated from Brown University. BVQ: Hm. All right, so then indeed the whole business of changing the name from the Women’s College at Brown University – EW: In Brown University – BVQ: In Brown University to Pembroke. 11 EW: To Pembroke College – BVQ: It wasn’t that big a deal? EW: It was Pembroke College in Brown University. BVQ: It was still Pembroke College. EW: Officially, Pembroke College in the [10:00] Brown University. BVQ: But then it wasn’t, I mean – EW: It didn’t say that. You didn’t cheer [laughs] for Pembroke College in Brown University. BVQ: [laughs] OK. EW: But – well, it was just like saying the College, the Graduate School of Pembroke. Different colleges within the – BVQ: Within the same organization. EW: Within the same university. BVQ: All right, all right, OK. Let’s see. This thing asks “family expectations about what you would do with education.” If they didn’t expect you to be a schoolteacher, I can’t imagine what they would have expected you to do. EW: [laughs] I have no idea what they thought I was going to be, really. BVQ: Really? 12 EW: I never was pressed to be a schoolteacher, particularly. BVQ: No? Family tradition, you don’t think they would have...? EW: No, no, I don’t think so. It was go to college and educate yourself and do whatever you wanted to do then. [11:00] There was no, “Oh, he’s got to be a teacher, and he must be a doctor,” or anything of that sort, no. BVQ: But you could do whatever pleased you or whatever turned out to be – EW: Yes. [laughs] I went to college and of course, I was going to college. BVQ: But of course, you were going to college. EW: College, yes. Well, it was a matter of course. I can’t think of any pressure on it. It just was. BVQ: But you simply – it was expected. EW: It was part of life. [laughs] BVQ: OK, all right. All right. Now they’re talking about Brown. EW: Yes. BVQ: Freshman year. Where did you live? Tell us about being at Brown. EW: [laughs] I lived in the city, at home, all four years. I was a city girl. Now, it was a situation that you could either let it bother you or let it not bother you. So many just [12:00] would come and go home at night sort of the carpetbagger. But I think a lot of it was just perhaps family background. My mother said, “You're in college, you don’t, you don’t have to commit yourself 13 to anything at home.” Now, they couldn’t afford to let me live at college [laughs] in the great expenses of those days of $400 tuition and so [laughs] I couldn’t really afford to live on campus. But, so they were very liberal in my comings and goings and most of my close college friends were dormitory girls, which gave me an advantage because in between classes you’d dash over to the dormitory and just [13:00] see people. But not all the girls in my class were that lucky, perhaps. Some were. My good friend Dorothy Gray was, and Lois Campbell. Lois Campbell is still living. And we just lived in the dormitory daytimes. Because we were very close to those girls. But I was a city, a city girl. And there was sort of a distinction. Of course, I wasn’t in on any of the dormitory dances or the dormitory affairs. BVQ: Mm-hmm. Did you feel that you missed that? EW: I would like to have lived on campus. I really would. But somehow I don’t think it bothered me [laughs] an awful lot. BVQ: You probably were busy enough that it didn’t – EW: I was too busy. [laughs] BVQ: Yes, I’ll bet you were. [14:00] What did you study? What did you study? EW: Well, I majored in English, primarily writing. And minored in biology. Actually I had as much biology as I did English. But somehow I took things for the professors, we were very, we were very close to the professors. And there were some great people in biology in those days. I guess there are now but I don’t know them. BVQ: Who do you remember? Who do you remember as being special? EW: Oh, Dr. Waldron, Dr. [Albert] Mead, Dr. {Frederick Poole] Gorham, Walter Wilson. And Dr. [Albert Davis] Mead, particularly. 14 BVQ: That he was just a wonderful teacher? EW: Oh, and a marvelous person. Oh, and I did a lot of, I took Latin for three years, because of Johnny Greene. He was so great. [15:00] And English I took as much as I did because of Ben Clough and George Benedict. Benedict, I loved Benedict. And Ben Clough was marvelous. He afterwards went into classics. became head of the Classics Department. [laughs] BVQ: A man of many talents, diverse and – EW: Yes, but I remember him in English and in writing, in particular. He spurred on a lot of people who really did quite creative writing at that time. Any young writers, you know, they’ll, “Oh, Ben Clough, Ben Clough.” He was terrific. And those were my main interests, I think. And then we did take – we had to take – in those days you had some requirements of language and so forth that you [16:00] had to take. But they didn’t register with me too much. [laughs] BVQ: Well, did you ask around? Is that how you found out who the really good professors were? EW: You didn’t have to, you knew. BVQ: You just really knew, huh? EW: You knew the... Of course, it was small. It was very small [laughs] and you just knew [O’Tyre?] in history was another terrific one, Professor [Theodore] Collier. He was great. And you went for the top, top people. And you were quite close to them; very close to them. BVQ: Well, how large were your classes? EW: Oh, History was a big one. Must have been 50 or 75 in that. 15 BVQ: Did you ever feel that, being a woman, you were at a disadvantage or that they treated you...? [17:00] EW: Oh, we didn’t have classes together. BVQ: Oh, that’s right. They taught you separately. EW: We had separate classes. One class, a seminar with Dr. Everett, in philosophy. He was a wonderful one, Walter Everett. It was a seminar that met at his house out on Broad Street. And there were both men and women in that class. That was a small class of about 10, I think. There were three women in it, and that was fun and interesting. BVQ: Was it very interesting, from just having the women in your class? Was there anything...? EW: Well, the subjects were just as interesting and the professor was just as interesting. Let’s see, did I have any other classes with men? I don’t think so. I think just that philosophy [18:00] seminar. I don’t suppose they became really mixed and mingled too much until the war, World War II. Because Pembroke practically carried Brown at that point. And I think it kept the college going. And that’s when they mixed more. And since then of course, there’s been no question about all the classes. I don’t think there were any classes barred from us, but there were some – I don’t know whether in some of the advanced physics classes and chemistry classes they may have mingled more. But they didn’t in biology, particularly. [19:00] BVQ: They didn’t, even in biology. So it wasn’t the sciences. I would have guessed that the sciences would have been mixed up a lot. EW: I don’t know about math. Because we had very good biology classes and they were large classes. BVQ: Yeah. How about the best thing you can remember and the worst thing you can remember, about an experience at Brown? Nothing grabs – now, you’ll think of something. [laughter] 16 EW: I don’t know. I just had an awfully good time. BVQ: You really did. And you all had been right here, I mean, to think that this apartment overlooks the Brown campus. EW: Yes, the worst thing that ever happened, I think, was the way... Now I don’t say them merging was wrong, and that was the trend of the time. But I do think the way it was done just railroaded over us. [20:00] It was pretty, pretty bad. I feel very bitter on that, but I won’t go into that. BVQ: No, I think you should go into that, because I think that that’s important. That’s important for people to have a feeling of it. EW: I think it should have been brought up and talked about, and the alumnae should have been given a voice. Some colleges were. Some voted yes. Some voted no. And as I say, I think the thing was coming because every school everywhere is co-ed now. I don’t like the word co-ed. I like the coordinate, which was the way we were – coordinate. BVQ: Yes. Rather than just co-ed. EW: Co-ed has an awfully state-college feeling [laughs] to it. BVQ: Oh, does it? Oh, dear. EW: That sounds – you know, sort of the “Betty Co-ed” sort of thing. [laughs] [21:00] BVQ: And then, indeed, the coordinate of the women’s college and the men’s college was a little bit – 17 EW: And it was a different relationship that was – well, in the old co-ed days, why it was always the women were the secretaries. The men were president, might be a vice president but not generally. Generally the woman would be a secretary and that would be it. And I don’t know, I have a different picture of it. The coordinate is what the college was, a college in its own right in the university. To me that is a very dignified and a place of your own. That I liked and I think it was the best [laughs] of both worlds. [22:00] And I was sorry when it ended. Maybe it would have ended anyway because time, of the times. BVQ: It probably would have, yes, probably just as time went on. But perhaps easing people into it would have been less controversial. EW: But it was just a – kind of “off with our heads” sort of thing. Just a swooping thing. And Pembroke isn't. In fact, we were talking the other day, oh, this is very much beside the point. BVQ: [laughs] Well, I don’t know. I mean, this – EW: Well, we were talking in the reading group, which is the old Pembroke reading group, gone on for 50 years. And people were saying, “Well, what became of that silver service that the class gave the Alumnae Room? What became of the grandfather’s clock that a class – so-and-so – left to the Alumnae Room?” [23:00] We had a lovely Alumnae Room, and an Alumnae Office. Both rooms were easily this size if not bigger, in the lower part of Alumnae Hall. And my office was one side and right across the hall was the Alumnae Room. Beautifully furnished and as I say, with coffee table, with clocks with silver service that classes or individual alumnae, things that have been left to them in wills. We just were wondering the other day where they all were. BVQ: Hm. So what you have to do is go... I haven’t the faintest idea how one would attack that problem. EW: We have no idea. BVQ: We’ll think about that. We can come up with something like that. [laughs] 18 EW: I tell you who’s very much concerned about that, is Ruth Cerjanec. She’s a younger, more vigorous person than I am. But she’s very close to things in college. [24:00] I don’t know, but she must have been interviewed for some things. BVQ: I’ll put her name on the list, too, and we’ll try for her. OK, let’s see, let’s see. We sort of talked... This thing says, “career advice you received.” I can’t imagine. You sort of figured things out all on your own. EW: I don’t think we ever had career advice as such, unless if we were having dinner at Johnny Greene’s, why he’d talk about things and we’d talk about somebody and just talk about life in general. We never had it spelled out for us. BVQ: Saying, yeah – OK. Extracurricular activities? EW: Well, my yearbook but I don’t know that you want all that’s in the yearbook. BVQ: Oh, all right. EW: I would say more, but this was... [25:00] A lot of them would mean nothing. I am the life class president. BVQ: I read that in your letter, that you were life class president. EW: Well, I was president senior year and then I was elected for the life class president. And I said I don’t know if it was a constant thing. BVQ: Well now, Phi Beta Kappa I understand. That one I’ve got. [laughs] But then there are about 20 other things. You were a busy person. EW: Well I was. I did a lot and – 19 BVQ: You did a lot, lot. Oh, what’s the pyramid squad? EW: Tumbling. BVQ: Tumbling. All right. EW: Tumbling, building up on each other and doing handstands on each other’s necks and so forth. [laughs] There may be a picture somewhere. [laughs] BVQ: Oh wonderful, wonderful. And the glee club. EW: Yes. BVQ: All sorts of things. I mean, how in the world did you have time to go to school, to go to class? [26:00] EW: Well – BVQ: You must, you must, all right, it says, “To portray Betty in a few words would require genius. But fortunately the above list speaks for itself.” EW: Well, you know how maudlin those things sound. [laughs] BVQ: I know. But it's wonderful. It's wonderful. Oh, goodness. Oh, that’s fun. EW: I just thought you might be interested. BVQ: That’s fine, no, no, no, oh, that’s wonderful. 20 EW: And that there may be, I don’t know what, of course, there were a lot of things in those days that they don’t have now like Senior Masque and – and the Brownie organization was a social organization and it ran the dances, the college dances and it – and the mask. Every year the sophomores wrote a mask and had a sort of a spring festival affair. And I think they put it out after [27:00] both [have been gone?] in the ‘50s or something as being a corny sort of a, sort of a thing. But kind of come back and doing those Elizabethan jousting. BVQ: Oh, the jousting tournament, that’s quite right. Yes. EW: Well, it was something on that order. BVQ: Or, something on that, all right. EW: And it was for, then it became corny and now it's in. BVQ: And now it's back in. EW: And now it's in. [laughs] BVQ: That’s exactly right. EW: It was that sort of [laughs] – BVQ: You never throw away any clothes or any shoes because they’ll be back in. EW: Back in style. [laughs] BVQ: Yes, yes. OK, let me ask you, last one on this one, before we get to the one where you have a lot of stuff, social rules. 21 EW: I put down something about that. I didn’t put down all the rules, but I will say that our rules were considered very liberal. Oh, I was in student government and so I went to a conference [28:00] down, Randolph-Macon, I believe it was my junior year I went with a senior, with the president and we had a lot of discussions on things like that. And I think Barnard probably was the most liberal. And Brown was next. Radcliffe was third. And then as you got into the strictly women’s colleges they were much more circumscribed and we thought rather boarding schoollike. BVQ: Well what, I mean as a liberal college woman, what were you allowed to do? EW: Well, I just, our hours and signing out of dorms, things like that were much more liberal. You didn’t have to give, have a note from home or [29:00] have to sign in quite as, well, you signed in and signed out so they knew where you were ostensibly. But it wasn’t quite the thumbs on all your life, that they had in varying degrees. Bryn Mawr was quite liberal. But we thought Mount Holyoke and Smith were a little, just oh, circumscribed and thought they were quite – but it was interesting at Barnard and I suppose it depended a little bit on where it was. Barnard, New York. You’d have thought Radcliffe might have been ahead of us, but we were a little more liberal. So when people say, “Oh, you had to wear a hat and gloves,” [30:00] and a lot of people, that’s the type of thing they remember. “Oh, you had to wear a hat and gloves on the campus.” That wasn’t so much a college rule as I think it was the mores of the time. That a woman just did wear hats when she went downtown and did wear a hat when she went – that wasn’t a college rule, as such. I think they were really quite liberal for that, for that period. We were just right after the World War I, so we were beginning to strike out a bit. Flaming youth, you know. I don’t think we [laughs] flamed very high but we were called “flaming youth.” And it was a liberation after the war. That was sort of the beginning. Although all the people who were way back in the 1910s and all [31:00] talk about suffragette movement as if they’d been in it and some of the youngsters now think, act as if they’d never heard of it. Nobody was free until 1960. [laughs] But it was all within the time. I think we were probably pretty, pretty simple. BVQ: The temptations in those days, I imagine the same basic ones existed but there are a lot more now that complicate (overlapping). 22 EW: Of course, the prohibition was the main – BVQ: Oh, all right. EW: The main – - End of Track 1 Track 2 EW: [00:00] I don’t know, it was basically just what you sort of wanted to do and – I suppose if one had really gotten caught being liquored up and all, one would have been expelled. Or at least pretty much brought to task, but I don’t think it, it really, it didn’t in the group I was in. And I was in sort of the leaders group. I don’t mean I wasn’t in the, well, the mousy group, it's what they’re called. But I wasn’t in a fast group. There were girls who were fast. That dates me, using that expression, doesn’t it? BVQ: Well, no, no, no. I know exactly what you mean. EW: There were some girls who were more sophisticated and others who were less so. And I think in general it was the leaders who were [01:00] not the most sophisticated. BVQ: Well, you were very busy out there, doing lots and lots of things. And studying. I think the same thing holds nowadays. I mean really, people who work very hard and study and do lots of things – EW: They don’t get into trouble [laughs] as much. BVQ: Not as much [laughs] maybe. 23 EW: But that was I think probably the big issue of the times. Bathtub gin. I think we were afraid of bathtub gin, deadly afraid of it. We didn’t want to go blind. BVQ: Yeah. A well-founded fear. Hm. EW: Yes, it was a well-founded fear. BVQ: OK. Now we get to the fun part. That you, more than lots and lots of people have information on, ideas or memories which is the deans. EW: Yes. BVQ: You really do. [laughs] I mean you knew three. EW: I knew three. I had three [02:00] and I worked with Nancy Duke later on. I didn’t know Mr. Snow, who was there from – BVQ: That was the very first. EW: Put in as the college was founded. And he was there perhaps, I don’t know exact dates but three or four years. And then Dean Emery came. And she was very much loved. Of course, that was before my time. This was back along around 1904 to ’10, maybe something like that. And then Lida Shaw King came and then when I went to college, my first year Dean King was on the sabbatical. So they’d called Mrs., or Emery, Dean Emery, who was by then Mrs. Allinson. She’d married Professor Allinson. [03:00] They called her in to fill out that year. And she was, well, if anybody was ever an introduction to a college, she was. She was a joy and a dear and very fine, she could be – everybody just loved her. And we had chapel then, you know. It wasn’t long. There’d be perhaps a hymn, announcements. She’d give a little five-minute talk, another hymn and out you’d go. The only trouble [laughs] is getting there early and it was on the top floor of Pembroke Hall [laughs] where the library is now. So that was kind of – particularly if you lived across the city like [laughs] – 24 BVQ: Oh, and you had to come, even though you were a city girl. EW: Oh, yes. BVQ: Oh, that you were still required. All right. All right. EW: Oh yes. We all had chapel. But I think it was, I look back on that as one of the treasures. [04:00] She was writing some of her books in that period and having read her books later, I’d come across phrases that I remembered her using in the college and she was an inspiration. Then the next year Dean King came back for just the first semester. And I had her as a dean, I had her in class, too. But it was a mistake, her coming back. She had taken her sabbatical for health reasons, I think and she had slipped and she wasn’t – I’m sure she wasn’t herself because I know older alumnae had said she was very fine and I think scholastically she was and did a lot for the standing in the – and for the well being of the college. [05:00] I can’t say that I knew her at her best. So I really discount her. No, she came back for a year. She was there that whole year. Then my junior year Mrs. Allinson came back the first semester. And then Dean Morriss came and she was there my second semester junior year and all my senior year. And well, but she did things for the college that were just simply great. She put it on the map. She was forward-looking, she was vigorous, she was beautiful. And a very fine scholar. So that she had everything. And she was head of the, president of the whole AAUW National and International [06:00] and, or national anyway and I know she went to international conventions, too. And she really put Pembroke on the map. That’s when it changed to Pembroke and became Pembroke, which gave it, I admit, more of an entity than just saying each time, “Women’s College in Brown University.” Pembroke made – and it really, and she saw it all through the war years, she – her house was being moved at that time. Somebody had taken it, they were going to put up Andrews Hall. So the house that she was in on Bowen Street was being moved. She had to get out, so she lived with Bessie Rudd and Eva Mooar on Laurel. BVQ: Why do I know those names? What? 25 EW: Well, Bessie Rudd was Athletics and Eva Mooar was dean of Admissions [07:00] and both terrific people. And they lived together in a little house on Laurel Avenue. But it was a chore. It was quite a ways from the college and all. We lived up near at the college – well, not nearer than I do now, but we lived on [Arewood?] Avenue and we had quite a bit of room, and I’ve have quite a lot of students room with us there. So Miss Morriss asked if we could take her maid, Lily. So Lily lived with us. She would go over every day to work at Miss Morriss’s and Miss Rudd’s. But she slept in our house. And she said sometimes Miss Morriss would come home so tired, to go up to bed [08:00] – she’d just go up on her hands and knees. [laughs] I got so very intimate big pictures out of them, though. And she did work. I think at that time she was practically carrying the college herself. Pretty much so. BVQ: But she was a person of great force of personality, too – EW: Great force of personality. I think some of the later classes did not like her as much. BVQ: Why? EW: Now I think if you talk with Ruth Cerjanec, she did not like Miss Morriss and she would deal with her different. Big picture. I don’t comply. I don’t comply. But they would be squared off at something. But um, I love Miss Morriss and she was a friend all the rest of my, of her life. But I do, I was there when she came and I could [09:00] see that and know the impact of what she did for the college. So I’m not just saying this about her as – a college student enamored by a beautiful woman. I’d seen enough of college and all to see what she did and how she’d put it on the map. And that is the sort of thing that Nancy Duke continued. And they all, Miss Morriss also jacked up the standing academically, I think. It had slipped a little bit during Miss Shaw’s later years. It had slipped there. And so she jacked that up a great deal. She had high standards and she insisted upon high standards. BVQ: [10:00] But then you knew Nancy Duke Lewis, too. 26 EW: Well, that was, I knew her when I became president of the Alumnae Association because I’d have association with her there. BVQ: Well, that all sort of fits back then to talk about what you did. I mean when you were graduated, what did you do? Because that’s also very entangled with Brown and – EW: Yes. Well, first off, my first job wasn’t connected with Brown. Oh, I had several jobs in different departments during the – There was one funny one I had for one summer. They were just getting going on psychological tests. Professor [Covden?] was one of the early developers of those tests and it was my job to correct these tests. [laughter] I mean, they weren’t just true and false, blind up like – they were, I remember, well, there was one [11:00] funny one I always laughed at and I would have given, I would have given the boy credit. Silly little thing with a teapot. Tea kettle. And steam coming out of the spout. Cover down here. No steam coming out of the top. You were supposed to put steam coming out of the top to match the steam coming out of the handle. The boy just drew an arrow and put the lid back on the pot. BVQ: I think that was very sensible of him. I like that. EW: I was all for giving him credit for that. BVQ: (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) EW: So you see how kind of flimsy these television sets were. But they were developing them. And I worked in the Biology Department and different labs, doing lab tests and things. But my first real job was social work, of all things. I never had a course in [12:00] sociology. Yes I did, I had Professor ]James] Dealey’s one semester, which I did not like. I liked Professor Dealey. He was a nice little man. But anyway, a Brown girl had had this job in the placing-out department so, and she was leaving to be married. It placed children – BVQ: I was going to say, what is a placing-out department? [laughs] You realized – 27 EW: Well, the children had been committed to the state. I didn’t have anything to do with taking them away from their slum conditions. They had been committed to the state home and school and then I found foster homes for them. BVQ: Oh, well that sounds like that would be satisfying. EW: – supervise them and I had all South County of Rhode Island and I just loved that. I did that for three years. And then Miss Morriss called me in one time, and Alumnae Hall had been built. And then she said, “We want to [13:00] build up the Alumnae Association. We have this office and living, lovely living room for the alumnae. We want you to become the first alumnae secretary, executive secretary and do all alumnae relations and alumnae affairs, which was not such a big deal in those days as far as numbers were concerned, when you think of what they have over here now. But we were very, very close. There had been an alumnae association, but it had been, oh, almost local purely local. Early days, the girls were for the most part local girls. And so a Christmas party developed and then of course, there was a big day at commencement time. [14:00] Saturday on campus was always Alumnae Day. And that was really a, that was a garden party and with a reception of the alumnae officers in the classes, it really was a lovely affair and it was one time that all the classes met together and in a small college you knew people ’22, ’23, as well as you knew your own, perhaps, and then ’25 and ’26 and so forth. BVQ: Well, did you know lots of the men, too? EW: I knew quite a lot. Well, my brother had been in college and I knew a lot through him and his fraternity and then I went to fraternity dances and all in – BVQ: So you did know some – EW: I knew quite a lot and then I had this seminar, which there were men. I wasn’t [15:00] a big dater relative (inaudible) [laughs] – as some of the girls were. But I had quite a few friends and then let’s see. 28 BVQ: Sorry. I didn’t mean to – you were talking about the alumnae. EW: That’s all right. That’s a perfectly natural question. Oh, I was talking about Alumnae Day and the Alumnae Association. So I went and I set up, they had had a rather rudimentary catalogue of the women over in the Brown alumni office. And so I constructed the, and got the file going and built up and I did start, I thought we ought to have, nothing was ever done about us in the Brown Alumni Monthly. There was nothing, nothing in there. And I thought we ought to have something of that sort. So I remember the first one, a funny-looking thing it was. [laughs] I typed, I think it was about a three-page thing of notes and little jottings about college and about alumnae and then I coordinated and got the three pages together and stamped them, this way. This is the way the first newsletter [laughs] looked. Oh, I mimeographed them, mimeographed. They were mimeographed. Beautiful. [laughter] And then stamped together and sent. Well, that was the first newsletter, that was along about 1927. And I did that, let’s see, I left in ’28. I was there two years and then I got married to my Ted. [17:00] Two years. So I got out newsletters about four or five times a year during those two years. And then when Gertrude McConnell came in, of course, she stayed I think about 25 years and she was, the Brown Monthly and her, said she was the first alumnae secretary when she (overlapping) they had her [laughs] but she wasn’t, I was. BVQ: You were. Right, OK. EW: But anyway, she was, of course, by far the best, [laughs] and was terribly good, and things grew under her. The spring before I left I went to conferences – the general alumnae conferences or alumnae-association conferences that were... But they were men and women. And got ideas. And so I had started the idea of having Dix reunion. [18:00] You know that system? BVQ: Is that every 10? Is Dix 10? No, wrong. Completely wrong. EW: No, it's named for Mr. Dix. It's a Dartmouth invention, and I think they still have it, not for the big classes like ’25 and ’50 and all. But on the lower classes, in between classes, I think you ”re-uned” about every four years, and it's on a varying system, as the whole thing is drawn up 29 ahead so you know where you're at, so that you are ”re-uning” with all the classes that were around you. On the fifth-year class you miss your classes – you miss them all, every year. BVQ: How interesting. EW: But this way you've got over [19:00] a period of time, you will have “re-uned” with every class. And in the days of small colleges, that was rather nice. And so I got that going, and that went into effect the year after I left. And I started, laid the groundwork, for the Alumnae Fund. That had always been you paid dues to the Alumnae Association, two dollars a year. BVQ: Whoa. [laughs] OK. EW: And then I think it was raised to five dollars a year. But instead of paying dues, you belonged to the association anyway, and then we set up the fund idea, which is very rudimentary compared to what it is now. But anyway, that started and it was voted in [20:00] the, my last year there and then it started the next year. And then Gertrude got funds so she could have the newsletter printed and it was called The Newsletter for the next 25 years and it grew to be a very nice little brochure. Very newsy and very good. And then along about when she died and Doris Stapleton became alumnae secretary. Doris had been president of the Alumnae Association. President, you see, is an elected office. And the alumnae secretary is appointed by the college. And in conjunction with the Alumnae Association. BVQ: And a real salaried job. EW: And a salaried, a salaried executive job. So I followed Doris Stapleton as president. [21:00] She went in before her term was finished so I finished out her term and then had a term on my own, all along in that in that period. So that’s when I began to know Dean Lewis. BVQ: Oh! All right. Because now you're president of the Alumnae Association – 30 EW: Alumnae Association. That came along in the ‘50s, you see, long about ’53 to ’57, something like that. And one thing about starting, when I went back, to go back a bit to the, when Dean Morris asked me to be the executive secretary, start up the office, the elected president of that time of the association was Nettie Goodale Murdock who was one of the first graduates. She was in the second class. I think Mary Woolley, [22:00] Mary Woolley and Anne Weeden were the first class. Then Nettie Goodale Murdock was the second one. Now I worked with her those two years very closely as executive secretary, so that’s how I got to know about the very beginnings. You see, I touched base with her. Through her I knew the very first people and could, and she would tell about President Andrews inviting the girls into have, take these tests and study in his office and that’s how things started. That those people just worshipped Benjamin Andrews. BVQ: Well, it sounds like he was a good guy, actually. EW: He was, he was a very good guy. BVQ: Yeah. I mean he felt for women’s education and he fought for those women to be educated. EW: Yes, yes he did. And he was – [23:00] He’d been a history professor. My father had him as a history professor. [laughs] So you see, there’s a continuity there and so that’s how I knew about the early times. And Mrs. Murdock was fighting, it was her dearest wish to have an alumnae trustee. The nearest we got to it at that time was having a woman on the committee of the corporation that dealt mostly with women’s college affairs. That was the nearest to a trustee we had. It wasn’t a trustee, but it was – BVQ: She was a member of a committee but not really a – EW: A member of a committee, with some very fine women on that committee and served from time to time. And then Anna Swain I think was the first one who actually was voted in [24:00] as a trustee. I would think that one was in [Henry] Wriston’s? time. 31 BVQ: Wriston so when? About when? About when do you think? I don’t remember. EW: I’m not good on dates but when did he, he came in after Barbara – oh, he came, no, I know he came in around ’38. BVQ: All right. So it's – early ’40s? Late ’30s, early ’40s? EW: Forties that we had our first trustee. BVQ: All right, let’s go back. You're president of the Alumnae Association. EW: Yes. BVQ: All right, so you're doing that. Now when you married Ted and you quit your job – EW: No, we went to New Jersey where Ted taught at Blair Academy. I was down there for – BVQ: Saying you knew all these schoolteachers [laughs], come on. EW: Eight years, then we came back to Brown and when he was in alumnae relations work there. [25:00] And then he went into business, one of his older men in his fraternity, wanted him to carry on his business and so he got into that, so he taught, he was in schools for 15 years and then in business for about 35. But he was essentially a schoolteacher. [laughs] BVQ: All right, now you had the two kids. EW: Yes. BVQ: I mean obviously you were a busy bee. What were you doing all this time? 32 EW: Oh, nothing important. (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) Well, I tell you, before I was alumnae secretary I’d done a lot on committees, working in the association. Oh, we had a lot of committees that were very active, scholarship committee and academic committee and – what were some of the other early ones? [26:00] Back in the alumnae archives it would tell. But – BVQ: No, I mean you were such a busy person. I can’t imagine that you kept your fingers out of the (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) – EW: Well, I mean, what did I do? I never did, have a job of any sort particularly afterwards. I just was doing things. And it was then that I, I knew a lot of classes through that. And you see, when I went in as alumnae secretary, I went in in ’27 – ’26. I graduated in ’24. So there were still some girls who were just graduating – BVQ: Oh, whom you knew in school. EW: Whom I knew in school and I knew really quite intimately up to the ’30s. BVQ: Oh my, very good. EW: Anybody up to the ‘30s. Then I lost track. For a while. [27:00] And then I came back and picked up again and in different committees. But that was just various things. Everything I did then was just working for things like Andrews Hall. I didn’t head the committee but I was on the, with Mary Louise Record, she and I did the publicity for that. We got out a little newsletter that we – I remember one time, well, funny things happened, a strike of news people so we went out and we worked all night setting it up so it could be offset, printed offset. [laughs] And we worked all night on that darn thing. Because you had to count every, every line, every letter of every line [28:00] to get it absolutely right, to get the right picture. [laughs] BVQ: Oh my. Dedication. 33 EW: Well, it was, Mary Louise’s. Her husband just died a short time ago. I think she’s up in Maine. But if you can get in touch with her, she’s a great one. BVQ: That she has good stuff? Yes? EW: She would know a lot. And then she worked at Brown and then, I guess she worked on the campus, alumnae relations for quite a while. BVQ: What do you think of as good stories that people wouldn’t tell, or they wouldn’t ask you to tell, but you've got good stories that you should tell. EW: Tell? BVQ: No? You don’t. I mean you just, it just is all so, (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) I don’t know. Just seems to me that there should be things that you know that I wouldn’t know enough to ask you [laughs] about. [29:00] Yes. EW: Well, let’s see if I – BVQ: See if you made any notes. Because just – EW: I mentioned about the deans. BVQ: Yes. And you got along with Dean Morriss very, very well. So that was good. Kind of – EW: Yeah, yes. Well, I’m not sure whether she got domineering or what, but I know most of the people just either loved her – BVQ: Or didn’t? 34 EW: Or they – or they didn’t. But most of my generation, my class area did. And then she was very much admired in the community. She was very much admired. I know some of the later girls did, maybe they didn’t know her as well, I don’t know. (overlapping) She had a haughtyish, grande-dame manner that may have struck – But now she did [30:00] something, she had, when she first came she had a little house on Bowen Street and every Sunday night, well, I don’t think it was the first term, I think it was the second term because somebody said that she was there, she came in February. I don’t think she did it back yet. But next year she had everybody in the senior class for Sunday night supper. Not all, it wasn’t a supper for the – BVQ: Oh, piece by piece or – EW: She would have four or five in for supper. BVQ: Oh, how nice. EW: Or Sunday tea, high tea and that sort of thing. You sit around (inaudible). And I thought that was a very nicely put – couldn’t possibly do it now [laughs] but, but it was a nice touch. The liberal rules. I think perhaps – [31:00] we had a little, it was a little more graciousness at that time. But there again, I think that’s the era was a little more graceful. BVQ: Yes, I was going to ask – EW: About? BVQ: Yeah, between what you feel at Brown today here from your wonderful deck overlooking the campus and you certainly (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) – EW: Well, there was something about a dress code that was nice, I thought. [laughs] I think we looked a little nicer than some of the kids now, even though they’re darling when you get underneath it all and I love them, but they – 35 - End of Track 2 Track 3 BVQ: Betty Winsor, who is talking about differences between here and there, or? EW: Well, this I was speaking about, well, I thought there was a graciousness of that period. Even though we were considered a rather inflammatory group, we weren’t as sedate as the ’13s and before the World War I. We reflected a war period, you know. The World War I. And girls used to laugh and joke about it and also be irritated by having to dress in the dormitory on Wednesday night or they always, they always had to be decent, or similar, but Wednesday night [01:00] was considered a dress, a dress night. I don’t mean long dresses, but a dress up night, you had to be presentable. And I think that was something rather nice about they’re having to do that. BVQ: Is that for dinner? EW: For dinner. BVQ: Oh, nice. EW: Yes. And of course, the housemothers figured very much – BVQ: Oh, no, tell us about housemothers. We haven’t even talked about housemothers. EW: Well, there was Miss [Emily Sanger]Paddock at Metcalf. She was the one I knew through my dormitory friends. She was very much the lady, a ladylike person, not academic in any way at all, but just a gracious lady and she did, would call girls in if she thought they weren’t dressing nicely or if she thought they weren’t behaving nicely in the living room [02:00] when they had their dates. [laughs] BVQ: Oh, so she really kept an eye. 36 EW: More or less. I mean she didn’t come in and holler at them but she sort of knew what was going on. Her apartment was just sort off the living room. And the girls could go to her and I never did, of course, because I wasn’t a dormitory girl, but, and there was a head of each house. A girl would, and my dear friend Charlotte Ferguson Rhodes was another person you should talk with, was very close to Miss Paddock and said she got a lot of really fine advice from Miss Paddock. And she feels very strongly that she gained a lot from having her as a housemother. And the housemothers varied in types. Now [Aileen Lemon?], [03:00] way down to modern times – I was saying I can’t think when she left. Friend of mine was housemother for 11 years after her husband died, in Andrews. I don’t think she had quite the control of them, that Miss Paddock had, but at least she was there ostensibly [laughs] there was. BVQ: There was, yeah, because Andrews Hall is such a big dorm. Or maybe it wasn’t as large as it was then. EW: Well, there were two, there was East Andrews and West Andrews, they divided it and she was head. BVQ: And she would have been the one for one or the other? EW: Yes. And Ruth Welles, I think, Dr. Welles’s widow was the other one to come back at that time. Of course, in my day there was Metcalf, Miller. East House and Sharpe House. Very different. [laughs] Let’s see. East House [04:00] is where Alumnae Hall is. And Sharpe House still exists, I don’t know if that’s a... It’s on Angell Street. BVQ: I don’t know. EW: I think it's there. BVQ: It's just a regular big, old house, then. EW: A big, double house, up on the banks. I don’t know what they use it for. 37 BVQ: I wonder if that’s the Am Civ department? American Civilization. I’m not sure. EW: It's just below Brown Street. Across the street. BVQ: Mm-hmm. No, that’s not Am Civ, then. I don’t know. [laughs] I don’t know. EW: But those were the four – BVQ: How many people were in your class? What was your graduating class? EW: Let me see. Just about a hundred, I think. BVQ: About a hundred. EW: Maybe not that. Was it 100 or was it, what was it, 70? I have to (inaudible) roughly, roughly 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 27, 32, 39, 42, 45, 48, 51, 54, 76 – BVQ: All these woman with very short hair. Sorry? EW: Sixty-nine, and 70, 71, about 75. BVQ: About 75. EW: Yeah. BVQ: You are, you all do, you have short hair, but you don’t look flapper-ish to me. I mean, you're not flapper-ish. You're post-flapper. EW: It was the flapper era. 38 BVQ: Was it the flapper era? All right. EW: (inaudible) She was a little flapper type. BVQ: Yeah, she looks a little flapper-y there, right. But, I mean all short hair. We’re not talking a longhaired woman in the bunch here. EW: Well, now I didn’t have my hair cut till after I was out of college. BVQ: Oh, I thought you had short hair. There you are. EW: No, I just (inaudible). BVQ: You think it's pulled back there and [06:00] sort of tucked in? EW: Yeah, yes I – BVQ: Top bun. EW: Were there any others who – BVQ: [laughs] OK, let’s see. Graciousness, that certainly is a weenie bit different between here and there. Anything else you can think of? EW: (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) – isn't college, it's – BVQ: It’s times. EW: Times. Except I do think there was a little something about, we tended toward a women’s college, which it wasn’t in a huddle with all, with the boys, we weren’t with the boys all the time. 39 BVQ: Yes, yes. Well, let me see. EW: No. BVQ: No? The only thing it says here was “any other memories, observations of importance.” We've been working on that some. EW: Well, I think, I would put professors at the top of my memories. The good professors [07:00] and the closeness of your relations with your professors. I think probably that stands out as much, as I talk with my daughter and with my granddaughter. I don’t think they had ever, well, they wouldn’t in the bigger, in the big classes, you wouldn’t have that. You wouldn’t, maybe they go to their houses or go to dinner with them sometimes, maybe they don’t. And I don’t think everybody in my class – BVQ: Oh, did either. EW: Did either, I’m sure. I mean, they were close to them in class. Well now, Professor Everett, oh, he was a funny little chap. He’s in here in that – no, I guess he isn’t in there. I guess we dedicated it to Dean Morriss. [08:00] And it's not her most beautiful picture, it's a little severe. BVQ: Now that’s one tough cookie. I mean that’s a severe woman. [laughs] EW: Well, she was a tough cookie. She could stand up to Mr. Wriston. BVQ: Bless her heart. [laughs] EW: And she could really – BVQ: Yes, yes. Now that is a woman of character. 40 EW: If she had been dean Pembroke wouldn’t have gone down the drain like that. BVQ: Like that without any – EW: No. BVQ: That it, yeah, OK. OK. Anything else you can think of we should stick on this tape while we’re working on it here? What do you think? EW: What sort of (overlapping) – what do you want? Have I missed anything that you – BVQ: I don’t know, just sort of thinking, well – I think we’ve hit everything that they have talked about and you've talked about lots of the other things, too. Anything that you can think of relative to being a woman during your lifetime that was affected by having gone to Brown or, [09:00] mm, I mean certainly you were expected to be educated, so that was, I mean certainly I think that there were lots of women who were not expected to be educated. EW: There were some girls there who had to rather not fight with their families but really, it was unusual for the woman to get the – the boys might. BVQ: And still in all, that still happens. [laughs] Strange to say. EW: Yeah. I don’t know. BVQ: I can’t think of anything that you haven’t covered. (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) EW: As I say, I went to Classical High School and that was a high school where everybody just thought college. BVQ: Yes, yes. So that, yeah, so it was a preset. 41 EW: So (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) all along. In my particular – BVQ: Mm-hmm. Well, at least we've set the record straight that you were the first – EW: Alumnae secretary – [laughter] BVQ: Yes. [laughs] Thank you. Thank you, [10:00] very much. That’s great. That’s really fun. EW: Well, I hope you can get something out of all the jumble – (break in audio) BVQ: Oops. Well, we've been talking again here. Before I leave, going over the yearbook and it turns out that Mrs. Winsor wrote tons of songs. And most of the ones that are printed in the, what is this called? EW: The Brun Mael here. BVQ: The Brun Mael, the yearbook, all right, 1924 Brun Mael. Now the one I would like her to read is the Apparatus Blues, [laughs] it has to do with doing gym things, but she feels, I mean come on, just read it, I think – (overlapping) EW: But I think it's rather silly, but it was considered a part of the jazzy era with its patter. That’s why it was a little different from your ordinary song. Goes something like, (singing) [11:00] “I've got the ap-, ap-, ap-, ap- apparatus blues, black and blue. Oh it's a hap-, hap-, hap-, haphazard way we jump the boom. First I hang my feet on the flying rings, and I shimmy up the great long ropes, and gee, how they swing. It's the things I do that give me the gall-darn blues – I’m black and blue.” [laughs] BVQ: [laughs] “I’m black and blue.” 42 EW: “First I breathe, one-two, then I bend, three-four, then I twirl on my toe and that’s where I score. I jump on a horse, turn a somersault. If I don’t break my neck than it ain’t my fault. I shimmy up the ropes. I travel on the rings. I do all sorts of stunts on those boomy things. I hang by my feet till my brains run loose, and now I’ve got the ap-, apparatus blues.” [laughter] BVQ: “And now I’ve got the ap-, apparatus blues.” I love it, I love it. Thanks again. - END - 43..