 Story_ID: 2184 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm an interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey. Observing is--what's your name? Speaker 2: Philip Osafo (ph.). Speaker 1: Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Raoul Abdul, R-A-O-U-L A-B-D-U-L. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 7, 1929. Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: O.K. And, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: That's very, very hard. Basically, I was trained as a photographer as a kid. I became a journalist when I graduated from high school because the man offered me a job and thought that I had some skills of writing and that they should be developed. And then, I all along studied music from a very, very early age. I studied piano with the mother of Natalie Hinderas the concert pianist. Leota Palmer Apple, she was known as then. She became Mrs. Palmer when they moved to Philadelphia and it was very interesting because today on TV and yesterday also I saw something about William Kapell who died in the plane accident at 31 and he was one of the bright lights of American music piano playing and was a great pianist, and didn't have a chance to go any further than that because of the accident, and they found a recording of a recital and they're bringing it out and Natalie was a student at the same time Willie was--they called him Willie and a couple of other people who studied with Olga Samaroff. [Leopold] Stokowski, who was married like two minutes to Stokowski, the conductor in Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Alright. I was just trying to establish like what your primary occupation was, and what-- Speaker 2: Yes, of course, and I'm sorry I strayed, but that's a sign of age, and I was seventy-five November 7, so consequently you have to realize that one gets senile and repeats oneself. (Laughs). Speaker 1: I think you just know a lot, that's all. Speaker 2: Well, anyway, what happened is that you were asking me about what I do. I have written four books by accident. I didn't really plan on writing those books but because I've worked as a literary assistant to Langston Hughes, that meant that I knew how to spell and punctuate and also type extremely well. So, I was very useful to him, and also I enjoy reading other people's mail, and his mail was quite fascinating, particularly his family mail, which we tore up mostly, but anyway. (Laughs) Because everybody wanted money all the time, and he didn't really have that kind of money that he could spread it around. The most he ever made during the time I worked for him was $30,000 in a year. I remember the income tax return and I was really surprised for the man who had done so prolific and had so little to show for it in terms of money, but he had many, many books translated in every major language in the world and so his fame--during his lifetime was great, and then after his lifetime he's still the enduring voice for others who are considered great artists and so forth, and great writers--but it's Langston's work that stands out in people's mind and that have somehow endured and young people who go to schools and they all know one or two poems by Langston Hughes almost out--I was going to say by memory and then I did that--that was my schlock job. In other words, you had to do something to make a living while you were studying something else. But what happened is that the singing talent turned out to be something unique. I don't have a great voice, but I have a very beautiful voice and had but I have now still, I guess, because I have a master class in German leader for twelve people and there are people who have been in the class, it's almost thirty years now--and there are people who have been eighteen years in the class, professional singers. We concentrate on that, and they come here to perfect their German and style in German music and that comes from an inheritance in life of sort of an ancestor away back in our family, Hans Schadt of the Shadd family. They changed their name to Shadd because one of the progenitors of the Shreve and Shadd family which are one family really. He was a German mercenary soldier. I don't remember when that time frame was, but it's back when they were in Canada some German mercenary. Speaker 1: This is a great lead-in. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: So, I had always people told me about this German influence, something in our family that was there and that attracted me to the language. I love that language, and I have perfected it in Vienna where I went to school to college to the Academy of Music and Dramatic Art [University of Music and Dramatic Art, Vienna, Austria]. Speaker 1: Now, we have to go over all these details in chronology, so (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, I'm just saying these things go together--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: You say you're a writer and a musician, but primarily-- Speaker 2: I'm a singer and a journalist. And all my writing, I don't write non-fiction I would love to, but I'm just not good at that and I have a kind of total--everything that I do comes basically from the inside out and I do pretty much what I want to do as a child. I was very spoiled. Speaker 1: What I want to do is stop here and then pick up the chronology of this like the way we usually do it. And, the next thing I want to ask you is, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, today's date is the last day of November--November 30, 2004. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my apartment in New York City in Chelsea and we're in a place called the Tate and this is my, the beginning of my third year in this fabulous building, which is two buildings with a garden in the middle. And I do face the gardens because the front faces Manhattan Mini Storage and I don't think I'd like to look out my window and see the warehouses across the street (Laughs.) Speaker 1: Now, now, this is one of the first questions we asked. When I asked you your name, usually if someone has an unusual name, I ask them, like you know, if there's a story behind the name, Raoul Abdul. Speaker 2: Well, my name on my birth certificate is Raoul R-E-H-E-M-E Abdul, but my name should be properly, if my father [Abdul Hamid] had been there when the birth certificate was filled out, it would have been done properly. It's Raoul Abdul R-A-H-I-M. That's the proper spelling. He was a Bengali from Calcutta. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so your father was a Muslim? Speaker 2: Yes, and he was a great storyteller. And I think I was influenced by that even though he died when I was four. I think there was something in the genes that makes me like to elaborate and to make dramas out of everything in life. Story_ID: 2185 Speaker 1: Now, I have five perfunctory questions I have to ask that are lightweight and have nothing to do with your life or anything, and I--they're warm-up questions. The first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Well, I love Hungarian goulash, the Austrian style because it's easier to cook, it's a pound of onions to a pound of meat and it's--I just enjoy that very much and I love the wienerschnitzel. I like fried chicken, and believe it or not, the Austrians love fried chicken; that's a delicacy on Sundays called backhendl and it's done just like American fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Brown, as you can, everything here is earth colored mostly, with just a few accents in blue. I like the blue in this shirt and I like even a deeper blue and so, that's--yes. I have a shirt from Hermes from Paris and it's a limited number of them. It's called Music of the Spheres. I don't know how to say it in French because French is not one of my languages, but I saw it in the window. It was for an African music festival in Paris when I was there once and I saw it in the window and every night I would go look at it in the window and I didn't know that Hermes was priced the way it was. So I went in the day I was getting ready to leave and I said I want that shirt in my size, please, because it had cello. It was an electric blue with a cello painted on the back, stenciled and violins on the back, very subtle. It sounds gaudy, but it isn't. And so I said I'll take that and gave them my American Express card. I went and I bought that shirt. I never looked at the price because I wouldn't have figured out the francs to dollars so, they were boxing it when I finally said I want to try this on to make sure it was my size, and the lady was there at the desk and she was processing everything, and I said "Excuse me, you have a calculator there, and you speak very good English, so I can ask you this. Could you please tell me how much this shirt is in dollars?" She said "Oui, Monseiur no problem". And I said "Well, what is it?" She said "Well, $1,200." For a sport shirt, and I was so afraid of letting the black race down (Laughs) by telling her that I would rather not have it. I took the darned thing and then how was I going to get it over to the Grigio Hotel and I was with a friend who knows a lot about my finances and who believed in being frugal, because he was so rich and (Laughs) and many rich people are frugal except on certain little once in a while. Well, I bought the shirt, so how do we get into that beautiful Hermes box and bag. Well, first of all getting it out of the store turned out to be a problem because all of a sudden a man came and security came out and said "The shirt, s'il vous plait. Could you please come back in?" And I said, "What for?" and they said, "Well, you rang". And I said "Excuse me?" He said. "Oh, no, no, no, you rang." And I said, "Well, here's the bill. I bought this shirt just now." "Monseiur, all the same, could you please come here?" And I said, alright, he just said please. I went in and lo and behold, I did ring because the man who waited on me and who boxed it, he came running up, said, "Is there something ze matter?" And he said, "Yes, for some reason I forgot to decode it." So, that's the way it started out--badly, getting that shirt just out of the store. The first thing was paying $1,200 later, having paid $1,200 for it, but it was that whole idea. Well, anyway I got it out to the hotel now. I had to go in the bar of the hotel, un-box it so that I would not be taking that lovely box into the hotel. Anyway, I stopped in the front where there was a closet and I put the shirt up on the shelf as if it had been there all of the time, and I couldn't show it off. I mean I had to pretend that I didn't buy it until I got back to America because I didn't want anybody, and especially someone with whom I was traveling, to know that I was stupid enough to pay $1,200 for a sport shirt. Strangely enough, when I got back to America, that shirt got--I wanted to wear it, and I began eating American-style again and the first time I put it on, one of those gold buttons, 18 karat gold buttons, popped (Laughs) across my stomach, and so that was God's way of telling me that you don't need a $1,200 shirt (Laughs). Maybe you're not ready for one. But, anyway now I can fit in that shirt. I don't wear it, but I did find out something nice about it from a Frenchman who knows all about style and he said "Raoul, you must never tuck that shirt in. You should wear it outside with a pair of white pants and white loafers, no socks and you should go to the south of France. As they call it Franz but not France. I found out that there is a difference--that the French are very particular about their language. Its Franz (Laughs). And so, anyway I've never been to the south of Franz and I don't intend to go there because it's too busy with tourists from all over the world and I don't like places--. Salzburg [Austria] is one of the few cities I like--towns I like, where there's international music and where you hear foreign languages spoken. But I prefer when I'm in a country to hear its language spoken its way. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, there are five of these little questions and they only require a short answer, but that was a good story. That was a good story. Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: I know, the shirt's in the closet and it's beginning to--it needs cleaning but I'm afraid to have it dry cleaned anyplace except Ms. Paulette, they tell me. They tell me I should take it to Ms. Paulette. But they deliver here at the store and I asked the man about, and I said. "What type of a person is Ms. Paulette. She must be very special." And they said, "There is no Ms. Paulette Ms. Paulette is a black man who (Laughs) founded this. He knew that there was a need for fine dry cleaning (Laughs). So he is Ms. Paulette. Speaker 2: Alright. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 1: (Sigh), it's not Christmas because I never got what I wanted. I always got clothes. I got underwear, I got socks. I got practical things and I always wanted some little fanciful thing, just if my aunt had only given me a piece of music. The only Christmas I enjoyed specially were the late ones when my aunt [Ada Harding] and uncle [Ben Harding] got very old. I loved those Christmases but the presents and all that--present time was not--I looked forward to being with them in Cleveland but the thing about the Christmas--the first Christmas I spent with them when my mother [Etta Beatrice Shreve] died. She died after my father [Abdul Hamid]. He died when I was four [1933] and she died when I was six [1935], and after she died in order to pacify this kid who was an orphan, they bought me a Lionel train, which one of my cousins in Canada still has, and he's almost as old as I am. Well, they're a little younger. And I gave it to him once for Christmas after I outgrew the train and didn't want to put it down anymore and I had no space to put it down. So, I gave it to those kids and their father did a wonderful thing, typical North Buxton mentality. Very cute. Their father, Uncle Chuck, he put a string on it and made them think that they had to pull the train and didn't let them know this is an electric train. Speaker 2: Whatever happened? Speaker 1: And they were happy just to pull the string but you really couldn't pull it very far and he bought the transformer because the current in Canada is different from ours. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But they love it, and they still love it now. Bryce Shreve has a basement where he has trains on different levels, all different kinds of Lionel trains that he's collected. Mine was the beginning of that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, my first Christmas with my aunt and uncle Ben and Ada Harding was a really great one because I got a little Lionel train. Speaker 2: Now, I'm going to ask you about your whole family. And, as we go along and, I have to ask these perfunctory questions. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 1: Yes, I like to be in Austria because I speak fluent German and I feel at home in Austria. I feel at home almost anyplace I like. On Lake Como with Lago de Como in northern Italy at the Grand Hotel de la Geste. I can't stay there anymore because a junior suite is $1,000 a night now, but when I first started going there, it was much cheaper. But it is a beautiful 500--I think--year-old place and it's right on Lake Como. It's sensational. It's twelve acres of nothing but you. I like that kind of place. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's just a little snobby, you know. You sort of feel proud when you go through that gate and they allow you in. Speaker 2: Okay. Now the last one-- Speaker 1: (Laughs).That's terrible to say, but that kind of little thing--you know these little funny things like that appeal to my sense of humor. Speaker 2: The last question in this set is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: Yes, actually my favorite saying is an Austrian German one and it's--I like to say this to girls whom I know. 'Nach komm, Putzi, gibt ma' Puß' [approximate translation]. That means "Come little doll, give me a kiss." Einen Kuß, the Germans say with that beautiful sharp S. But in Vienna, the language changes and becomes a piece of music and in the high Viennese dialect (Laughs) because it's really a dialect. They say "Nach gib' ma' geben Sie mir einen Kuß". They're lazy and shiftless and southern and I know that all too well from my American experience. (Laughs). Oh, I love lazy, shiftless people from the South and anyplace, but particularly from the South because they do it so charmingly. Story_ID: 2186 Speaker 1: Now, we're going to try to tackle chronologically your parents--the history of your family. Actually, I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. We'll start with your mother's side of the family and since this is oral history, I'll have to ask you to spell names and dates. Speaker 2: It's the only one that I know, really because Daddy [Abdul Hamid], when he came over, he came on a boat with his brother [Abdul Gahni]. We think it was his brother. Speaker 1: Let's start with your father, then. Can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Your father. Speaker 2: His name is simply Abdul A-B-D-U-L Hamid H-A-M-I-D. That was his name. Speaker 1: What is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I have no idea except that he was in his twenties when he died and my mother [Etta Beatrice Shreve] and father were both in their twenties when they died. Speaker 1: Did he come here directly from India? Speaker 2: No. I hear the story is that the parents sent him to London to be educated--the two brothers and they didn't want to go back to India to that country. They wanted to go someplace where the people lived the same style (Laughs). Speaker 1: Was he from India where we would understand is India now, or what's now Pakistan? Speaker 2: Calcutta [India]. Speaker 1: Okay. Calcutta. Speaker 2: Yes, and there's no distinction too much. I mean in those days there was one India, period. Speaker 1: That's right. That's before they split. Speaker 2: So, there are all kinds. Just like New York with all kinds of people, different religions. Speaker 1: Okay. But do you have any idea of his date of birth? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Can you try to get us in the ballpark? Speaker 2: No. I was born in 1929 and I'm seventy-five now. If I was born in 1929 and my father died when I was, four years old--'30 [1930], '31 [1931], '32 [1932]. '33 [1933]. Probably '33 [1933] he died. In 1933, somewhere around there. I don't remember the death dates of people and the months sometime. You know why, because I have a tendency, people live on. Speaker 1: Now, was he--? Speaker 2: I don't remember birthdays too well unless they remind me. Time frames are very difficult. They're very general for me. Speaker 1: Is your general impression that he was a young man when he died or was he--? Speaker 2: Very young, his picture's over there. He was gorgeous. I'm looking at his pictures. Speaker 1: Was he in his twenties? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He was in his twenties. Speaker 1: So, we could probably guess-- (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: He was just going toward probably thirty. Speaker 1: Okay. We can guess maybe the turn of the century, 1900, thereabouts was when he was born? Is that a good guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: They jumped off a boat. They weren't here legally. They never became citizens. But, I know he, I understand he's from India. Speaker 1: Calcutta and,--? Speaker 2: Specifically, Calcutta. Story_ID: 2187 Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on that side of the family? Speaker 2: We know nothing about them except that my father [Abdul Hamid]--his youngest brother [Abdul Gahni] always told me that your father, he outlived him, and that he lived in our house in a room. He roomed with my aunt and uncle [Ada and Ben Harding] and he told us that my father was an Indian prince. But I think a whole lot of Indians like people when they move to foreign places, they suddenly became princes and maharajah and maharishi and all those kinds of things. So, I don't know how true it was, but he was a great storyteller they say. I mean he had a wonderful, fertile imagination and he could describe things vividly and that came in handy when he--the first thing I heard about my father was that he found out that people down South were superstitious so he and his brother brought a bag of anthracite coal and sold it to people for $100 a piece or $50 or whatever he could get for a piece because it brought blessings to them. They put their turbans on and went and sold that. That is what I was told. My father told that story to aunts and uncles who remember him very well. And, but I do remember one thing specifically about my father which I think is really glorious. The Depression came, you see, in 1929 and my father had a job. He went around the corner to the Cleveland Foundry and got himself a job and he was a molder, pouring iron hot stuff into molding and he had to wear asbestos gloves, I was told. I later found out that many, many people who worked in that foundry died early because it was something they were inhaling--the coal, the bad coal, that was used to flame and the asbestos gloves--the asbestos in the air, got in their lungs. But we never knew that at that time and in that time you wouldn't dare as a common worker in a place like a big foundry, a Cleveland foundry, you would never be believed in court. First of all you would never find a lawyer who would take your case probably. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You didn't know until later that that was why so many people died who worked in that foundry. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you said he went to school in England. Do you know where he went to school? Speaker 2: No. Because you see, we only knew the stories of Uncle Gahni kind of brought us up to date on it, except we know that they never wanted to go back to India because they didn't want to live in a place like that. They wanted to start another life and many people want to take their gifts back home and share them, but some people don't want to. They want to go further and into the outer world. Once they see the outer world and see what the possibilities are, they want to take advantage of those possibilities. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They say he and his brother came from England to the United States. Speaker 1: They came on some kind of a boat and somehow they jumped off the boat, and the story goes that they jumped off the boat and they swam to the shore. Speaker 2: In New York? Speaker 1: I don't know where that was, and I doubt if it was in New York. But anyway, they found themselves someplace where they could jump off and where they could be undetected and where they became a part of this society and in Cleveland there's a small part of the black community there, the middle class black community, was lower middle class, but we call middle class now. And it was working people, that's what they meant by middle class. And the people had jobs and honest labor. There was an Indian with the kids with one parent. The father was Indian and the mother was usually a black American woman. Speaker 2: So, there's a community of people with Indian--I didn't become a part of that because my aunt and uncle, you know, naturally I grew up with them, and so they didn't--I wasn't exposed to those kids although they knew of me and I knew of them, but somehow they were distant and foreign. Story_ID: 2188 Speaker 1: All he [Adbul Hamid] did was work in the foundry and go around giving lectures with lantern slides on India, educating people. He did that, and sold sacred coal to people who were stupid enough to buy it, mostly white people, of course because Negroes weren't going to pay one hundred dollars for a piece of anthracite. They would say, "What! This piece of coal! I'm not paying money for this piece of coal." And he was--thought that it was blessed--that he was giving a blessing to them, and so then the police came in and they wanted their cut, and so my father moved out of the South, wherever he was, and came up to Cleveland where he stopped doing that and started showing slides and talking to church groups about India, because people have always been fascinated by India because they saw, what was his name--Sabu the Elephant [Boy]. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's right, he was popular. Speaker 1: Apparently, he came to our home once. Well, black people identified with Sabu because he was not white, and he was a black from India, as far as most black people knew in those days. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: He played the guitar and sang folk songs by the way-- Speaker 1: Just an observation of my grandmother and other people in that generation that went to see Sabu and they were very excited about it. They didn't know if it was India or Africa. They knew it was a jungle , and they saw the jungle on television, in the movies. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: In the movies, not on television, because there was no television then. He was the star, but they-- Speaker 1: Andy Razaf was the name of the person. Speaker 2: How do you spell his last name? Speaker 1: R-A-Z-A-F-F, or something like that. Andy Razaf was, and he really was, a true son of a prince. Speaker 2: In Madagascar?. Speaker 1: In Madagascar. And he really was what he said he was. He was not faux anything, and a fabulous lyricist-- Speaker 2: and--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: F-A-U-X, which is the word for imitation. Speaker 2: False, I see, imitation. Story_ID: 2189 Speaker 1: Mother's family we knew a great deal about, and that's who you asked about first, and you said we should cover. The Shadd and the Shreve family, which are basically one family. The Shreves and the Shadds married each other from way, way back and they're really one family in a way. And he's named by the German's name, who was one of the early ones. The German one was Hans Schadt. Speaker 2: That's the progenitor way back, and, we're talking about--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: He was a soldier (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And we're talking about 1700s maybe. Speaker 1: Probably, a Hessian. And this lady of color took him, he was wounded, and she took him in and nursed him back to health, and they were married for practical purposes. You married by the Bible and you didn't go to the justice of the peace or anything like that. And certainly, those escaped slaves who were in Canada, they were not involved in--allowed really, they weren't married in churches at first. Speaker 2: Okay, now he married this woman in Canada, or-- Speaker 1: Yes, he lived with and married her. Speaker 2: Where North Buxton [Ontario, Canada] is now. Speaker 1: Was he a Hessian mercenary in the American Revolutionary War? Speaker 2: That I don't know because I never trace back. Speaker 1: We can trace him then in the late 1700s? Speaker 2: 'Cousins by the Dozens' may have a reference to him, and anyway, he always heard about him, because out in the country, one of your forms of entertainment was hearing stories about ancestors and family and legends of different people in the family. And so I got that every summer when I went up to be at my grandmother's farm, and grandfather's farm--the Shreve family. My grandfather was W.J. Shreve, and was the station master in North Buxton, and so he collected the mail and took it to the post office---- Speaker 1: I don't want to throw you off, but Hans Schadt you said-- Speaker 2: I don't know how they spell that, because it became-- Speaker 1: Shadd. Speaker 2: Yes, it morphed into Shadd. Speaker 1: S-H-A-D-D. Speaker 2: And how do you spell Schadt? Speaker 1: That I don't know. Speaker 2: There's a woman in Cincinnati, which is one of the German centers of the United States, named Marge Schott, who owns the Cincinnati Reds. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Got in trouble for making racist remarks. Speaker 2: I kind of like people like that because they say their mind, and you know where they stand. But, she, the name could be S-C-H-O-T-T, or it could be S-C-H-A-D-T, that's another Schadt, but the spelling of that one I never bothered to look up because it was far back, and-- Speaker 1: Is there a story associated with why they changed the name from Schadt to Shadd. Speaker 2: No. In Canada, they Anglicize. I remember that I had a song, a book of piano songs, that you sat at the piano and played, that they had from around the world. And it was '[Hymn to] the Evening Star' by Richard Wagner and I had gone to school in Austria, so I came back and I looked at the book and I said, "We have some of the Wagners in here", and it's been here ever since I was little boy, this book on the piano which had an inhabitant of mice always one time or another and when you played the piano the mouse--you would hear him jump up, run around, but he came back. And I was deathly afraid of mice, because I was afraid they would go up my pants leg and, anyway, I said Wagner, and they said no, his name is Richard Wagner--why are you, that's an affectation--and I said no, I said, remember I did go to school in Vienna, and I said his name is Richard Wagner, but to call him Wagner, I mean it just irritated-- Speaker 1: It sort of follows suit with calling the people who call themselves Deutsch--Germans, you know, they don't call themselves that. Speaker 2: So, anyway, they used to tease me about Daddy [Abdul Hamid] and my name, calling me Abdul Abulbul Amir, which was a song, one of those crazy songs in the song book. Speaker 1: How did it go? Speaker 2: I don't know, and I never wanted to know. I wasn't really interested in Indian music until Ravi Shankar and his brother Uday Shankar, the dancer, came to America and I got interested in Ragas--just hearing them, I liked them and it's wonderfully relaxing music and you can become hypnotized by it Speaker 1: This is true. Okay, So Schadt became Shadd. Now the family, the Shadds, they came from Canada? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Delaware. Speaker 1: Abraham and that whole group. Speaker 2: And the Shreve family, see my grandfather, his mother was a Shadd, and she was Elizabeth Shadd, the one who was a circus rider on horseback. He had a very interesting cousin, I found out, Cousin Lil, lived in a pretty house in Buxton which was on the main road going around back town, which got close to the railroad tracks. She was crippled, a very beautiful woman, striking and I found out later--my grandmother always wanted me to go and speak to her and to go sit with her, and I didn't know why, but there was something very special about her then, and she spoke so beautifully. It turned out that she--her father wanted her to come to the States and come to New York and live for a little while. And she came to New York and she stayed in a rooming house with a lady in somebody's family, where they knew it was a good Christian home and she stayed there, where a young girl could come and be safe and beautiful places in Harlem and townhouses that people lived in, and they rented a few rooms out. And they loved young girls and boys who were coming to be something in New York. She had the secretarial skills and particularly stenography, and it turned out--and she never spoke of this with me, but it later came out in 'Cousins by the Dozens' by that girl who did the research and is now deceased. Marvelous book. She published it herself and that woman answered an ad and became a stenographer, among others, for Marcus Garvey because see they were all British subjects. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Lil Shreve. Lillian Johnson. But Shreve was her maiden name. And she became Mrs. Johnson when she came back, and when Marcus Garvey was kicked out of the country, of course, I'm sure like many people, she didn't talk about him until he was vindicated because she didn't want to do anything to hurt him. She never said a bad thing about him, by the way, after she could speak of him. And one thing we know that, unlike what the stereotype of Jamaican men is--you know about of nesting, of having families here and there and everywhere. He was not a womanizer, as the stereotype is. They just believe that to some of them--women just become--you know, interchangeable, probably caused by the fact that they had to move from place to another and the man had to go someplace to wherever there was work, and he was estranged. And sometimes he moved far away. Well, so the families got sort of broken up like that. The woman became the main source of nurturer and sometimes people never even saw their fathers ever again if they ever did. But they did usually know them at one time. But, there were things like that, and she said that Marcus Garvey was a one-woman man, number one, and she said that the reason probably why that was true was because of the fact that he was so busy with his ideas and with his philosophy that he had no time to go around and mess around the corridors. He was so dead serious and an inspiring, driven man and she admired him apparently. Speaker 1: His two wives actually worked for his organization. I mean, he met them both in the organization. (simultaneous)--and they were both named Amy-- Speaker 2: You mean one wife, and then there was a divorce, and-- Speaker 1: Amy Ashwood and Amy Jacques. Speaker 2: That's nice to know. Story_ID: 2190 Speaker 1: I came to admire Marcus Garvey very much. I do think that those poor people going back to Africa would have--that ship--and if he had the money and it had materialized, the whole idea--because we're finding more and more that the idea of going home to Africa is a myth, and that black Americans who think that the Africans are going to accept them, they're a whole different people. They have their own people. They're Africans on African soil, and African Americans going back and expecting to be discovered and a part of family again and--what's his name who wrote that wonderful book--what was the man's name who wrote the book about 'Roots'? Speaker 2: Alex Haley. Speaker 1: Alex Haley went there and found out after he talked to this man who brought him in touch with his family background, his ancestors. It turned out that the guru, or whatever it was, you know, the town something--storyteller--who he found, was really--so, that same line of family line to other people who weren't writers, and who didn't write books--and later Alex Haley found out that a lot of that information was imagination and he was disappointed at the end of his life in the fact that he felt he'd been duped. Speaker 2: So, you're saying that-- Speaker 1: The whole idea of going home, because you're going to Africa, Africa does not want you. You're an American. You can go and live, but I mean you would be welcome, but not to appear that you could reclaim this heritage because of the fact that you are more American than anything if you were born and brought up here. And the more you get to Europe and other places, for example, in Vienna there were some black kids, very wonderful kids who studied music and there was an artist there, and there were all kinds of people who were in Vienna and they weren't looked at as so much as being black as being American. You see, they were Americans. And it could be a group of black and white people together. They were all placed in the same category. They were Americans and with a slight disdain. Speaker 2: Okay. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Because you have no culture, quote. We have an old, old culture. You know, they, not meaning us, me and you, but them. Story_ID: 2191 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name? Speaker 2: Yes, her name was Etta E-T-T-A Beatrice Shreve. Speaker 1: And, do you know her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: No. She was the same age of my father [Abdul Hamid]. Speaker 1: Alright, so circa 19-- Speaker 2: She was the youngest sister in W.J. Shreve's family of girls. There was--Beatrice Shreve was the youngest and the other kids, I think there was an uncle who lived in Michigan and there were some younger--the men--Aunt Ada and Aunt Eunice were the older sisters and Aunt Ada is the one who adopted me with Uncle Ben, who was her cousin. Speaker 1: Now, your mother-- Speaker 2: And really married, civil (laughs)-- Speaker 1: We're going to get to her, but I'm just saying that, you say your mother--you don't know where she was born? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Buxton. Up in that area. Raleigh County. I don't know--South or North Buxton, nearby, Raleigh. Speaker 1: Buxton, Ontario. So, and she was the youngest daughter of W.J. Shreve-- Speaker 2: My grandmother, Elizabeth Shreve, who we think that her father was blind and we used to go and visit him. The kids would be taken occasionally and apparently he may have been--his name is oh her--maiden name is Moore and he may have been Scottish or something. He may not have been black at all. He sure didn't look black to me. Story_ID: 2192 Speaker 1: I've heard other stories where it seems that sometimes white people pass for black. Speaker 2: Of course, there are people who do that, and with glee, and on the other hand, it works the other way. You know the woman who is the--J. Pierpont Morgan Library, the Morgan Library. There was a woman named Belle [da Costa] Souza and Belle Souza's real name was Greene. G-R-E-E-N was the original, but the father changed his name and put an 'e' on the end of it. He was one of the first blacks to--he was an experiment at Harvard University to see if he could take a black man and how far he'd go in education--how far his mind could be developed, could it be developed as far as the white man's mind. And he was quite a famous character, but nobody knew that about her except her black friends, of whom there were many here in New York. And she was J. Pierpont Morgan's, I was going to say librarian--secretary and she was responsible for the decor in his library. She had a great deal to do, and then the book which they sell in the Pierpont Morgan Library now has a whole lot about her because she passed for something, Souza, and she definitely was not known as black to those people at that museum. Speaker 1: They thought she was from Brazil or someplace or Portugal? Speaker 2: I don't know what they thought, but they did not think that she was black woman, a woman of color, which I think she would have liked better to be called. When she died, the truth came out that her father was indeed this black man, Mr. Greene who was an experiment at Harvard (laughs). Speaker 1: That's not Richard T. Greene, you're talking about? Speaker 2: I don't know, because it's all in the J. Pierpont Morgan book and it was so thick, I didn't want to read about his family, I mean, because he's not put any coins in my fountain (laughs) and so, I was interested in her, and the way I became interested in her, was I was in the library--in his personal library which is in the museum, and which has lots of books that go up to the ceiling and you wonder how they could reach them. You just pull one row of books open and then there's this spiral staircase that takes you up on the other levels. But, behind his desk, near--not directly behind, over here, is a large portrait of a black man. Oil portrait. And so, I asked one of the men who had worked at that museum for a long, long, time, I said "Why is this picture of this black man in Mr. Morgan's library--in his personal library?" And he said, "Well, find out something about the secretary." And I said, "Who was the secretary?" He said, "Well, if you go out into the hallway, I'll show you a picture, a photograph of her." And I looked at it, and I said "Those features are kind of familiar. She looks like she might have passed for white." And, that's what she did, precisely. But, I was sitting at a Grace Bumbry recital in the beautiful music room there a few years ago, and that's how I got more interested because the book was there and portraits of Belle Souza, whatever her name was. Anyway, a young man, not a young man, a man my age, was sitting next to me and I said "Did you know that Pierport Morgan's secretary at this library was--a lot of decor and everything and the design and the choice of books--a lot original choice of books--was a black lady?" And he said, "My mother was a very good friend of hers"? And he said, "She used to bring me over to the museum to have lunch with Belle, Mrs. Greene--Ms. Greene." But she was not the mistress, and it was very clear in the book that she was not the mistress of Mr. Morgan. He liked her and admired her very much in her mind. Whether he knew that she was of color or not is besides the point--probably did. And in those days, it would be better not to speak of it, because he wouldn't want to blow her cover, and people might not have admired him for hiring her. Speaker 1: This was the early 1900s? Speaker 2: Yes. Anyway, what happened is that we do know, from people who knew both of them, and she used to tell her friends, that Mr. Morgan would sit there and tell her all about his affairs with all the women he had in great detail. I guess, she being of color--maybe he didn't know. In fact, you can always treat your Negro employees--you can always say everything. Well, a lot of white people thought that, you know. Speaker 1: Well, I only raised this point because it appears that somebody in the family passed for black, I mean was actually white and passed for black. I've heard a couple of stories like that. Speaker 2: Well, anyway, this was very interesting and this fascinated me. I have a portrait somewhere around here, a postcard of her, but that was a portrait that was painted of her to make her look like a Souza. But I originally saw the photograph, and by the way, the photograph of her as she really was, is missing off the wall when they were painting, according to this story that some of the employees have told me, that her portrait mysteriously disappeared and it wasn't on the wall anymore after they painted the wall in the hallway going to Mr. Morgan's personal library. Story_ID: 2193 Speaker 1: Your mother [Etta Bernice Shreve] comes from this family of the Shreves--? Speaker 2: A very elite family. Speaker 1: An elite family which includes Mary Ann Shadd [Carey], Abraham and Isaac Shadd and all these other luminaries from the 19th century. Speaker 2: And my cousin, Buster, Aunt Ada's son who became, according to Grove's Dictionary of Jazz, which is over there--Encyclopedia of Jazz--they said Buster Harding's arrangements were among the very best and most artistic craftsmanship--was so fine in an era when there were a lot of second rate arrangers around. Speaker 1: Buster Harding? Speaker 2: Harding H-A-R-D-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay. Harding. Speaker 2: And I have inherited with my Uncle Ben's half-sister; she gets one-third of the royalties, and I get two-thirds. I was supposed to get everything, I mean, not that I wanted it, because I felt that my aunt and uncle having brought me up until I was 18 and didn't make me have a job--I mean I didn't have to deliver newspapers or take--I didn't have to. I chose to go to a photography studio and to learn, but they didn't force me to work; they let me just live very nicely. Speaker 1: We're going to get to you (laughs). (simultaneous) Speaker 2: They're wonderful people and they have have this one remarkable son. His music was in everybody in Buxton--all the group families had--he studied a little bit of piano and he studied the guitar. My uncle played the violin and he'd studied so he could play, and I found in his music the Mendelssohn violin concerto. Speaker 1: This was the jazz musician, Buster --? Speaker 2: No, Uncle Ben, his son. But he put down the violin when he found out his friend, his best friend growing up was Shelton Brooks, who wrote 'Some of These Days', and consequently he found that Shelton could make money, but he couldn't. How was a person of color, in a rural village in Canada couldn't dream of becoming a concert violinist or playing classical music, except in the church or in the local gatherings, but to consider that a career there always had to be something on the side, which speaks well for the culture of North Buxton because people either sang, and many people played an instrument and they were exposed to good music, even though they called Richard Wagner instead of Richard Wagner, which still irks me (laughs) today to even think of it, but that was typically Canadian and the English influence. They couldn't pronounce it, so they change it to suit their own--(laughs). Story_ID: 2194 Speaker 1: Is there a story connected with how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yes, there is a story. She [Etta Beatrice Shreve] was staying with Aunt Ada and Uncle Ben [Harding] in their apartment on 100th or 105th in Cleveland, and there was a lawyer and his wife--wonderful--she worked at City Hall, and they and they, Uncle Walter Carey and Aunt Vivian, and they, he played bridge and my father [Abdul Hamid] played bridge, they played cards and they had a group and my mother sort of played around it. I mean, wives got together and they, when the men were playing cards. My father saw my mother on the porch every time when he was going to that foundry, or going wherever he was going to work at that time, and the Careys told me that my father admired her, but she didn't pay any attention to him. First of all, he was foreign. And so was she, for that matter, but she never thought of it that way. And, Walter Carey sort of instigated, sort of brought the thing together so that they both were put in the same place in his house in the social gathering at one of his card parties or something, and so they met and fell in love and got married very quickly, and then I came. I must check and see if nine months had--from the time they were married (laughs). Speaker 1: Don't bother. Speaker 2: (Laughs) I'd love to know just for fun. Speaker 1: Walter Carey, he must be directly related to Mary Ann Shadd Carey, I guess? Speaker 2: No, no, no. He had nothing to do with Buxton. He was from the South in America from a rather--that's when I found out that a lot of Southern people--there were a lot of very, very well-educated Southern people of color. Story_ID: 2195 Speaker 1: --Stik S-T-I-K wit W-I-T, with, W-I-T-E, white--always stay on the Lord's side and stick with white. I took grandmother's [Elizabeth Moore Shreve] advice because she said it, and she was the oracle of the family and she said if you want to get anywhere (laughs)-- and grandmother knew what she was talking about, unfortunately. I mean, in a sense of material success. Speaker 2: Okay, now--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: I was very amused by grandma's sayings, always--reminded me of Duncan because I had a person, an attendant, who said I--a note he wrote to his son, because I was in the apartment in the Bronx to take deliveries for them because one was in school and the other was at work. And so, I saw this note on the table that said "Prince, please cook the steak, S-T-A-K-E, like a stake. And he still spells that way. But I realized when I talked to his brother about it, and he said, "He's a bushman." He said, you don't know anything about bushmen, that's why we all don't get along sometimes because it--the mentality's different and they see things in different ways, they have different customs and things. They're not bad customs, but they study animals and the man studies the lion. They love the animal channel because you see how the lion sits around and how a little lion can kill an elephant because they'll sit there a long time studying and watching the baby elephants and then--there's one I'm going to get when he stays behind a little bit, and then before you know it, the baby elephant has been devoured by the lion. And they want to be like, a lot of Jamaican men want to be like the lions, and there can only be one man in the house and sometimes they kill the male offspring because it's only it who stays at home and it's only to be the one man in the household who runs everything. The kids are supposed to get out as soon as possible and get on their own. And that a lot of Jamaican people feel that, whom I know. Story_ID: 2196 Speaker 1: I want to ask about growing up. Do you have a first childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't know whether one can describe this on camera. My mother [Etta Beatrice Shreve] apparently was a bit--what do you call people who belong to the church and they--she had a puritantical outlook on some things and my father [Abdul Hamid] went to work and it was very, because it was like 5:00 in the morning when he--in the kitchen because it was the Depression, had a little twenty-five watt bulb and sometimes a fifteen watt bulb in the ceiling, so it was dark in that kitchen. And so, I always wore short pants and I was sitting like this because you know kids grab their crotch if they're afraid. And I was sitting at the table like this--and my mother, after my daddy went to work out the back door, and I was sitting like that, and my mother looked and she said, and she went over to the stove, and got this great big thing of matches that they had, and she brought the box of matches and pulled it out of box, and hangs it on the wall. It was hung on wall, and she struck a match and she said, and I remember this vividly, "If you ever touch it again, I'm going to burn it off." Imagine telling a child that! I was scared to death! Speaker 1: That's scary. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, there were a lot of good things. She taught me how to be selfish in a way, about certain things. She was always ailing because she had a heart condition and she played it up to the hilt. She was a very beautiful woman, and everyone spoiled her, even when she was living at my uncle's [Ben Harding] house. I have a vision of her. I can see her lying in the bed with pillows behind her, calling up the drugstore and ordering two pints of ice cream, both vanilla, and getting a big bowl and a big spoon and stirring her vanilla ice cream. She ate one whole pint of ice cream herself. That was hers, to stir up and make it into a kind of pudding like. And, the rest of family, meaning my aunt [Ada Harding] and uncle, who supported all of us but I mean, supporting her, in a way of letting her live there and letting her have a room there, and they, we had, the three of us, maybe Daddy was gone then, or something, he wasn't around at that time; he may have died or maybe he was at work. I don't know the time frame exactly, but I just remember us, the three of us, eating vanilla ice cream, and one pint for all three of us, whereas Mother had a whole pint to herself to stir in this bowl and to make her wonderful brew and eat it all herself because that's mine. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was sort of pampered? Speaker 2: Very, from childhood, being the youngest and being enormously beautiful. Story_ID: 2197 Speaker 1: So, your father [Abdul Hamid] died when you were about four [1933]? Speaker 2: Yeah, and he died when I was about six, and I remember his funeral. It was a fantastic funeral because the Indians wanted him to have their ceremony, with the turbans, and my mother [Etta Beatrice Shreve] wanted him to have a Baptist funeral, Canadian Baptist, that is. (laughs). But no, Rev. [Wade Hampton] McKinney of Antioch Baptist Church presided, and--over that part of the funeral. It was in two parts and his wife [Ruth B. McKinney] sang the solo, my father's favorite song which was 'Just Molly and Me, and Baby Makes Three, We're Happy in My Blue Heaven'. I can't stand that sentimental crap. On the other hand, it makes me happy that he felt that way and loved his family, 'Just Molly and Me' and I hope it was just Molly and me, meaning (laughs) I hope there not was something on the side, which I doubt if there was time. But, anyway, they only had four years together (laughs) so I doubt if there was any time for him to slip around. But anyway, he was too busy working, trying to support a wife during the Depression--marvelous character he must have had, and work ethic. Anyway, he didn't have to sell any sacred coal (laughs) but Daddy--my mother had that kind of thing about--having people do for her, and she found a stepfather very quickly. Apparently, he had noticed her before and he turned out to be a white man passing for colored and he was adopted, it turned out, and his mother--there were two people who lived together from Tuskegee, Alabama, his stepmother, who was Miss Chapman and there was Mrs. Lisk who apparently was a widower, and they lived together and had a fantastic house. One worked at the Cleveland Athletic Club, a marvelous job, and bought me one year's suit, the next year from a very fabulous place where all the rich kids' parents brought them that she met in the athletic club and she found out where they shopped, B.R. Baker and I had a B.R. Baker suit and knickers once and then the next year I had a new overcoat. It was either one or the other, every other year. And, Mrs. Lisk used to sit in the rocking chair and smoke, chain smoke, one cigarette after another. Her whole family had something to do with Tuskegee Institute and they knew George Washington Carver, and blah, blah, blah. I think these woman adored me, and I used to give their Christmas present, and their Christmas present was a 25 cent bottle of, a little tiny bottle of, Evening in Paris perfume which I bought at the drugstore because the bottle was pretty and that's all I could afford because I was given one dollar for Christmas presents, so I got--50 cents of it went to those two marvelous ladies who adored me and Al Chapman was Miss Chapman's adopted son, actually. They adopted him. And this white lady and this black lady lived together in peace and quiet, I guess. One cussed and the other one didn't. The one of course, from Tuskegee, whose family was associated with Tuskegee Institute--she was the cusser and she drank, and I found out that the cup that she drank her tea out of was not tea at all, but it was straight whiskey which she would sip on all day long. And she had a harsh, not a harsh voice, it was a very--gravely kind of voice, like Tallulah Bankhead. Story_ID: 2198 Speaker 1: What what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, and I'm sure you're going to run with this one. Speaker 2: Every Thursday, curry. One day a week, curry. Uncle [Abdul] Gahni was permitted to cook curry at our house, which was a desecration because my aunt [Ada Harding] didn't like smells in her house that weren't nice, and she bought incense that Chinaman sold us, which gave numbers when they burnt down so that you could play the numbers also, but the point was is that they were used to take the smell of stale curry out of the air and all the windows and doors were open up and down stairs to--on 93rd street when we lived there, that's what I remember the most. To get that smell of curry, she didn't want it in her new drapes and her new furniture. Curry was one day a week, that's all Uncle Gahni could make his curry. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Uncle Gahni? Speaker 2: That was Daddy's [Abdul Hamid] brother as far as we know. Speaker 1: His name was Gahni? Speaker 2: Gahni, G-A-H-N-I. Abdul Gahni and Abdul Hamid, two brothers. He became the pin-setter in my uncle's [Ben Harding] bowling alley. Story_ID: 2199 Speaker 1: Did you ever--you said there was an Indian--? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --African American community in Cleveland. Speaker 1: What part of town was that on? Speaker 2: It was the central area. I remember a family on 95th street who lived next door to a woman that I called Money. She was Mrs. George Washington and George Washington was her husband, who somehow disappeared after a while. She was a kind of shrewish person who loved kids and she had a whole room later, she was somewhat crippled. She worked in private family and she worked for a lovely family called the Portmans and she took me out there when I was six years old because I wanted to see this beautiful boy that was like a relative to her. And sometimes I even spent the night there, weekends because she was off on the weekends. And Bonnie Portman was at the Cleveland Play House as an actress. White Play House. The Cleveland Play House was all white and, not even the janitor was of color. And I was next to Sears and Roebuck and it was very interesting because they had a children's theatre called [The] Curtain Pullers and she insisted that I was going to be a star of some sort or another and that I had all the requirements to be an actor, even though I was only six, and that I should, like every white kid, rich, white kid, go to the Cleveland Play House and be in the Children's Theatre. I fit in very well. They didn't stop and think of the name Abdul, I mean, I never--they didn't know what my address was, they didn't know I lived on 93rd Street between Cedar and Quincy [Street], you know, a city in Quebec. They didn't know exactly. I was a mystery and I was accepted very well, until I told some of the kids in the community, and then, Floyd Gaffney, who was very, very midnight blue, a dancer, and he decided he wanted to be in the Play House Children's Theater because I was in it. But he came over, and lo and behold, who got cast in the 'Pirates of Penzance'. They created a dance so he would be on stage with the white girls, a sailor--some kind of dance that the sailors did, and they made a special feature for him so he'd get off the stage before any white girls were on stage with him because people--they thought the board of the Play House would be very upset to see these children mixed up. But they never came to Children's Theatre itself but they saw the production and I'll never forget when we did '[The Story of] Little Black Sambo' because, who did they cast as Little Black Sambo, but Joel Katz, who is now Joel Grey. (simultaneous) Yes, and he refused to do it in blackface. So, he was in his natural face. Because, I think his family was very, very, very liberal and wonderful--Mickey Katz was famous artist and comedian in the Borscht circuit. And Joel was very short, he is still very short, and we grew up in Children's Theatre together. They're a couple of people who came out of Children's Theatre, and came out the Play House experience in junior high school, my junior high school. An English teacher who was not mine, but who was the English [teacher] that cast me in the plays that he put on , and his name was Martin Fuss. At that time he had brown hair, and he was very, very handsome. He looked like a movie star. One day Martin Fuss went to Hollywood and Martin Fuss became what? Ross Hunter, who produced 'The Magnificent Obsession' , who produced the first 'Airport', who produced 'Lost Horizons', a remake, one of many remakes. And he was one of my mentors in junior high school. And he eventually became--he's still a bachelor, but he did go to work with Nancy Sinatra, meaning the first wife of Frank [Sinatra]. They went around together; he was like her, always companion. And I did write him when my book, 'Three Thousand Years of Black Poetry' came up, the anthology, with Alan Lomax. I sent him a copy of it. I found out he was doing 'Lost Horizons' and I received a letter back from old--"Dear Raheme," R-A-H-E-M-E, is the way my mother [Etta Beatrice Shreve] chose to spell it. "I remember you very well and was so happy to get, Rawlings Junior High School, I'm so happy to get a copy of your first book that, your anthology of poetry, first thing that you have published." And it was really very nice. It was on stationery I remember typical of him, a bit pretentious, he had, the stationery had 'Lost Horizons' on top and then "Ross Hunter, Producer" (laughs) but he wanted to be an actor. He did three films that I knew of, 'Ever Since Venus' and 'A Guy, A Gal and a Pal'. He did something with Judy Canova but he did something with Eleanor Parker because she was from Cleveland. Her father was the mathematics teacher at a school that became almost all black. It was a Jewish area that turned black. I recall that it was, well, it was the Gold Coast, because you had to buy a house. You couldn't live there and it was an upscale thing, and his daughter, Eleanor became a very famous leading lady in Hollywood. And then she disappeared (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Eleanor-- Speaker 2: Eleanor Parker. Story_ID: 2200 Speaker 1: There was Eleanor Parker, and then Ross Hunter and Martin Fuss--it's his real name, and then that boy, a man who was the son and nephew of some men who had a sportswear store, called The Newmans. [Joseph Simon] Joe Newman, who became a poet of sorts. He wrote a book called 'Verse Yet!' and some other things. He worked for Scripps Howard Paper, the 'Cleveland Press' and guess who the Newman nephew--and Hunt-- Speaker 2: Not Paul Newman? Speaker 1: It was Paul Newman, who didn't show an ounce of talent, I was told when he was trying to get in the Cleveland Play House, just like Martin Fuss, but, who became a great actor. Speaker 2: So, did you know him when he was--? (simultaneous) Speaker 1: No, I knew Paul Newman, I mean, Joe Newman, very well because my roommate of forty-nine years at that time when he died, was his family--his father worked for one of the largest law firms in Cleveland and I was instrumental in getting a black lawyer who didn't care for me because he didn't know that I was responsible for him getting his job his trial, until later--when he came to the funeral and I said, "By the way, could you come in my bedroom please?" He was surprised to know I had a bedroom in Shaker Heights in that house and that apartment. And I said "I have to tell you something because I notice you sort of look at me with disdain and you just ignore, and I said I play a greater role in this household than you think, and I said you know we sort--Mr. Haber got the B'nai Brith Human Rights Award, national, and Doris Sherry came to give it to him, to present it at the ceremony. I was in New York at the time, and I called Mr. Haber and congratulated him on the award. I said, "But Mr. Haber you don't really deserve this award because you don't even have a Negro, which was the word we used, even sweeping your floor in your office." And I said "Let alone, a lawyer with all these wonderful Negro lawyers coming out of Harvard and Yale, and you don't have a single one on your staff. How can they give you a human rights award?" So, he said, "I'll think about it." He wasn't offended. It was a surprise, I'm sure--I couldn't see him on the telephone. But I know Richard [C. Haber] was there and he probably discussed it with him and Richard agreed that his father should definitely do something, so he brought the people together at the head of the firm when they had it affirmed and talked to them about it, and they said okay let's put out a latest-- that we're looking for, and let's find some black talent to have one on our staff and they went to Harvard and Yale, of course. They were going to go to the top places and they found one. I don't know which one he came from, but he certainly was a brilliant student, and they hired him and he made a big success of that job. And I said, "By the way, I have to tell you something. He would never have had this job in Mr. Haber's law firm if it hadn't been for me and my telling the story." But I didn't want to be buddy-buddy with those Negroes because I can't stand that kind of snobbery. I respected him because of what he knew, and the very kind people they were. They just didn't understand, a lot of people, you know when my Uncle Ben [Harding] died, the wake when receiving the guests, was in the apartment. Story_ID: 2201 Speaker 1: Did you know, I know Ruby Dee's from Cleveland-- Speaker 2: Ruby Dee, she has a different name [Ruby Ann Wallace]. She was not Ruby Dee. Dee was rigid but she was married to a very wonderful man who knew everybody and he was always at the Theresa Hotel and it was a perfect stepping stone for her into meeting all the important people. Speaker 1: Now, there's a man whose last name is D-E-E? Speaker 2: Yeah, Billy Dee. Not Billy Dee Williams (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: His name was Billy Dee, and he was her--? Speaker 2: Something like that. Speaker 1: He was her first husband. Okay. You say he was a midget? Speaker 2: She knew, and she later did a movie, I think maybe the 'Joe Louis Story', or some movie, with a woman who came to the [Cleveland] Play House. She came to Karamu [Theatre] but the so-called black and then later, interracial community theatre, but she actually was at the Cleveland Play House playing quote "Negro" roles whenever they needed Negro women. And her name is Mildred Smith and Mildred Smith did over twenty, thirty roles and in one of her big roles, she was the co-star with Alfred Drake in 'Beggars'--it is a story, I think about a 'Beggars Holiday', something like that. It was a Duke Ellington musical with fabulous lyrics and book and it was an interracial story like of a Romeo and Juliet situation where the man was white and the woman was light-complexioned colored which was acceptable to Broadway, and Mildred was the co-star, her pictorial history of the Negro in the American Theatre which was put out by 'Theatre Arts' magazine, has a picture of the two of them together, and the only reason that I'm sure that her career came, she only did dignified roles, number one and preferably roles that had no racial connotation if possible, and she also by the same token, she had two things about her her story to an end, climax. She had a plane accident in Elizabeth City, New Jersey, somewhere around there, and she survived the plane accident, crash, and she was, I hope, she got some-- (simultaneous) But anyway she remained a beautiful woman. She lives in White Plains now. She became a school teacher later and she was married to David Hepburn, who was one of the first black men, or Negro men, to become publicists--Hollywood publicists for Hollywood movies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very important man, and there's a wonderful story about him because my cousin, Mrs. Count Basie [Catherine Basie], had a very--David Hepburn went up to her and said "Hey Katie," at a board meeting at the New York Urban League (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Katie, what's her--? Okay, she's your cousin? Speaker 2: Catherine Basie. A cousin, through her stepfather actually. And she said, and one of my mentors in New York later, when we got to loving each other, when we finally met, she only remembered me as a spoiled little boy with perfect manners, as a child, but she never knew--then, later Langston [Hughes] went out to her house and she said, "Oh my God, that little monster has grown up", and we became very good friends and she gave me a room in the house so that I could come to her on weekends or anytime I wanted to. But anyway, Catherine ran into him at meeting and said "Here, Katie, what's that niggah's name before he changed it?" And she said, "Which niggah?" and he said, "Your cousin, Raoul." She said, "Oh David", she said, "Raoul's name has changed, yes. His real name on his birth certificate is Raoul Abdul Raheme or Raoul Raheme Abdul. But he changed it to Raoul Abdul so simple niggers like you could remember it." (Laughs). That's a horrible story when she got back to him, but on the other hand, he was amused by it, too, both incensed and amused. Story_ID: 2202 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about--is that what you were like when you were little--you were like a little kid with perfect manners? Speaker 2: Well, yes because I was from Buxton, Ontario, Canada, all the kids were brought up well, most of the kids in the city, because my cousins and things all had good manners. They were country kids, typical and could be mischievous and everything but they were good kids. I mean, they turned out to be some really wonderful--you met the offspring of Brian, who's head of the museum now, and who I hardly know, and Shannon. I hardly know them because they were so young, but their father, it turns out, that their grandfather, who brought that fortune with farming, Mr. Prince, and his wife was my grandmother's [Elizabeth Moore Shreve] something--first cousin or maybe even sister, I don't know, but the Shreves and the Princes are intermarried too, I mean way, way back. Story_ID: 2203 Speaker 1: Where did you go to school? Speaker 2: Bolton Elementary School. Bolton, B-O-L-T-O-N. The corner of Carnegie and 89th Street. Antioch Baptist Church was nearby and Bolton Elementary School had one Negro, and one, I mean, one white and one other--a German girl was the white one who some of the kids used to beat up just because she was white. And, there was only one girl actually instigated that named Paulette. I never knew her last name, and I'd love to kick her butt. But, this girl was in Bolton Elementary School and she was--a lot of kids liked her, and so all the girls got together with the tough girls who beat Paulette up. She never touched this girl again. But, I was always the other--(laughter) and a lot of the kids did like the fact that I had an Indian daddy [Abdul Hamid] and certainly their mothers loved it because on 93rd Street those women, I heard, used to pull back the curtains and watch my beautiful Mr. Abdul go to work, and see him go to work, just to see him walk down the street. Because he had good hair, and oooh, he was handsome and he was a real Hindu, they called him. He wasn't an Indian at all. (simultaneous) They thought he was adorable. Speaker 1: So,--(simultaneous) you gained status by being--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, in some--yeah, I gained status, but I lost status in the sense that I didn't fight and scrap like some of the kids did, and I wasn't too tough, because I didn't have to be. I had a mouth. You know the expression, "He has a mouth on him." So, my--warring, not warring instrument, my, what is a gun? Speaker 1: A weapon. Speaker 2: My weapon of choice was my tongue. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were able to defend yourself? Speaker 2: Very much so, except the only thing was, I had some tough girl who, I'm sure there's a series of dykes in Cleveland who are now (laughter) who probably were the very girls that used to beat up the boys that tried to beat me up. (laughter). Speaker 1: So, you had some protectors. Speaker 2: (laughter) I had my protectors, and they were big girls who really could mow down any boy on that campus. But, I did go to Bolton Elementary School where I had teachers who knew about my background and who wanted me to have sense of being special because my mother [Etta Beatrice Shreve] was Canadian and my father was Indian, and they wanted me to always have some pride in that. Pride, because there were a lot of kids who didn't have necessarily--they wanted to just give me confidence, I guess, but they kind of wanted to set me apart, in a way. I didn't choose to be set apart. But, I mean, how could you help it with a family like that, and educated people who only went to grade school that could spell and figure perfectly and who spoke beautiful English, not American. And, certainly not the dialect that some of those people who came from the South spoke. Some of them had very definite, it wasn't just a Southern accent, it was low (laughter) Southern English. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: I never picked up on any of that because I--and I was at the Cleveland Play House where people were taught to speak and to do Shakespearean plays and to do the classics and--so, I was brought up speaking distinctly and I couldn't get away any kind of a trace of an accent other than possibly a little touch of Ohio or something, but, Midwestern if you want to call it but--it wasn't and then when I started learning German and learning foreign languages, that alters your speech a great deal. Your ear picks up on certain unpure vowels, using consonants and not being afraid to. Speaker 1: Now, when did you study--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: The year that I got to New York, I went to the New School for Social Research-- Story_ID: 2204 Speaker 1: Did you like grade school? Speaker 2: Yeah, because I felt apart, there were some of the kids I liked and everything, but remember I lived in a yellow brick terrace with Jesse Owens on one side of me and his family, poor but proud and well-educated. And my aunt and uncle, Mr. [Ben] and Mrs. [Ada] Harding who operated an international household, an (laughter) international house at their house, with Uncle [Abdul] Gahni, me and they were Canadian, who were proud Canadians--they never became citizens. They got their first papers, that's all. They claimed it was because they were too old to study the tests and take them, so they just kept their first papers. They got their permit, like green card, I guess. That's what they had, because they did pay income tax when that came in, I understand. But, they were very interesting in that my aunt took a nail and put it on the wall of the parlor where nobody sat except me and the piano, but I mean, people were entertained in the room where we ate dinner and the TV set and everything was there in that next place that we moved, and when we moved out to that area called the Gold Coast, in a small apartment building. But, I remember always she had the calendar on the wall with the Queen and King of England, not Elizabeth--the parents, Queen Mother [Queen Elizabeth] and her stuttering husband [King George VI], whom she eventually taught not to stutter and, yeah, that's right, she took credit--the Queen of England took credit, Queen Mother, Queen Mama, as they call her. And, so we had that sense of pride in being Canadian which also made us feel a little superior in a way--apart, I like to use--but actually (laughter) we did. No, we actually did, I mean, to be honestly speaking. Speaker 1: Well, that's honest. Speaker 2: 'Cause we was from Canada. And they were--them colored folks. And my aunt, I remember when she was old and we lived in a mostly white building that was bought for union members. We moved up in the heights, and it was a wonderful building and they didn't have any prejudice about it as long as you belonged to a union, but it just happened that mostly white people lived in that building and they loved my aunt and uncle because they were so proper. I mean, they fit in very well, much better than most of the people that lived in that building (laughter) who were, you know, but anyway--My aunt sat amongst those white ladies and I remember very well they were in our place and the lady across the hall's place, somebody's place, and I was visiting from New York, and my aunt said, "And you know that colored lady that lives down the hall". Story_ID: 2205 Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Ah, junior high school was Rawlings Elementary School until I wanted to go to a better school out on the Gold Coast where my stepfather's [Al Chapman] stepmother lived, so-called, Ms. Chapman and Mrs. Lisk and I used their address so I could go to Empire Junior School, which was a Jewish high school. In other words, I was going up in the world. Speaker 1: Okay. Empire Junior--Now, is this when you--at this time did you get involved in theatre? Speaker 2: I was involved in children's theatre from the age of six because of Bonnie Portman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, anyway, so I had training in theatre school and then later I got into sort of piano with Natalie and Darius' mother at a very early age, the age of six, as soon as I moved in with Aunt Ada [Harding] because she played the piano and had been a piano teacher up in Canada. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in drama and music? Speaker 2: I had that, and I had Buster [Harding] as an example of a wonderful arranger and had gone to the Cleveland Institute of Music. He didn't play classical music anymore, but he played high class jazz, because see, the people he worked for--Count Basie's orchestra, his big tune '920 Special' which he co-wrote with Earl Warren but wasn't really co-written. Buster was drunk and he needed some money, and he sold half of the rights to Earl Warren. That later came out in the wash when royalties were involved and whether I should get his share. But I loved Earl Warren, too and he--we were talking about Uncle Ben and Buster--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: We were talking about high school. Speaker 2: High school, yes. In high school I went to John Hay [High School] because that was not too far away from home, 93rd Street and 105th, you know, that distance and I went there because I wanted to go to an academic high school and I mean, not an academic, but a high school where you learn how to type, how to--you learn everything you need for business. Speaker 1: Business high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Something like a good commercial high school. It was a very racist place because there were a lot of Italian-American kids, Sicilian, I might add, because I make a distinction now that I've been around (laughter)--I like the northern Italians better because they don't steal, most of them, and the Sicilians, being very poor, had to get money anyway they could. So, you couldn't put your jewelry in the hotel or leave it in the hotel or your watch and everything, when you went out of the room. You always had to be very careful in Sicily, but in the south--but in the north the people had jobs and had brighter hair and they had blue eyes and they were the more elite of the Italians. [Luciano] Pavarotti sang those songs of Naples, and I forget the song. Neapolitanische, as we say in German. Neopolitan songs, is it? Speaker 1: Uh, huh. Speaker 2: He is into Neopolitan. He's not a southern Italian at all. If you see his name ends in an "i", Pavarotti, and he's from Modena which is very north, not too terribly far away from Milan, and he's definitely not southern Italian. And so all that is--in fact, high class Negros who've been brought up very, very--and whose churches were very--who belong to congregational churches and they didn't know very much about spirituals at all, and they kind of thought of spirituals as something of an intuitive kind of thing and they never sang with rhythm. They sang the traditional Protestant, I like that word better than Protestant, if you look in the dictionary. Protestant is just like the word trespass, those who trespass against us, or something, instead of trespass, as we said, but I--the English. Anyway, he didn't sing Neopolitan style. I mean, you needed one of those other Italian tenors who came from the South to sing those things authentically. Speaker 1: Now, you're at this commercial high school, and you're still involved in theatre and music. Speaker 2: Yeah, because they had a real good drama department, very good stage craft and they had very fine music teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And again, I had people there who were like mentors. There was a woman from Italy who taught, because she dreamed the world. We got a whole bunch of Italian kids who left Italy because of [Adolf] Hitler and--[Benito] Mussolini and they came to Cleveland, they didn't speak, and you know that's why when you speak of bilingual education and how some people are so against it, they say. "We're Americans and you're in America and you've got to speak English, blah, blah, blah." And nobody-well, you're not supposed to, and--yet those Italian kids had separate classes in the morning in Italian so that they didn't get behind the other students. Their main subjects they had in class was where they spoke only Italian, but in the afternoon they had everything English to quickly give them vocabulary and pronunciation and help them to fit in the melting pot, but they weren't pushed into the melting pot. It's the whole idea of the kids who spoke black English who were fortunate in some ways to have a dialect that they could, or a way of expressing themselves which was private. It goes back to the underground railroad and the spirituals, which had hidden meanings. There was always a language that they spoke that white people didn't understand. They sang. When they spoke of Canaan land, they were speaking of going to Canada, and cross the wide river or something, it was--the River of Jordan was the border between Canada and the United States and the Detroit River. And, all of that was underground. "Steal away" was not steal away to Jesus. It was steal away to the worlds where we could have our private feelings and talk about things of importance to us. I learned all of that later. It took [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] to make me get in touch with African American roots. Speaker 1: So, were you--I guess all the black Canadians seem to, from that part, seem to stay in touch with other and go back for reunions and that sort of thing--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: They have a Buxton reunion I went to every year until I moved to Europe and then I couldn't come anymore because the trip from Europe would have been very expensive, so I stayed over there for three years without returning home. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: When you were in high school--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: --but I became a Viennese, because I didn't associate with the American kids. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: You were used to going to Buxton for the reunion and--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Of course, I answered to my grandparents because my grandmother [Elizabeth Moore Shreve], I was the favorite grandson, unfortunately, I later found out resented a little bit by other grandchildren who were my cousins and I never realized I was a favorite, but I was a favorite primarily, I'm sure, I'm also certain, because I was an orphan and all the other kids had parents, a mother and a father. Speaker 1: And there's another reason to--(simultaneous) your cousin, Artis Lane, a great sculptor and painter who lives in Los Angeles, that we've interviewed as well and is in this collection says that you used to tell, you used to sit in a tree and tell stories. Speaker 2: Me? Oh, I read from [William] Shakespeare and--'cause I have read, when I went up to Toronto one summer, all thirty-two or whatever it is of Shakespeare's plays, and then left all the books in my aunt's house and she had that terrific find for the library (laughter). Speaker 1: How old were you when you read all of Shakespeare? Speaker 2: About sixteen. That is somewhat unusual-- Speaker 1: Oh, well, that is somewhat unusual, so I just I would question you-- Speaker 2: I was also not a good student in school, only the subjects I liked. I graduated at 19 when all the dumb kids did from high school, because I had to stay over and, I'll never forget the principal called me in his office and I was failing, and just some points I needed more to graduate at 19. And I did go to summer school and catch up a little, but then I still failed something. And do you know what he said to me, "Mr. Abdul, you have had a very checkered career at this school, but, he said, you know, you're failing and you don't have quite enough points to graduate, but we're going to do something very dishonest. We're going to change one of your subjects, science, to a passing grade because we want to get rid of you; we don't want you here." And so, I graduated with my class, (simultaneous) but I was down at the bottom. Speaker 1: That's interesting because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But I'm glad I was a bad student, what they thought was a bad student, because first of all I spoke better than mostly all the kids in the entire school and the faculty. Number two, my breadth of interests, and say the assimilating many, many cultures and having visited museums of art, and many, many times because that was my solace, I mean I had a place to go to where I felt at home among all those great masterpieces and the bad paintings of Jesus--you know, those horrible religious paintings, that are really crappy and they call them masterpieces but most of it is like a man like an old man--ooh, I couldn't stand that, because Jesus was probably a beautiful child. And, I'm sure--well babies do look a little--but I mean that thing looked so ugly. You see it's enough to make you not become a Christian if you saw those pictures and didn't go to the church and hear his words. You wouldn't choose to associate with a baby that looked that ugly because that's the way he was depicted (laughter) by those great Italian artists. Story_ID: 2206 Speaker 1: You weren't the typical student in high school, I take it? Speaker 2: No, I was exposed to theatre, I've seen the Shakespearean play; I'd seen Hamlet; I'd seen good theatre at the [Cleveland] Play House and then, I had that, and when I came to Karamu [Theater] and I wanted to be in the theatre because it was in my area, it was just a few blocks from my house where my aunt [Ada Harding] and uncle [Ben Harding] lived, and I wanted to be a part of that, Russell Jelliffe, the co-founders, Mrs. [Rowena Woodham] Jelliffe took me aside and she said, "Well, well, darling, you know, stay over there at the Play House; you don't really belong here. You know your father [Abdul Hamid] is Indian and you're doing quite well over there; there's no need for you to come with these Negros," and (laughter)--the big encourager of Negro talent. But she just didn't feel that I quite fit in there either. Speaker 1: How did you feel? Speaker 2: I didn't--(simultaneous)--because anybody who accepted me and who wanted to give me an opportunity to encourage me to grow and who respected the creative part of me, and encouraged that and nurtured that, I don't care what color they were and they could be the most prejudiced people in the world as long as they didn't turn it on me. Because, first of all, I later learned that people who openly say things, especially Southern whites, that they are the best friends many black people could have-you know why? You can read them; they tell you exactly what they mean, they're honest. But the kind of people who behind your back--and they treat you with a dignity that's fine, but underneath, it's bullshit. (laughter). I'd much rather have that, because you can know how to deal with the person who is direct with you and let you know exactly how they feel. Speaker 1: And how did you feel about who you were? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Very ambivalent, and I still am, because I don't know who I am and I don't want to because I've had so much fun (laughter). Although Langston [Hughes] said to me once, "Man who sits on fence sometimes gets spike up behind." I didnt. But, he wasn't referring to me, he was referring to some other people. Langston was an elitist too. He pretended to be a folk, you know, and he was in a way and he did write real life as he saw it. But, he was always a bit exotic. I mean every now and then he would say, "Abdul, no more colored, no more culture--let's go downtown" and we would go to the Russian Tea Room and have a nice meal (laughter)--we'd go someplace where he couldn't see any colored folks, just to get away from "the race," he called them because it put a great burden and a sense of responsibility on a person like Langston who was kind of a spokesman for the whole Negro race. That's awfully hard to live up to, and Eartha Kitt, a lot of people don't care for her or didn't care for her when she said, "I don't represent the race." One time she said something to that effect. She said, "I represent Eartha Kitt, so don't be angry with the whole Negro race just because of something I said, or so forth." It was to that effect. I was paraphrasing, but she wanted to be an individual. She was Eartha Kitt. Period. And I'm Raoul Abdul, period, and I get upset when people try to place me in, or any other person I know--in a box, like you know those things where you put the mail and you've got to have a category. I really used to admire Ms. [Catherine] Basie who used to lie to the census man. One time he came to the house when I was out there for a while, and he wanted to know what the racial orientation of people was, so we put Bill Basie as black. As colored. That was the word used. Diane Basie and Catherine and I were white (laughter)--And that's what they put on the census records. Just for fun, we did it for devilment, because how dare somebody put people together--and a lot of political people that I know feel that that is wrong to not put yourself down as a black person because they said, you know, in Washington more money is put in according to numbers, and so you want to be one of the number. Well, I am willing to join the band if I like that idea, and I like to see the money, blah, blah, but I don't want any part of the world closed off to me. I want access to the world. I mean, to any part of the world I happen to be in, or any situation, I want access. I don't want to be left out. I don't want to--I did feel left out a great deal by a lot of people in different--got beat up by white kids for not being white enough. I got beat up by black kids for being too light and from being from foreign--both parents being foreign, period. And it is very difficult, and so I grew to dislike both groups. I mean, you know (laughter). Story_ID: 2207 Speaker 1: Tell, me were there any teachers or particular mentors in school, grade school or high school? Speaker 2: I had teachers in the community like Dr. Selma Watson George, who was a member of Antioch Baptist Church and her husband was Claybourn George, an attorney, who was the first Negro to go downtown and have an office, a lawyer. And he taught Sunday school at Antioch Baptist Church. Both of them were members. She was from Texas originally, and then later she was a graduate from the University of Chicago, and she naturally got a PhD, over 50, from New York University. She did it mostly by mail order. I mean, that is, because she'd already done the work. It was just a question of her thesis she had to come up and stay here for a short while, and her thesis. But, the name of the thesis, 'The Sociological, something, of the Significance of the Negro Spiritual.' Fantastic title, but anyway, she encouraged me very much and she sort of felt I was almost like one of her children in a way. They never had any kids and she really did, because she watched me grow, but I knew that she had--because she had a PhD and that time she only had a Masters but she'd been a delegate to the U.N. [United Nations] and blah, blah. They were big Republicans, which my family definitely were not Republican sympathizers but with Franklin Delano Roosevelt all along. Anyway, we--all the way. I'm fans of Amos 'n Andy on the radio. Speaker 1: Did you listen to it on the radio coming up? Speaker 2: Yeah, of course. I listened to those programs on Sunday night with the creaking doors and the spooky shows. And I'd have my lights out and I listened to Amos 'n Andy and whom we found very funny, Madame Queen, and Sapphire and all those. We listened to that every night at dinner, a fifteen minute program, and we loved it because we thought they were real people and had no idea that they were white men playing all the voices. We didn't know that. It was their concept, but it was so true. You could see in terms of humanity, the people that they created. There were people just like those people and fortunately, they didn't show the up and coming, I mean, the achievers, but they got their just due because Howard University and Fisk helped them and [Clark] Atlanta U [University] did plenty for the black middle class and to make them feel elite and superior to all the rest of the race and to have to uplift the whole black race. They did that. They did a good job (laughter). Story_ID: 2208 Speaker 1: What did you do immediately after high school? Speaker 2: After high school. Well, I met my friend, Richard [C.] Haber, whom I spoke of earlier--of whom I spoke earlier, and we decided to come to New York when I was twenty-two. I worked for Karamu [Theater] briefly. I worked for the Cleveland 'Call and Post' first as a reporter and then I got them to give me a classical music column. Speaker 1: Now, we skipped your photography. Speaker 2: Well, that was just a very--Shanti Bahadur (ph.) was an Indian from Bombay who later became, he was a portrait photographer--high class--in Cleveland. (simultaneous). Shanti Bahadur and my father [Abdul Hamid], apparently he knew my father, all those Indians knew each other even though they were in different circles. He was in the upper echelon with the educators and things. He later became a photography teacher of the philosophy of photography at [Case] Western Reserve University. But in any case, the schools are all a part of one now, but anyway, he let me be an apprentice in his studio by handing me a broom and a schaufel [dustpan] as they say in German, what do you call it--you know, and he said, "Here, clean the dark room." And I said, "I've never swept a floor in my life", which was not quite true. He said, "This is the way you learn. You start out at the bottom and work your way up." He said, "You don't think you're going to come in and develop pictures and make enlargements and do all that right away, and use the camera. The first thing you're going to do is learn how to clean the dark room if you want to learn what I know." And so, I just did, and very quickly he showed me different things. He let me make enlargements of his negatives, but he would never let anyone else develop his negatives, because the negative is a very important thing. And he used a beautiful view camera with 8 x 10, or sometimes 5 x 7--thing on the back, the big negatives and the big retouched gorgeous portraits. His philosophy of portraiture became, as he became more philosophical and then the university was--a photograph should be, a portrait should be a beautiful rendition of a man's live age. You know, souvenir of a person's existence. But it should be a beautiful one. Story_ID: 2209 Speaker 1: And then the Cleveland 'Call and Post'. I worked for them as, as soon as I graduated from high school, Mr. Loeb gave me a job, the city editor, as a cub reporter, which meant that I covered obituaries, I wrote obituaries and rewrites. But I did an awful lot of--I did not have to go to journalism school to become a good journalist. Speaker 2: How did you come to the attention of the 'Call and Post'? Speaker 1: Because my uncle's [Ben Harding] bowling alley, which he was the co-manager with someone else, assistant manager and the manager for these people who were in the underworld, the black underworld, they were the leaders of it--the numbers racket and they got out of that, Mr. Price and Mr. Pearson. They became respectable citizens. They were very fine people and they were not show-offs. They didn't go in fancy cars. They were businessmen, and I doubt if they killed anybody or did anything terrible, and they pushed somebody out of the market, but not--and they were real gentlemen and they trusted my uncle. He was Canadian and they knew that my uncle was not out to steal anybody's money. They just felt that, and they were right. And, so I, there was an enterprising man there who operated something at the bowling alley, selling shoes--I don't know what he did, but he was a nice man, and he encouraged me--he had a mimeograph machine, and he'd re-edit a paper every week of the leagues that met there, and their scores and do feature stories on some bowler, and Mr. Loeb--his wife, Beulah used to bowl in the women's league and so he would come, because he didn't care for bowling necessarily, and he sat there proofreading things and doing all kinds of--his work, his homework from the paper, while he waited for Beulah, to drive her home. And Mr. Loeb read that little bulletin and realized that I had a talent for writing, and he was determined that he was going to nurture it. So, I got a job for $25 a week. At the 'Call and Post', Negroes exploited each other in those days, and they still do. I mean, I have relatives who will say, "Don't work for no black person, because they're not going to pay you right. They're going to be worse than the Jews." I don't know why they had to put all that on Jewish people, because--(simultaneous). The best friend that many black people have, the opportunities they had for decent employment was quite often due to Jewish people.(simultaneous). At lower salaries, but nevertheless, they got those jobs and they were encouraged and nurtured and became good businessmen because they learned the fundamentals of business. Speaker 2: Wasn't the proximity of many of the Jewish businesses in those days, correct me if I'm wrong, were predominant among black communities. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah, but the point is, you would be stupid not to be able to find some place where you could sell your wares, in other words, you would own stores where people bought things and you would own little stores, you would own things that people needed, you'd find the need of the community and then you fulfilled that need. There's nothing wrong with that because--but the main thing that I think is so awful is the fact that they're so berated for that many times by people who don't know the history, and they also are very--I'm disappointed in black youth whose families built beautiful homes that they lived in, they acquired, because their fathers or grandfathers were sleeping car porters, with A. Philip Randolph, and those people, and the waiters and head waiters in the finest restaurants, and they acquired so much material wealth and beautiful homes, and those kids never would have gone to college because the scholarships were not available then. Parents paid for their kids to go to Howard [University], to the different--and do you know that those kids put their nose up at being a head waiter, or being a waiter, or doing anything that did service for people, and missed out on all those jobs? Now, all those jobs are given to foreigners. They didn't have to wash dishes and do that, they could have been chefs, and were, at one time, and many a chef get a country club, and many a maitre d' in the country club, or a waiter in the country club accumulated enough roles in their social position, financial, which in America you're judged a lot by money, and they had wonderful luxuries that other black kids didn't have, and yet they turned their nose up at something that they could have dominated during that era and made it almost the exclusive thing, and kept it exclusive, and they could have cleaned up. Speaker 2: So, how long did you stay at the 'Call and Post'? Speaker 1: Aah, until I asked for a raise, within a little while I asked for a raise, and I saw the people getting a $5 raise, so I got my first $5 raise, then I wrote a letter to the editor, to the owner, W.O. [William O.] Walker, who was very proud of me later in life, he really admired me, but you couldn't sit down in his office, you had to stand in front of his desk, the authority figure, and I wrote him a letter saying, "Dear Mr. Walker, if I don't get a rise in salary, I'm going to have to seek employment elsewhere." (pause) Speaker 2: So, did it--. Speaker 1: He called me in his office and I stood there, practically trembling, and I said "Mr. Walker--" He said, "You wrote that, I got your letter". I said, "Yes". And he said, "Mr. Abdul, you are, you asked for this raise and said that you would have to seek employment elsewhere if you don't get it. I wish you great luck on your next job, and get the heck out of here. If you're not going to stay, go, and I wish you luck with--somewhere else you'll get that salary you want." He had the nerve to say that, and left seven million dollars to Howard University, or one of them, and there's a big center in Cleveland called the W.O. Walker Center for Rehabilitated Employees, or I don't know, something--workers, please--and he had all that and paid us those little tiny salaries of twenty-five and thirty dollars a week. When I got to thirty-five dollars, I said, that is not enough money for me to make, I mean, because I saw all them rich white kids at the Cleveland Play House and everything, and Joel Grey, Joel Katz then, and all those kids, and what their families had, and I said, no sirree, I'm not going to work for no thirty-five dollars a week--please! And it's true-- Speaker 2: So, it's 1948, '49 [1949]? Speaker 1: I don't remember. (simultaneous) Yeah, around then. And then I went on, I went to Karamu [Theater] and worked as public relations, where I got fifty dollars a week, so that was a bit more and then I met Richard [C. Haber] and decided that I would like to live in New York. We came to New York ostensibly to see 'Wozzeck' by Alban [Maria Johannes] Berg at the Met [Metropolitan Opera]--no, 'Wozzeck' at [New York] City Opera and (unclear), which were my two favorite sort of modern operas. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what year did you come to New York? Speaker 1: When I was twenty-two. And I decided I didn't want to go back to Cleveland to live anymore. I loved New York, and I've been here ever since, except for Vienna and, you know, but I mean I've been a part of this city for a long, long time and I feel anybody who puts fifty years in a city, you know-- Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Speaker 1: --deserves these awards now that are coming. Speaker 2: Sure. Story_ID: 2210 Speaker 1: 1950 or so, in New York City, what was New York City like then? Was Harlem--? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: It was fairly decent, to go up to Langston's [Hughes]. There were a few drunks that sat around and some people who were gradually getting into dope on the streets, but they didn't bother anybody, and the pretty house that he lived in and-- Speaker 1: How did you meet Langston Hughes? Speaker 2: Well, because of Rowena Jelliffe. She gave me a letter of introduction to him, and he immediately liked me. And later, I found through an psychoanalyst when he died, that Langston thought that I was his son. I was the son he always wanted to have. I didn't know that because first of all, I called him Mr. Hughes out of respect because all of these young people came from all over and immediately called him Langston--young writers and things--and I thought that was so disrespectful for one of the leading writers. You first call Mr. Hughes, and then when he gives you the opportunity, you say that. So, I always referred to him as Mr. Hughes. I referred to him as Langston away from him, meaning if I were in a group and I said Langston, so and so and so and so, I didn't say Mr. Hughes, but I felt that I owed him the respect--I wanted to give him the respect that I would like to have had if I were in his position. That's all it was. Speaker 1: Well, you--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: He spoke German, by the way, and he spoke--his stepfather's housekeeper and wife were all probably in Mexico, and he spoke perfect French, and he spoke very good Spanish. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--(simultaneous) As a kid who read complete books of Shakespeare at age sixteen--? Speaker 2: I didn't understand them. Speaker 1: Did you know, even if you didn't understand them, had you been exposed to black poetry, or Negro poetry, in those day? Speaker 2: No, I gave a bad review to Langston Hughes' book called, not a bad review, I was very critical of some of the poetry, I said that some of it was second rate in a book called 'One Way Ticket', or 'Montage for a Dream Deferred'--one of these books came out and I was asked to review it for the 'Call and Post', and I remember the review--had the review for a long time--and I finally showed it to Langston and we laughed. And he always said after, "I'm going to put you on my list." That means, his 'S' list, but he took criticism from me, which was amazing when we were writing, and we weren't up for a deadline, although mostly. But, I would read his stuff because I had to type it all, and I would read this stuff, and I'd say "Langston, couldn't you just--Mr. Hughes--you should revise this just a little, this is a little sloppy, and you can write--remember this is going to be in print and people are going to feel that this is your best, and it isn't always." And, he would listen to me, and he would go and scratch it out, but I really hurt myself more than him, because of the fact that I had to type then and revise, and I had to type the revisions in three copies. (laughs). I mean, it was work. But, he learned to respect me and sometimes, when he was up for a real deadline and he had some record jackets or something to do that he thought I knew something about--an album by Shirley Verrett, that he did for her, freedom songs, there were different kinds, Kurt Wile, all kinds, they weren't all--there were different countries, and all those things. He asked me to write the notes, really. I wrote the notes really with him, and some of them for them, and he would just Langstonize them (laughs). In other words, he would re-do just a little so it had his personality, but I wrote them and I know two distinct albums also, the album for--I had a lot to do with the descriptions of the music and, an album by Joan Baez, so those two albums I worked on and I really did the words. Speaker 1: That's interesting. I heard you say--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: He never gave me credit. I didn't want any credit. All I wanted was the little measly dollar and a half an hour that he paid me because he couldn't afford any more, and I knew that. It was just for fun. We had a rapport and a wonderful camaraderie. Speaker 1: You're in Harlem, I guess, some years after Harlem Renaissance? Speaker 2: Yes, I worked with him a little while. He introduced me to everybody who was anybody so that when I had my coffee concert series, which was the first subscription series of classical concerts in Harlem, you had to buy a subscription, you couldn't buy one ticket, at Saint--a pre-school church Speaker 1: This was much later, though? Speaker 2: No, that was when I was working for Langston. I met all those people, and I did a lot of things. And, they were all sold out because Langston made sure I knew the right people and I contacted Paul Johnson, and all those people saw those bright, young kids from Cleveland, and they were going to help him. If it killed them, they were going to make sure I succeeded, because they liked my dream and they saw that it was almost unpenetratable, that is, the balloon couldn't be burst, a sign of tenacity, because I always learned bright and early from working with Jonathan in Karamu [Theatre] how to go straight forward, and if you keep on, even if you inch along very slowly, but if you keep with it, you've got to succeed if you've got any talent. You will, and that's what a lot of Cleveland people did when they came to New York, as many of them succeeded in the theatre and in music and blah, blah. I mean, there are a lot of big people who are from Cleveland and it's because they didn't take no for an answer. They were determined that they were put on this earth to do something, or that their will wanted something and they had the talent, and they found by sticking to it, they went over all the people who had been in New York for twenty-five years, or born here, (laughs) trying to get someplace, and all (laughs) all the leading roles and things were going to people from my home town. But it was because they wouldn't give up, and that's why Paul Newman succeeded, even though I'm sure people--I'm sure that's why he succeeded--why Martin Fuss who became Ross Hunter, while Joel Gray, Joel Katz became Joel Gray. How they succeeded because of their tenacity, no, for an answer. Story_ID: 2211 Speaker 1: What was Langston Hughes' personality like? Speaker 2: He was just very amusing, and he found humor in almost everything as long as you didn't criticize him too much. I mean, I had to do it in subtle ways, or in very funny ways. I mean, to make things a joke and then he would get the point (laughs) but I got the point too. But he just had a wonderful time, and if he had been wealthy enough to pay an assistant what an assistant was worth, it would have been a very interesting profession. But, I don't talk about Langston very much. I don't give lectures on him, very seldom, because I don't want to be known as the assistant to Langston Hughes. If I pass on and there's an obituary, I don't want it to say, "Raoul Abdul, long-time literary assistant to Langston Hughes." I don't want that, because I have my own thing, and it's very valid and very--it's my own achievement, my achievement to get a job with a famous man, or to be exposed to many things--to have a cousin [Catherine Basie] who was married to Count Basie, to have this and that, Buster Harding, all those people. It's not my achievements, that's theirs. Speaker 1: Right, but I still want to ask you about some of those-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I don't need them. Speaker 1: I still want to ask you about some of those figures and stories you might have about them (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I don't need them. Speaker 1: Was Richard Wright in town? Speaker 2: No, I didn't know him. Speaker 1: Ted Ward or any of those--? Speaker 2: [James Theodore] Ted Ward wrote me a wonderful letter from Chicago when I did a program called 'The Negro as Playwright,' which put me--gained great respect, because on Broadway, I did a wonderful lecture at the Countee Cullen Library. It was packed with all the important people in black theatre, and everybody who was anybody was there, packed in there. Janet Collins, oh, great people, and they were very impressed by this kid from Cleveland who came up, and was he was only, what, twenty-four or twenty-five years old, and I had people from Karamu [Theatre] reading parts of the plays and I wrote to him to ask for something because I'd read about him, Ted Ward, from Chicago, and I said--I loved his plays and the neighborhood theatre had produced 'Our Land' with Mildred Smith, and the singer [Dorothy Dandridge] who later became Carmen Jones, and I appreciated him, and I wanted him on this program called 'The Negro as Playwright' and I wrote him a letter, and he wrote me a handwritten letter back, and said "I see no reason why I should be on a program. I will not grant you permission to have a reading for many of my plays because," he said, "I respect what you're doing, and I respect you, but I don't see why I should want to be on a program where people were placed together because of their race, or that became the criteria." (laughs). And I agreed with him in a way, but in a way, I felt that he was depriving young people of a very positive and wonderful image to show what they could become if they wanted to. And, so you're damned if you do, and damned if you don't. But I could understand his point of view, but I was very mad at him at the time because I wanted something by Theodore Ward on it, so I just had to write about him and about his plays and I mean, talk about them, but I couldn't have any of his stuff out there for people to hear, but I discovered Louie Peterson who had a play on Broadway just at the time I was doing it. So, that was in a way, good, because Louis Peterson brought things up to almost Lorraine Hansberry. She had not quite come on the scene here in New York. 'Raisin in the Sun' hadn't got here. But, anyway, that was that. We did a lot of fun things with Langston. He really apparently respected the things I said because he didn't fire me for being critical, for looking at his things analytically, I didn't mean to call it critical--really, analytical, and to make him aware when something was not his best, and he accepted that from me, and it's kind of amazing when I look back on it, because I'd fire somebody immediately if all I got was that kind of negative--(laughs) it wasn't negative, though. It was really positive, because it was to his advantage to have somebody who could look at him honestly and not in awe. I never was in awe of him. (pause) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've never been in awe of anybody much, because of the fact that I feel comfortable with almost everybody on every walk of life, and unless they choose to reject, it's their loss, because I'm interesting too, and they might be losing out on a little humor and looking at themselves as human beings (laughs) instead of as on a pedestal. Story_ID: 2212 Speaker 1: Had you focused on music this year? Speaker 2: Yeah, I came here and I got a scholarship from New York College of Music [College of Music, New York] to study with Alexander Kipnis who was the great Russian bass, K-I-P-N-I-S, Sasha, and he was one of the great Boris Godunovs and he was a great star of the Chicago and the Metropolitan Opera--the Chicago in its heyday, under Mary Garden, and he was especially good in [Richard] Wagner, he was very versatile and he learned German, he was discovered in a prison camp by a German soldier way back and heard that beautiful voice, and he was singing for the other soldiers and that man, one of the officers, took him to the Berlin State Opera, and let them hear him, and of course, they wanted to engage him, and they did, but he had to go back and sleep in the prison camp at night. Speaker 1: When did you go to the New York College of Music? When did you start? Speaker 2: Right when I arrived in New York, practically, because I wanted to study with Alexander Kipnis because I used to listen to his records of German songs, [Johannes] Brahms and [Johann Sebastian] Bach especially, in the library in Cleveland, and I learned to respect, and I knew that he was one of the greatest in his field, and I have always been attracted, in terms of studies, to people who achieve greatness, not necessarily with maximum publicity, but who were considered very distinguished. I sang at the Marlboro Festival in 1956. I went up to Marlboro as part of the group that comes up to study and then get concerts for the summer under Rudolph Serkin, I mean, you know, the very best because I've always strived to, I've always been one to strive to, wanting to make music with the best. When I gave my New York debut, I had a man who was one of the top pianists for singers who's now at University of Urbana, Illinois, University of Illinois, John Wustman and he played for some of the greatest artists, Elizabeth Schwarzkopf and [Luciano] Pavarotti until he got tired of Pavarotti being sloppy, and he kind of made sure Pavarotti--disciplined him, and because he was such a personality and sometimes he goes overboard but he's a wonderful artist, Pavarotti, when he's at his best, and when he's serious. And so, I had him and I gave him equal billing. I was one of those people who the singer and the pianist got, and pianist, not accompanist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I assisted in my leader class, my master class in German leader, that everybody put Kelly Wyatt who is my associate, either at the piano or, pianist, so and so baritone, so and so soprano. Always give the pianist don't call him an accompanist, because he would be nothing without those people, because they knew more about music usually than any singer knows, and they're the ones who really make a difference at your own concert from a well-sung recital to an artistic success, and it can only be when two people collaborate to make beautiful music, and they were equals. They are artistic equals, and if you think of them as under, you're sunk because they can ruin your whole performance by the tempo, they can make it hard for you to breathe by drawing the phrase out so long that you run out of breath, they can do all kinds of things to screw you up. Speaker 1: Well, were you a soloist yourself? Speaker 2: Of course. A wonderful leader singer, and the alcohol came into the picture after ten years of singing beautiful concerts of only German songs, only. Speaker 1: And this is a period of time from-- Speaker 2: I decided I wanted to sing [Franz] Schubert, [Johannes] Brahms. You see Schubert right up there on the piano. You don't see William Grant Still because first of all, he wasn't as good a composer as Schubert. (laughs). But he was the best that we had in America. Speaker 1: Did you know him? Speaker 2: No, but I knew Howard Swanson who was a better song composer. He's a great song composer and the first Negro to win the New York Music Critics Award, for Circle Award for the best performance of a contemporary piece by the New York Philharmonic. He was a wonderful man, but he's too precious to be a popular favorite, but as soon as the people hear his music, they respond to it, because of a spiritual something, that goes out. He's more French than anything, but it's a combination of that Negritude with the French spirit. L'esprit de France and the mixture--a very, very special man. So anyway, I have a man who I call my cousin because his mother had married into the Shadd family at one time, Hale Smith, Jr., a wonderful composer, symphonic, he does jazz arrangements too, but his symphonic music, I mean, he has fantastic pieces, that have been played by major orchestras all over the world. Speaker 1: So, he's your accompanist? Speaker 2: No, he's not my accompanist, he's my so-called cousin. He's my adopted cousin, and he adopted me as cousin because it's a Buxton experience. See, Ira Shadd and Buxton, and that was his uncle, Ira. Speaker 1: I thought we were talking about accompanists-- Speaker 2: No, not accompanists. I had a wonderful collaborator for thirty years, Kelly Wyatt, who is outstanding, and he's played for some great, great people and some not so great people, but he makes not so great people sound great. Story_ID: 2213 Speaker 1: I only like pure-blooded people, I don't like Mischlinge--and so I ran out. Speaker 2: And this is what--who told you this? Speaker 1: Otto Vogel (ph.) Speaker 2: And he--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: He was the leading-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I'm just trying to put this in context, though-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He was my teacher of voice at the Academy of Music in dramatic art in Vienna in the-- Speaker 2: In the--1962? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's when I graduated. So it was 1959 to 1962. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: And Herr Vogel said to me, Herr Vogel said--and I walked out, and he said, "Are you coming to your next lesson?" I said, "Well I have to think about it," I said, "because you've insulted me", and I said, "I don't see how I can come in this room and sing anymore with this", and I thought about it when I got out. I never told him anybody at the time, and I said, you know what, that man told the truth. He told what he really meant, and I said, you know what, there won't be any love between you and this bond that people have with their voice teacher so they can't pull away from them, some day they become so dependent. I said, "Just think. You'll just work on singing and you'll take the best thing he has to give, and you won't be involved with any kind of friendship. You don't have to be the man's friend because you know so much you want what he's got." What I liked about him is he taught you how to be independent, and he hoped that someday you would leave his studio so that you would be able to do it on your own, and only come back to him when you were having some difficulty understanding something along the way. But he wanted you to be independent, because he was, as a singer, and later after you accumulate your--you let it sink it and then you use what you learn, but you don't have somebody constantly controlling you. You shouldn't have to do that. Well, Mr. Vogel then, at the end of my stay there, when I gave the senior recital with the kids on the senior recital to get my Reifeprüfung which is on that wall, it says "with the highest artistic merits." In other words, I had special merits as an artist, and you know, which is a high recommendation on your diploma. They write it in, type it in, that's extra. "Mit vorzüglicher Hochachtung"--and so, you see it on there. And do you know that that man came to me after I sang that evening. He said, "How did you do?" or the next day or next lesson, and I said, "Oh, terrible, I wasn't pleased." "What do you mean, you're not pleased?" He said, "It is marvelous. You did the best on the program. I put you first because I thought you were going to be the weakest, and I put the best ones later." And he said, "And you walked off with the show." He said, "The way you sang that one song, he said, "everybody was talking about that after the concert." And, he said, "And furthermore, you're my student", blah, blah, blah. In other words, you've had good training. And he became, like, he told me the truth. That's what he really felt. And I felt that that was a wonderful compliment. Speaker 2: Especially coming from someone who doesn't even like you in the beginning, doesn't like your kind--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: He explained to me when I left that summer I went and studied privately in his home and that's where I found a picture of Adolf Hitler above his bed, signed. And I said, "Mr. Vogel, why did you say," I said, "You said something that really, I was very upset about." And he said, "Don't you realize you didn't show any temperament". And the only way I thought I could get any temperament out of you. I wanted to see if you had any in you. I had to insult you, because I wanted to see how you would respond." He said, "If somebody insulted me, I'd go and try and do twice as good." And he said, "You did." He said, "You showed some expression, something personal, your anger and your walking out of the room with a person like myself who people worship, and you walked out of the room on me." He said, "You showed spunk." He even used the word spunk, but he meant that. And that is what showed temperament, and that's what I lacked, and he wanted me to find out whether I had that in me, because you know, some people are very placid, and they learn how to do everything perfectly. But somehow there's that little missing thing that gets under, and it moves people, and he wanted to see if I had that (laughs)--a horrible way to do it! Terrible story. Story_ID: 2214 Speaker 1: You are part of, I mean, black singers in Germany. Paul Robeson sang in German--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: He sang in a lot of languages. He was a very good linguist, but the people who did Roland Hayes, of course, who perfected German, because he lived in Czechoslovakia--with the Czechoslovakian musician and family who immersed him in the German spirit, and he didn't like to sing [Johann Sebastian] Bach. He felt he didn't understand it, his religious music, and Dr. Lierhammer in Vienna said. "But Roland, you sing 'Were you There When they Crucified My Lord'. You sing with great passion. That's what Bach's passions are about too, the same passions, just different language and a different culture." He said, "Why don't you try to imbue Bach's arias, this religious music, with the same spirit that you do your own spirituals". And Roland Hayes said that opened a whole world for him, and he suddenly realized it was true. And he wrote about it in Marian Anderson's book, his autobiography and her son wrote. Ms. Anderson learned how to speak German finally, actually speak it fluently, and with beautiful pronunciation, because a lot of people don't know she spent a whole year in Berlin working with Michael Raucheisen who discovered Elizabeth Schwarzkopf and discovered many, many great singers. He was a great pianist for singers, accompanist, and he knew the repertoire and style, and he passed that on. But of all the Americans who came to him, he always said there was only one person, and it was a singer who moved over there---it turned out he had two wives. He had a wife here still, and one in Germany and a family. Gee, I can't think of his name, but he was a wonderful bass baritone and Dr. Raucheisen felt that he was the one who really captured German spirit and was the best of all of the people that came to him. Speaker 1: Was he an African American? Speaker 2: Yeah, most of them--yes, he was a protege of Todd Duncan's, originally, and he had a fabulous career. He was a wonderful opera and concert singer and his name doesn't come to me right now, but--(simultaneous) [William] Warfield was a master of German song, but he was a perfect linguist, he learned all that in the army. I mean, he had an opportunity to develop that, but he had, he of course, was very great. This man was just a little before him, and he didn't sing much in this country because once he got to Germany he just sang in the opera houses there and, but anyway--(simultaneous) Larry Winters. He was a Porgy at one time, but he didn't want to play Porgy, he wanted to sing German and sing [Richard] Wagner and sing [Giuseppi] Verdi and his name is Lawrence Winsonant (ph.)-- his real name and he changed it to Winters because Mr. Duncan said-- Speaker 1: Lawrence Wissolus? Speaker 2: Winsonant. Speaker 1: Winsolant. Speaker 2: Lawrence Winters is what we knew him as, a great, great artist and unfortunately his German things are not on record for us to have. I'm sure he made records in Germany, but a person like Michael Raucheisen felt that he was really super, and there was a woman who Kelly Wyatt accompanied, my collaborator, who in the lead class, as we call it, it's a class with almost all black people who sang only German in my class. Only German songs, probably the only class in America like it, and many famous artists--Kathleen Battle, came to one of the classes and a number of well-known artists. Anne Brown came over here from Norway, and she participated with me in one of the classes because she wanted to see what it was that people were talking about, and there's a very interesting thing in Creutz, Germany, and it's a thing that made me realize that I did not need to have a great big voice, like some of my friends had, but I had pure, lovely sound but that was not the important thing that I had to offer. It said, they called my recital a view, the headlines said, "A view into the landscape of the human soul." Speaker 1: So, was it your articulation of the songs that--? Speaker 2: Very difficult. I just gave it all up because I discovered the pleasures of my, I thought, alcohol and it took me a long time to get over that, and I had a wonderful rehabilitation through various--AA [Alcoholics Anonymous], wonderful friends, and I discarded all the people who were leading me to, re-encouraging, not enabling, because I knew that I had to save myself. Speaker 1: Did this take place in Germany, I mean, did you--here, or when you came back? Speaker 2: I didn't want to return because I realized the pressure of the perfection that I seek always, in others and myself, was too much. And it was not only false pride. It was because I've wanted always to succeed and I've always wanted to do better, and I demand that of my students, and it was a very highly disciplined class. So, that's why they comment I've got people who've been eighteen years in my class, and they come back, go into it, come back, but they have to be in the class because they get something that they find they can't get anywhere else, which is that thing which that critic found, and I realized that what I had was--I could get inside of German text the same way some people do with Negro spirituals. Soul, what people like to refer to as soul, but not phony soul, I mean the real thing that comes from the guts and that's heartfelt. And I had that ability to pass it on. Speaker 1: Did you learn anything--? Speaker 2: So, my concerts were quiet concerts at Carnegie Hall, you know, even though it wasn't in perfect voice. Guess what happened? A magical thing happened. No one applauded until the end of the first half of the program, because they sat there absolutely quietly trying to take in everything that was happening with the way I was interpreting the songs, with what I was doing with the art, what the lyrics were about, what the music was about. They felt something, and they didn't want to miss anything and they didn't want to ruin it by applause. Amazing. Story_ID: 2215 Speaker 1: What did you learn about German people that you didn't know before you started? Speaker 2: The German people I know so much about, it's Austrian, because I like Austrian--I like Austrians, like I said, because they're lazy and shiftless and very much like (laughs) Southern black people that I grew up with, and so I kind of like that, you know like, never do today what you can do tomorrow, take the easy tasks, do them and save the hard things for tomorrow, then tomorrow and tomorrow. Mañana, y mañana, y mañana y mañana. Morgen, morgen. And there's a wonderful saying in German, which is "Morgen, morgen, nicht nur heute, aber nicht heute, sagen alle faule Leute", tomorrow, tomorrow, but not today, is what all lazy people say. (laughs). I love it. Morgen! And if we put the hardest things off until some invisible day, and never do anything on time, and love fried chicken because Viennese fried chicken is the closest thing to black American cooking that I know in Europe. They call it Backhendl, It's dipped in egg batter and, first flour, then egg batter and then bread crumbs and you fry it very slowly until it's a golden brown and you spice it up a little with pepper and salt and--it's marvelous and the, the, it's crusty, you know, and it's just a wonderful thing. Leontyne Price I've heard, used to love a place called Zum Weissen Rauchfangkehrer in Vienna. Amazing thing "To the White Chimney Sweep", which specialized in that, and she used to like that place until it changed management, and I never heard of her liking it anymore. She didn't like Vienna anymore, I don't think. But, Vienna made her in a way, that beautiful opera house was where she did some of her best work, in Salzburg at the Festival and, 'Salzburg' (exaggerated pronounciation) is the correct pronunciation, Grace Bumbry lives there now, in the house that she bought, and we have--music is so international, and the main thing is to get to the heart of things and then express that in a way that it excites people, and makes them interested. And I sang before an almost all black audience in Cleveland for my debut there at Karamu Theatre--sold out, with standing room because it was a very small theatre, and I had a black audience listen to a whole program of German songs and I only sang one English song, it was an encore. Speaker 1: Were you tempted to stay in Vienna? Speaker 2: Yeah, at one time, and I found out that there were certain aspects--first of all, manic depressives, a lot of suicides and alcoholism is rampant, and I just decided that that was not what I wanted, but it's a beautiful place. But it's too placid in many ways, you get bored and then you drink. You do unsociable things, and you waste time, fritter away, and it's easy for me to do that, but I like the Gemütlichkeit--that ability to take life a little easy and do it gracefully, to live gracefully, I learnt that from the Austrians--so I like that. I don't know whether I could live there, because I put too much into New York, and New York has given me so much. Thirty years--students--people--superior artists who come to me to work, they're going to be in next Saturday, and they believe in what I'm doing, and feel that they're getting inspiration from what I'm doing. Well, that's the greatest thing, and money, thank God, I don't need. I'd love to have more, but I have enough to have what I want, what I need, not what I want. I want a, a black man's wish, do you know what that is, a black man's wish? It's a BMW, Bayerische Motoren Werke, is the name of the company, is what it is, but BMW. A boy who parks cars in Cleveland in a hotel, I said, "What's that car that that black man is driving there, it's so elegant, I love that car." He said, that's a black man's wish. I said, "What do you mean by that?" He said, It's a BMW. I said, "I know, BMW means Bayerische Motoren Werke and I took this kid, whose a very rough kid from Cleveland, from the inner city, and made him say "Bayerische", and he said Bayerische , and I said, "Motoren", and "Werke" and I took the inner kid and made him speak German. [Crying] It actually moved me. That's what education is about. He may never speak another word of German. His friends laughed about it, and said, "You know what a BMW is, do you know what a black man's wish? A man from New York told me it was Bayerische Motoren Werke (laughs). I loved it, that kid is probably--God knows what he's doing. Maybe he'll be taking cars and selling them, (laughs) he may also have gone much further than that, he may have got curious and studied more words. Who knows, he was parking cars at that hotel at that time, but when I go back to that hotel, I went back once, when he was still there. I don't go to Cleveland much. I love Cleveland, in a way. I can't live in North Buxton, I can't live in Canada because of the rules about ownership of property and having a Canadian-owned part of it, and I don't want--I can live in Vienna if I do that, because they won't let anybody own anything unless an Austrian owns 51 percent of it. And I can't live that way, I mean, if I buy something, it's mine. I mean, as long as I live, it's for me, and I don't want to have, you know, unless you knew someone or you were married to someone, then it would be different, but just to have to follow some stupid rules that like, you know, it's not what I want in life. But, I love Vienna, and the moment I step off of that plane in Cheshot (ph.), the airport, I get a feeling of being at home, but I feel that way when I go to Lake Como too, and when I go to Paris even though I don't speak French very well. I feel at home in that atmosphere, that is, at peace. In New York, I always feel I've got to succeed a little more, I've got to keep on, keep on, you know, and I don't compete because I know that what I do by way of my teaching is something which very few people are able to have the affinity--the Cleveland Plain Dealer said "He has an affinity, an amazing affinity, to German romantic song" and he meant that. That was a very learned critic, and just like the Austrians, Mr. [Otto] Vogel once was asked why he--somebody said to him that I sang German songs with so much soul, so much feeling and so much sincerity, and he said, "Oh, they all do it," meaning--and I questioned him on that, and he meant, he said, the Americans that come tend to do things with--they learn, those who stay, how to do things as well as-- In Hungary and Budapest when I sang, one of the critics said that I sang Hungarian folk songs in the German language. He dared to say Hungarian folk songs, arranged by Bartok, Bela, in German rather than Hungarian, but he captured more of the Hungarian spirit and temperament than most of our singers, most native singers. That's a wonderful thing. Story_ID: 2216 Speaker 1: You know, that's what I can give, and what I do give, and it keeps me alive and makes me enthusiastic still about--I never lose my enthusiasm, and I hope I never do. It's like a kid, I've never grown up, I'm still that same little snotty nosed brat from Cleveland, over-privileged--under-financed, but over-privileged, but I hope I never lose that. I hope I can help other people not to lose the child in them. There's not much more, except that I do the books. I did, you know, the four books. I wrote 'Blacks in Classical Music' because no one had written a book about blacks in classical music and no one has done it since, exclusively classical music. Well, I'll try to cover the whole field. I don't write about classical jazz because people are printing a lot of beautiful things about jazz, which is our American classical music, but I wrote about blacks who choose to be specialists in European music, and they weren't recognized. A lot of black people didn't even know them. That's why I wrote that book. A lot of it's reviews of things that I did from the Amsterdam and other papers that I brought together. Speaker 2: I've seen and even used it at one period. (simultaneous). How far does that history go back? Speaker 1: Well, it goes back to the eighteenth century, the Chevalier de Saint-George-- Speaker 2: The great swordsman, ice skater, composer--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: And everything, a ladies' man and the wonderful Stuffed Negro in Vienna, they had a man whose name was--oh, I had the poster in my old apartment, I had no place to put it, Angelo Soliman. Angelo Soliman belonged to a Sicilian gentleman who gave him away to a nobleman from Vienna as a present, because he thought this would be a beautiful person to have in your--when you have parties and things, to show off your pet Negro. So, they had their pet Negro, and Soliman learned all these languages, he spoke French, he spoke German, blah, blah, and married a white woman and when he died, he was so beloved by the nephew of the Kaiser Josef that he became, the Kaiser's nephew had him stuffed and put in the museum so that he could be seen as this perfect Negro. Speaker 2: That's a horrible story. Speaker 1: It's a true story.(simultaneous) Speaker 2: It's a true story? Speaker 1: But he's not up there for you to see anymore, because, fortunately, what happened was there was a skirmish between the Turks and they came in, and something, and a cannon fell on the roof of the Museum of Natural History where his remains were, and by that time, the church got involved and felt that was a terrible thing to do, to stuff him, so he was put up in a storage closet, but the men who worked there, got a little extra money by showing people, opening with the key, and showing them this thing which people wanted to see, and the cannon ball, something, started a fire, and he burned up. All the things that were stored up in that attic were burned up, including him, which was wonderful, because there was no way he could no longer be this object that--but, if you look in certain, there's a few [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart pictures where you see him and you see people of the royal vintage in Austria, and you see this black man there, and that was Angelo Soliman. He was very learned and very special and highly prized in this society, high society, I mean the--not the king himself, but at least his nephew. I mean, but people of that, you know, count and countesses and all kinds of things, you know, noble people, and he was a favorite, and he socialized with them, on a very, you know, equal basis. Speaker 2: Who else do you cover in the blacks in classical music, then? Speaker 1: Well, I've got Howard Swanson, whom I felt wrote the best songs that anybody black has ever written, but some of the young people are beginning to write, to be good craftsmen, too, and I don't know, you know, but Howard has something very special--this is a unique voice that he has, the way he says things, and said big poetry, Langston Hughes, he said, many of the white poets, some great American poets, period--and in a beautiful way. No one's quite equaled him, but he's so precious, and people need to, you know, look back because singers are hard to learn, and singers like things that are very melodious that they can pick up and immediately start singing (laughs), yet that are easy things with the American songs, yet they'll spend years studying a particular German song to perfect it, or particularly Russian songs, or foreign things and work hard on the style, but on their own music--I don't mean black music, music by blacks and others--there's no such thing as black music--music by blacks, which expresses the African and African--American spirit like in the Caribbean, that kind of music, but by composers who--it's wrong to call it by its race--it's the person who created it and its--(simultaneous) --by his spirit. Speaker 2: Do you really think there's no such thing as black music, as such? Speaker 1: I hate the term, black music, but I know what they mean, and I accept it. I have to accept it because it's a fact of life. It's like the man who writes for the 'New Yorker', John Simon, who is a very erudite critic---he's Romanian, you know, and he speaks seven languages and writes them better than anybody, and he is a great critic, and he was on, he was on a program discussing black English and he said, "This is stupid. All of us white people sitting here, intellectuals, supposedly, talking discussing whether or not black English should be accepted." He said, "We have no control over it, black English is a fact of life." He said, (laughs) "So what do we need to discuss that for?" And I said, that's a man of real intellect, and of real understanding, a man who really--he's to be respected, because that's the way it is. You know, why should you analyze everything? Jazz was fun when it was danced to. [Count] Basie never liked jazz in the concert hall. The most pleasure he got was when he was playing a dance. He wanted to see people dancing to the music and listening, and taking it in. Story_ID: 2217 Speaker 1: Who are some of your students. I want to--(simultaneously)--? Speaker 2: Well, but my students don't have big names, but they have--but they are people who work at the music trade. They, they work in music as educators and as performers, and they give performances in the best halls in New York and Alice Tully [Hall] and so forth. And one just sang in Carnegie [Hall], in the little hall, the Weill Hall [The Weill Institute of Music], a week ago or so, two weeks ago, and they, they worked, they, they did it with Kelly Wyatt at the piano. And we have people who just--they're not big names, but they're people who work at music. They're professional musicians. And that's a big, big--that is a very honorable word. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Why be a great artist who sits at home and doesn't have a chance to walk out on the stage? It's not great art unless it's shared. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I mean nobody's there to appreciate it. And these people work and they'll put out their own money sometimes to give a major recital in New York and succeed in getting a good press sometimes and getting, certainly a good press when they get a press at all because now classical music is shrinking is the number of reviews of performances. White kids aren't getting performed either, people, things. But it's--I have a very beautiful letter that came. I thought my reviews in the 'Amsterdam [News]'--a lot of people put down things that are in the black press. They think that it's not as good and you're there because you don't have, can't get to the '[New York] Times' and blah, blah. I was offered to be a stringer at the time. But who wants to go and review one concert a week for fifteen dollars or twenty five in those times? You know, I didn't--even if they would have allowed me to, they considered me because Mrs. Theodora Keogh recommended me to the cultural editor of the 'Times', but I--it just wasn't my--I, I make a better contribution by making the African American community aware of the fact that it has people who make a living and who function as first-rate purveyors of European art. In other words, if they've got that in them and can do that and that kind of achievement. Not that that's a great thing itself. It's just anything that you can do well. And we have some very wonderful interpreters, and they don't even know their name. Speaker 1: So that was--was that part of the motivation for writing the book, 'Blacks In Classical Music'? Speaker 2: Educational, educational, just to put the stuff down where people--it's available. It's in every major library, and it's there if people want to open it up and they can be exposed to a part of black life that they don't know, part of the whole, the mosaic. Story_ID: 2218 Speaker 1: Did you know J.A. Rogers, by any chance? Speaker 2: No, but I admire him because that's where I first found out about the Chavalier de Saint-George where Andre--Mr. Soliman, Angelo Soliman is in his book, a lot of the people, and the [Alexandre] Dumas, of course--. Speaker 1: And Dumas? Speaker 2: Of course, yeah, pere and fils, and some many wonderful, some of the--there was a Cuban, African, Afr--Cuban, African Cuban violinist, Joseph White, but that wasn't his name, but it was probably Blanco or something, but I mean Joseph White who made quite a career. There was George [Augustus Polgreen] Bridgetower in London who was part African and part white, a Polish mother. And he was a great violinist, and [Ludwig van] Beethoven wrote the Kreutzer Sonata especially for him, and then they got at each--Beethoven got mad at George Bridgetower, and he scratched his name off the manuscript and wrote Kreutzer, and he didn't know Mr. [Rudolphe] Kreutzer. He just wanted to get that other name off, but you can read that it was dedicated to George Bridgetower who must have been in tears. Beethoven way back, one of the classic Beethoven studies of the past, closer to Beethoven's own lifetime, you found, you know, evidence that he was a friend of Beethoven's. I loved 'Beethoven's Nephew', which was a movie that, irreverent movie that other--probably comes closer to the truth of Beethoven's character. He adopted his nephew [Karl van Beethoven] because his--the mother was kind of a street woman--I mean she sold herself in a way--she wasn't a prostitute exactly, but she was a kind of a kept woman. And the nephew was a bad boy. I mean he got in a lot of trouble, and he tried--the grand, the uncle was very jealous of his trying to jealously bring him up right, blah, blah. And the boy, you know, was trifling, and so they were living somebody's house, Beethoven had many, many homes. They moved in and out like the Gershwin family did. They used to move out in the night (laughter), you know, and disappear without paying. Well, anyway, some of the noble people would allow him, and they had two--they were only supposed to use two rooms. Beethoven didn't see his nephew there, and he was looking all over. And finally, he comes in the movie to--he sees a candlelight flickering from an open door, half open door, and he goes up, and there is his nephew taking his pleasure with this girl. And Beethoven in the movie snatches him by the ankles and pulls him off. I mean that is the Beethoven I would like to have known. And it makes me respect Beethoven's music more. He was a real human being. And this film showed the humanity of that man, not Beethoven who was worshiped and who wrote the 'Ninth Symphony', which the, the 'Ode to Joy' about mankind and respecting mankind and all that. He was more than that. There was something in, he was a total human being. Speaker 1: Have you heard the rumor that he was of African descent? Speaker 2: They say that he had one drop, but, you know, a lot of Germans have that, features that are--they have large lips. They have a big nose, and that's not necessarily--a lot of people look like a lot of things. You spoke of white people who passed for black or passed for something resembling it. See, I pass for everything because I want to be a part of the world. I mean I want to be, feel inside, I won't really feel free until I feel--I try to keep a perspective on all this. I, I know I'm, do important things connected with passing on black culture and all that as I see it. But I--and achievement, but I also feel a responsibility to me to be Raoul Abdul which, whose father [Abdul Hamid] came from Calcutta and whose mother [Etta Beatrice Shreve] is a part black, a mixed Canadian woman. Story_ID: 2219 Speaker 1: The book, 'Three Thousand Years of Black Poetry'--? Speaker 2: That covered 3,000 years, way back to ancient Egypt, and some critics got very upset over that idea that you considered Egyptians black, but they were of the black race. No, there's no difference. They have a upper and lower Africa--Egypt was Africa. It's not Egypt. Egypt was created by white people who wanted to create a break in African culture. Those people are as African as any Afri--the whole Africa is one country actually. It's one continent, I mean. It's not--there's not Egypt. There was no such thing as Egypt first. It was Africa. It was one piece, and then began to separate themselves, as prejudice (laughter) came into being, you know. Well, there always was prejudice, I'm sure. But the point is, I want to be able to make a choice, like tonight, I feel so Viennese, let's go to an Austrian restaurant that has the real true atmosphere. Then we go to a Hungarian restaurant and be Hungarian for a night and remember my adventures in Budapest, Buda and Pest, Pest. It's up on, a Buddha is up on the hill and Pest is down here. I want to be able to have all of those things at my disposal and to be able to look in the morning and say, hum, I think I'll be Hungarian today. Story_ID: 2220 Speaker 1: When you look back over all the things you've done in life, all these, and all your various talents and how you've used them, is there any one thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would work harder. I wouldn't take them all for granted (laughter), you know. I really wouldn't. I wish that I would work harder, but I would rather lie on the bed and sleep, you know that. I enjoy it more when he's here. It's nice in the morning because then I can lie down and somebody's in the house with me, and he can be doing things around, but there's someone there, and I can--see, I'm a household person. I loved living in the household that I lived in Vienna out in the countryside, with that family, wonderful family because there were other people around, but yet they didn't interfere. They were there, and I had company and they had company, but we also respected each other's space. Well, there was a lot of space in a twenty-six room house, and, but it was--I've been very fortunate, and I think I appreciate that. I'm very grateful for that. Some people say I don't use the word "grateful" enough, but I am very grateful. But I, any kind of spirituality that I have and stuff, I feel I have a direct line. I don't want a minister to tell me what religion is. I want to be able to communicate directly with God, to speak to him and to feel what I think he wants me to have. And I turn my life over every day to the care of, and I ask, when I look at moon or I look at the beautiful river there, the Hudson [River] and the lights, and I, I go in the corner near the elevator where I can look at it and meditate for a few moments and just say, please grant me your blessing, guidance and protection against anything negative. And I do ask for that because I do believe that you can create a, an invisible wall, of which anything that's gonna harm you can't penetrate. Speaker 1: Can you tell--now, you--. Speaker 2: Psychologically at least. Story_ID: 2221 Speaker 1: You've been in and out of the black community, I mean physically, and, you know, and lived in and out of it. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But can you tell me what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I feel sorry for young people, Americans in general, and young people through most of the world because of the fact that they're frittering their time. They're--everything is hedonistic, too much sex, without thinking, and I think that disease, the horrible disease that's come has come for a purpose, to teach people that promiscuity is not the way. It's all right to be--I mean, people should do what they want to do, but to make that the prime thing and make their music, and when I see beautiful women, particularly women of color, looking like prostitutes on television every day when you turn on, and when I see 'Dance Hall', the Jamaican dance hall, and see those girls flitting about their sexual, and you--they can't help but arouse men to do things. And if you get some men who are not whole, they do terrible things like rape, mistreating people. The female is not--if she doesn't have the respect for herself, she doesn't deserve anything more. If she wants to dress like a, a harlot, then treat her like a harlot. That's what I think. And I feel sorry for young people who don't realize that there's little more to that. And the ones who go to the sanctified churches, they--and one part of them is so religious on Sunday or when they go into the church. They have this great fear, and they're all about Jesus and gospel music and feeling that. And yet, they go out and do, and live a life which is so opposite of what the church is teaching. And too much fervor of anything, if, if there's too passion, it expresses itself in that other way too, physically and, you see, and I, I, I feel sorry for the kids who don't have--boys who can go out with girls and have no respect for them, not phony respect, but who can say, gee, this is, she's a friend of mine first. What they do about the rest of it, that's something else. But I would like to see a little more respect of people for each other. But what can I do? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't change the world except--all you can do is set an example and those who want to follow it and if they see that you have a spark of something that is a little beyond the ordinary, you know, in order word--when I say ordinary, I mean, you know, base. But you, but you wish for them that too. I mean I've done a lot of things, you know, and all, especially when I was young because I was much desired by a lot of people, and I, and my head was almost turned, but not quite because I always remained somewhat aloof. I loved to flirt, but I don't like to deliver. And do you know what? That's been very good for me. I know a lot of people call that certain type of teasing with a bad word, but I am sorry. I like flirting, but, oh, he always stops in time is the, in other words, don't go the whole way. Make people desire you, but they don't have to possess you, and they don't have to touch you physically. They don't--you don't have to, it doesn't have to turn into a full fledged sexual experience. I like sensuousness as a--the tease, but don't be vulgar, but, you know, have fun. It's grazioso they say in, and gemütlichkeit the Viennese say, but grazioso, you know, gracious. And, I mean, that's just me. That's romantic, it's hopeful, and it's wonderful. But I like that, that's what I want. And that's what I hope I can pass on. Plus, the desire for people to try to achieve because I came from nothing financially, I mean, from--well, lower middle class, but people who--I, I didn't come, I come from what people call from nothing, what rich people call from nothing, meaning from the bottom, and was able to achieve something of what I wanted. And that's a great gift. And everyone of those kids on TV could do that, you know, those people who are leading these hedonistic lives. They could achieve that too because when they get older, the flame, you know, begins to flicker, and that passion doesn't well up like it used to, and all those little tricks don't work anymore, and you're not quite as pretty, and you can be graciously--grow old graciously, but there's nothing there when you suddenly realize that your living, and all that paint on your face, all that--and those clothes that you get from the various places and that you see the designers showing off, but nobody buys it except the kids. I mean but the, you know, people really don't buy, most of that is show for the models. And do you know what? You can--they, they realize that it's a show. It's like an Easter egg and the show, the egg dries up inside and then it, somebody drops it or touches it too--tries to dust it off, and then the shell collapses, and there's nothing in the shell. And that's a horrible thing to discover toward the end of your life, that it's--that, that your cup, you have a beautiful teacup of porcelain and then the camera comes in on it and looks in the bottom like a Austrian movie called 'Das Riesenrad' where the lady had all these lovely things, but she had no money, and she had--and she didn't have to buy things. It was after the war, and she, you showed them sitting at a table, beautiful wood, Maria Theresa from that time, M, Theresa, and the cups--and then silver, porcelain and silver. And guess what? The camera panned on the cup, but it was nothing in the cup. That's what their lives were in the end. Nothing, an empty cup, beautifully made cup, but empty. Story_ID: 2222 Speaker 1: You, on the contrary, have received numerous awards. You're not a household word--. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --but people who know classical music, black folks know that book, and they know--. Speaker 2: Well, the lady told me-- Speaker 1: --about the book and the literature, I mean people know that name. Raoul Abdul. And I've been asked, who is Raoul Abdul. I said--. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: I didn't know at one point, so I had to say, I don't know. Speaker 2: Well, neither do I so, and you see, that makes--. Speaker 1: Most people don't know. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: They don't know who you are, where you come from. So is a guy, a man by the name Raoul Abdul writing a book on black classical music? We don't know if it's an Arab. We don't know what, we don't know, you know, but, but--. Speaker 2: Well, I'm not a Muslim. I'm a Canadian Baptist. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay. But the point is, you've achieved quite a number of things in different fields, in literature and in music. Can, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know. If I have one, I think it's great. I mean I hope, but I'm not doing the things, all the things for charitable reasons. I'm not doing it to make money. I'm doing it for self satisfaction. It just happens that doing what I do gives me a great of satisfaction. And if you can have some satisfaction--you can't pass on joy unless you have joy. You can't, enthusiasm, if you it, it's infectious. And other people will feel it, and it's superb--whatever it is that I have is, is the gift--for example, when I could take a whole recital of German theater up to Canada to the Canadian black community in Windsor and sing nothing but German until the encore and have a whole audience buy those tickets and sit there and listen to it as if they were listening to a whole program of, of hymns, of church hymns that they know. But somehow there was something that they responded to, and made them happy and made them sad and made them feel the essence. That's a wonderful gift. I can't make everybody do it who comes to me. I can only show them the road. You know, I show 'em what I did and let them, and try not to let them make the mistakes. But they're gonna make the mistakes because if I made them--I was pretty smart, you know, because I was around adults all my life and very high achievers later, and I didn't, and I didn't take all the advice. In other words, do as I say (chuckle), don't do as I do, in a way. But, you know, I, I don't stop and think about that. I don't want to think about that because then I'll get old. Speaker 1: Now, did your--what did your aunt and uncle think about your--. Speaker 2: Aunt Ada [Harding] and Uncle Ben [Harding] encouraged everything. My uncle said, you know, you sing better than--who was the guy who was on, Perry Como, Perry Como. He said, you're much than Perry Como. Why don't you learn how to sing popular songs? And you could make good money. And I said, but Uncle Ben, all I know is what I've learned and, and what I've worked, spent my, what I spent my whole life. And he said, okay, he said, but you know you could be on TV. And, you know, but I didn't, and it might have been nice. It might not. I might have--who knows, singing beautiful popular songs. But I will, hope I would--if I had done, I wouldn't be as dull as Perry Como. He sang beautifully, but my God, he was so square. Story_ID: 2223 Speaker 1: I know an old German folk song (singing). Niemand wir weiss was Kummer mir macht. Niemad wir weiss als Jesus." Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, I remember that one. That's about the--. Speaker 1: 'Nobody Knows The Trouble I've Seen'. It's not a German folk song, and I announced it in Wien once after a concert that I was gonna sing, ein alt Deutsches lied--Deutsche lied, ein altes Deutsche lied. And I said, "Niemand wir weiss was Kummer mir macht", and I sang it, and they were expecting something very German, and they got a Negro spiritual, and all the colored folks in the audience got such a kick out of that. And when I sing for--well, I used to sing for an all-black audience, sometimes I would sing as an encore, 'Der spricht von Strömen. And on several occasions, I've recited Langston Hughes, Der Neger spricht von Strömen uhr altes--uhr alte Strömen. Meine Seele war tief wie die Strömer. 'My Soul is as deep as the rivers', in German and it's all the same, different language, but the essence is there. Meine Seele war tief wie die Strömer Speaker 2: Do you think that the popular culture conception of what a German is, is what a German is. I mean, you know, I mean--. Speaker 1: It's all wrong. First of all, Germans have a certain type of behavior, and unfortunately, they have one quality which I don't like. If a person wants to be an artist, like a singer or performer, they go to school and learn dramatic art, and they think that they can become that without that little extra thing which is called talent. They have a talent for learning, but not always a talent of communication or that little inner thing that makes the difference between--that, and that bothers me that they feel everything can be learned by hard work. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's not true. Everything cannot be learned. If you don't have the gift, you might as well forget it. Why wait all that time energy perfecting unless you just like learning for learning's sake. But I feel sorry for people who, in a way for some of the, the young girl told me she wanted to be--in the train in East Germany, that she wanted to be--she said that she was a Geige, a Geigespieler, that she was a violinist. And I said, oh, wonderful. And she said, oh, yes, and I'm going to have a very great career. And I looked at that simple girl who was so plain and so ordinary she would have been much happier in a, in a cotton field (chuckle), in, in a, on a farm bringing up pigs and cows and so forth and with the sheep. She'd be so much happier in her little German village and forget the vio--or play the violin for fun for your parents and friends. But have music in your life. There's a wonderful saying that Theodore Bikel brought up in his book of folk songs. He said, there's an old Austrian poem, something about, I can't say it in German because I don't know it in German, but if you go into a room and you see people singing, sit down at the table with them. But if you see a man sitting in the corner, who doesn't have a song, stay as far away as you can because a man who has no song has nothing. It doesn't mean a beautiful song, but the ability to sing inside. Langston could sing, but he was tone deaf. I mean he made the most awful, you know, couldn't--pitches. But he had a singing spirit and his--he brought it out in his poetry. He could--his poems make music, but it's not the music that he could make himself because it was--he, he was a born musician without musical talent--without the ability, with accomplish--knowing, mastering an instrument. His instrument was writing, but his poem sound just like, if you listen to jazz of his, the different fashions of his time--. Speaker 2: And they've placed, I mean they've been put to music by numerous people. Speaker 1: They should be because of the fact that his poems are music. It's music in words, so why take it. [Dietrich] Fischer-Dieskau wrote a lovely book called 'Words that Sing and Tones that Speak'. That's what he called German theater. The words sing and the tones speak. They say what the words say. In other words, they say something. It's all about seeing something, and you can't evaluate--that's why when you asked me the question what kind of legacy, I don't know whether there will one. If there is, good. But I can't think about that. I have to think about what I'm doing cause life goes on and you've got to--you just keep on doing, keep on keeping on. Story_ID: 2224 Speaker 1: Do you have any projects that are imminent that you're working on? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't want to write books too much because if I write another book, you sit at a typewriter alone or at the word processor alone, with a blank piece of paper, and you've go to put words on it, and you've got to put something decent on paper. It's a lonely sport. I like--I guess they were right about us who have African blood. We, we're better storyteller, oral (laughter) than we are writing it down on paper. I mean we're more, we're toward oral expression. We, our greatest talent, a lot of greatest talent is oral expression, and the wonder--listen to the black lecturers, all of them, even the real intellectual ones, they say something and they have, they make words sparkle and have color and passion, even the Christian Scientists. You know, I mean when a black touches something or a person even with a, one ounce black blood, they're, the black experience, more an experience than the blood, is the ability to communicate something that's in the essence of whatever it is, something of the essence and not just a superficial--if you said, I've known rivers, ancient, dusky rivers, or if you say, "I've known river, ancient, dusky river", there's a difference. And if you can't get that nuance, forget about acting and reading poetry out loud and going on the stage. Stay off the stage, go get a job as sleeping car porter, and who'd go home with a big, twenty-six room house and, and a BMW, a black man's wish, and be happy, not try to strive, just because you see somebody else making millions of dollars, I mean, please! It's not about, all about money. Story_ID: 2225 Speaker 1: The last question we usually ask is similar to legacy, and it's how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: It isn't how, it's, I hope I'm remembered. I would like to be remembered. How, I don't know. It's, that's, that's not up to me. I, I mean I am what I am, and that's what I put out. And I'm not--I'm able to do that. I have the freedom in my life because of the way I was brought up and all the people I came in contact with, allowed me--and certainly the black community of, of New York City and of the whole community, New York City, period. And Vienna allowed me when I was there. Most places I've been, but particularly, New York City because that's the longest stay I've had in any one place, has allowed me to do what I felt inspired to do. And that's wonderful, and I'm so appreciative of that. So, I hope somebody remembers it or is inspired by the idea that you can, you can, you can, yes, I can, what's his name said in his book. But there's, it's really a deep thing. You can if you want to and if you're willing to work, but you've got to make so many sacrifices, and I'm not sure that the sacrifices, all of them were worth it, and I wish I'd had more direction. But on the other hand, if I'd had more direction, I might have become a very boring, boring person. So I guess I just have something, and I hope that somebody else is interested in it, but I certainly am grateful for what New York, especially, has given me the opportunity to do what it is that I thought I wanted to do. If I've failed in any way, that was my own fault, laziness, the period of alcoholism, it wasn't a long period. But I got out of that, and, but the, they, the fact that I wanted to take life, life easy, and not push too hard, excuse me. I, I just--somehow, you know, this kind of grazioso, very gracious, just to be able to go at my own pace and not somebody else's pace, not to be discouraged--oh, I've had despair and periods of great despair, but then I come out of it because it's like a, something you bounce out of it, a rubber something that--I'm just very happy for--to have been able to do and to continue to do what it is. And as long as I have health, and I've got a mouth on me, I will--you know, I don't exploit myself as much as some--I don't have a publicist or anything that can go out and tell the world, but maybe the world isn't supposed to. It's the people who, who come in contact with you. You cast--what did, what did he say, your bucket? Who was it--? Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington. Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington, something about you cast your bucket--. Speaker 1: Cast your buckets where you are and all--. Speaker 2: Where you are. And you what, he was right in some ways. I mean there was something to be learned from what he had to say. Some people thought he was an Uncle Tom, but Uncle Tom was not an Uncle Tom, the real man, Mr. [Josiah] Henson. He was what we call, in that way, an Uncle Tom. An Uncle Tom some time is a sly fox who knows how to, with honey, get what he wants. And it doesn't mean that he sold his soul down--because certainly Mr. Henson didn't because he taught self reliance up there in Canada. And it's a great thing, these mostly Canadian Negroes, who were born there and who came from families that came over through the underground railroad, those people did something--they were self sufficient. They found something that they could do well and did it. They worked. They didn't live off of welfare cause there was no welfare for them. Some of them lived off of members of their family, and some of the good-looking men lived off of women, I mean, but not much of that. But the people worked hard, and people had a sense of, of self worth. And that's, that's a pretty big thing. So I suppose, so legacy I can't speak. Legacy, I'm not responsible for. That's people like you who are making these documentaries, books, but as long as there's a library and they're not all bombed out, there'll be books, the books that I wrote or edited. They'll be there, and somebody will find them at some point, if it can be of any use to anybody. But the main thing is that I did--do the things that I do because I want to and because they give me satisfaction. And then if they give other people, I'm very happy. It's satisfaction I want more than material reward, but I'm still not happy because I still--I'm striving for something, and I still haven't learned how to be totally comfortable with me because I don't know who I am. And frankly, I don't want to know (laughter). I really, one of those lovely society ladies used to say, but darling, I couldn't care less. I do care less, I care more. But I just can't encumber my life with that because I only have the next few days, you know, to do it, what I want to do and what I, you know, want to achieve. So I'd rather not try to objectively look at myself. I just have to be, and that's it. I don't know. I hope somebody has said something like that (chuckle) too because I don't want to feel like way out in left field, left field somewhere, you know, but I would like to feel that there are kindred spirits and they'll understand, I think...