 Story_ID: 949 Speaker 1: And so, and I'll ask also five "People Magazine"-ish questions. But I want to start out by stating, having you state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Your name and spell it? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My name is Maya Angelou. I spell it M-A-Y-A A-N-G-E-L-O-U. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: Well tell me what all you want me to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Your date of birth, today's date and your occupation? Speaker 2: Sister, now you could do all that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Why do you want me to do--you shouldn't use my energy and my art that way. Speaker 1: Okay, no problem. Can you tell me what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: My favorite what? Speaker 1: Food. Speaker 2: Food? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: It depends on what time of day I'm asked and it depends on where I am. If I have to answer the question what is my favorite food, I like good chili, Southwest Texas Mexican chili and African American chili too. I like it cooked with lots of spices. And I like it hot but not burning, not punishingly hot. I like it served over rice, over cornbread, there's even something called Chili Mac which is eaten in the south and in the southwest. So you make macaroni and cheese, bake that and then put chili over it. I like chili on hot dogs. That's about the only meat I like except chicken of course. At another time I would have said mustard greens, I mean whenever I'm asked it just--I had--the reason I'm thinking about chili is I made some exquisite chili last night and I can't wait to have some today. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I'm grateful to be alive. I like it all. I know that I have a poem which is a song actually sung by Ms. Nancy Wilson. It's, it says our summer's gone. The golden years are through. The razy dawns I used to wake with you have turned to gray. My life has turned to blue. If summer comes next year will we be here to share its brown caress? Or will the colors bright something leave us loneliness. I've heard it said that winter too will pass. That spring's a sign that summer's due at last. But until I see you lying in green grass, my life has turned to blue. So I like them all. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, color? Speaker 1: Color. Speaker 2: Again, I, I'm grateful to be alive and to see blue and green and yellow and red and white and black and they remind--I've written so much. That reminds me of another song I wrote for a movie. The movie is called Sisters. We shot it in Sweden. And it's when the colors, blues and greens are running yellow from my dreams and everywhere I look it's black or white. All those lonely yesterdays, when skies were melting down in grays, then you bring me light. You're my bird of paradise, bird of paradise, bird of paradise, treat me nice. All the sweet and swell pastels are running softly just like bells. I like all colors. It just depends on where I am and what I need today. I thought today to speak about myself and my history. I would wear a kind of blue because it's beautiful first. And also because African Americans began writing the blues and some of the spirituals even are really undistinguishable from blues. So whether it's, [sings] "how long, baby how long," has that even train been gone? Or the spiritual which says, [sings] "how long oh my lord, how long," before I'll be called home? So blue is very important to me and blues even more important. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite place to vacation? Just--? Speaker 2: Oh I like the idea of staycation. I like the idea of vacating where I am so I try to relax and let my mind rest wherever I am. So I live in [Winston-Salem] North Carolina and in New York and I like to whenever I'm in either place, I like to keep my life simple. That may--many people may think that I'm being coy or fey or--it's not true. I, I work hard and I play hard. At home I want to be at home everywhere. If I'm not I leave that place. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite phrase or saying Dr. Angelou? Speaker 2: My favorite--? Speaker 1: Phrase or saying? Do you have one? Speaker 2: Phrase or saying? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Well my great-grandmother raised me. I mean my grandmother raised me and she had some sayings which have stuck to me like, like glue. For six years of my life I didn't speak except to my brother [Bailey, Jr.]. And my grandmother would braid my hair the way old black ladies still braid girls' hair. I would sit on the floor on a pillow. Mama would sit on a chair. She'd pull her dress way down between her legs and so I could get very close to her, my back to her so both of us looking out. And my hair was huge and very, very thick and it challenged anybody. And my grandmother would brush my hair. She'd say sister, mama don't care what these people say that you must be an idiot or stupid or a moron cause you can't talk. Sister, mama know when you and the good Lord get ready, you're going to be a teacher. Sister, you're going to teach all over the world. This black woman, the daughter of a slave, of an ex-slave who went formally only to the third grade, who taught herself to read and write and she said she learned figures from the almanac, had the only black owned store in this little village where I grew up in Arkansas. This woman said I would teach all over the world with me and the Lord, when we got ready. But I as a practicing Christian, I believed the Lord is already--always ready. I just have to get ready you see. And I can do what I'm called upon to do whether it is direct a movie. The last film I directed starred Alfre Woodard and Wesley Snipes, whether it's that or-- Speaker 1: That was Down in the Delta, right? Speaker 2: Down in the Delta, yes. Whatever it is I'm challenged to do. If I can make myself ready, if I study the craft, God is the art you see. So I can do what I'm called upon to do. Story_ID: 950 Speaker 1: Dr. Angelou, what was your earliest memory of growing up, your earliest memory? Speaker 2: I remember I guess I was three, I was on a train with my brother who was five who until this moment remains my black kingdom come. He was everything to me. He taught me--he told me how to be quiet. He told me--I believed him in everything he--in every situation. So I remember being with my brother and when he went to the toilet and the big man, like a porter took him away, it scared me to death. Everything important in my life it seemed to me my brother was there. And so I remember that fear. I wasn't afraid that my mother wouldn't come back or my father or anyone else. It was always Bailey. Speaker 1: And Bailey, so what about Bailey? Can you describe (unclear) why the attraction, you know he was an older brother. But what did he represent in you? Speaker 2: Well I know this, I believe this, my family came closest to making a genius when they made Bailey. I'm smart, I know that but I worked very hard at it. Bailey didn't seem to work at it you know. I mean I would have to labor over homework. He just had it. And he was kind to me. Whenever people would laugh, and people laughed a lot at me because I didn't speak and so kids would say, "dummy, dummy, dummy," you know, "stupid, stupid." And Bailey would say you're smarter than anybody here. Don't worry about it. He'd say but you're not as smart as I am of course. Of course that's a big brother. But he would, he really helped me, told me what to read and I could memorize so I could speak to him. Some years later, many years later I had the ambition of writing some songs for Mr. Belafonte [Harry Belafonte]. I knew his wife at the time was Julie. I had known her as a dancer and I'd been a dancer. And I thought, I remembered it as a ring song that the children sang around the house, around the store outside when I was growing up. And then all I remembered was, [sings] "I call you Julie, before day Julie. Julie would not answer Julie. That's all right Julie." I remembered that, but I couldn't remember anymore. So I called Bailey. He was on the coast, I was in New York. And I asked him do you remember that song, I call you Julie? He said yes. So I asked him, what's the rest of it? He said I don't know. I said Bailey please, you must know. He said no I don't know. You wrote it. You taught it to me and I taught it to the kids. So he was just always there. Story_ID: 951 Speaker 1: So can you describe your childhood? And I'm trying to think if I should ask you before or after the, you know the incident? But can you describe what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh. My grandmother was a wonderful cook so I remember those aromas which came from her kitchen. And she had a wood-burning stove. I remember that people would bring peanuts, ground nuts and they were always in a bunch pulled from the ground. And even the weeds which were attached were all there bundled. My grandmother would put those peanuts in the stove to roast them, not in a hot, hot stove but over sem--embers and the whole store, the whole house would just be redolent with the aroma of roasting peanuts. She made pineapple upside down cake and she would let me open the can and I could have--Bailey could have a piece and I could have a piece. And I knew that pineapples came from some exotic place like California or Africa or Paris, France. I knew they weren't from anywhere around Stems. And I would keep that aroma on my hands as long as possible. And mama would say sister go wash your hands and I--one of the few times I could successfully lie to her. I would say yes ma'am, I did it. And the truth is I would hold that aroma of pineapples because it was so far away. Yes. Speaker 1: Sounds, what about sounds? Speaker 2: Sounds? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Well my grandmother's voice was the best. I remember that. I remember she'd sing in church and that if she--if I wanted her to sing, she gave me a little tablet and took a pencil and cut a groove into the pencil. And she'd tie one end of twine into that groove and the other end to the spindle of the tablet, two cent tablet. So when I wanted to say something I'd write on this tablet. I would write to her, mama please sing. My grandmother would put on her spectacles, she'd say "sister go on, you know mama can't sing." And she'd sing. She had this huge voice. I have a voice much like hers. It was a very textured voice. And if I left her alone, if I didn't bother her, she'd sing, "I shall not, I shall not be moved. I shall not, I shall not be moved. Just like a tree that's planted by the water, Oh I shall not be moved." I love it! And then I heard on the radio Ms. Marian Anderson [African-American contralto singer]. I was about nine and her voice came over and I said to Bailey, I love that. Bailey said, that's a black woman. That's a Negro. And I didn't believe it. I just couldn't. I knew he wouldn't lie but he was wrong. And then he went to mama and he said mama, tell Maya that that's a Negro woman singing. And mama said it is a Negro woman, Marian Anderson. And so then I could, I mean I thought the voice, it was too un-human, not a human, but un-human. And mama got the Chicago Defender about three or four months later there was a photograph of Ms. Marian Anderson and she showed it to me. It's so amazing because years and years later Ladies Home Journal gave me the Mother of the Year Award and she told--they told me, Lenoir(ph.), the then publisher said I could have anybody in the world to accept it for me and they'd bring the person. So I asked for Ms. Pearl Bailey because she wasn't really thought of very highly and she was a great artist. So Ms. Bailey came up from California to present me with the Ladies Home Journal award and a big piece of jewelry. Years pass and Ms. Marian Anderson is asked--was offered the Woman of the Year award. She was too frail to come. She asked if Maya Angelou would receive it. And so I went to the Ford Theater in Washington D.C. and received their award for Mrs. Marian Anderson. That a wonderful story-- Speaker 1: It's wonderful. Speaker 2: --how life, history itself, history just if you stay faithful, work hard and keep a cheerful mane, you know nobody wants to see the sad mouth and--my mother [Vivian Johnson] said whenever, when people ask you where--how you are, you're supposed to say splendid. They don't want to know because their legs are hurting, that your back is hurting. So I think if you keep a cheerful mane and work hard and keep the faith, I believe that you will--history will show you who you are and what you're supposed to be doing. Story_ID: 952 Speaker 1: Now when you spoke of the abuse you suffered you know as a child, do you remember how you felt after it happened? Do you remember that day? Speaker 2: I tell you interestingly enough Ms. Richardson, I was just asked last week to record "I know Why the Caged Bird Sings" and I had to read that portion again. And I was that seven and a half year old girl again, raped again. And it took the butter from the duck. It took everything I could do to get through that. The body of a child gives because the penetrator cannot. He can't stop. And so, so he told me the rapist told me that he would kill my brother if I told anyone. And I was sick. I really became sick and my underclothes which I had hidden under the mattress. My mother said the mattress must be changed, everything must be changed and of course these panties fell out, and there was all the story. And so, they asked me who and I wouldn't tell. Bailey came to me. He said Maya you have to tell it. You have to say who told you--who did this to you or he will do it to another little girl. And I told him that the man said if I told the man would kill Bailey. Bailey was nine years old. He said I won't let him. So I believed him. Of course he's Bailey. So I told him. The man was put in jail for one day and released and three days later, police came into my mother's mother's house in St. Louis where we were visiting and told her that the man was found dead and it seems he was kicked to death. I thought that my voice had killed him and that my voice could just kill anybody. It could go out of the keyhole and kill people I don't--didn't even know, black people and white people, all kinds of people, children. So I stopped speaking. My mother's family and she did their best to woo me away from my mutism but they didn't know what I knew. So I just stopped. The only person I spoke to was Bailey because I knew somehow that I loved him so much that I couldn't hurt him. And he loved me so much he wouldn't be hurt. So for six years--my mother's people sent us back to Arkansas to my grandma, my father's mother. And that's when mama said that's all right sister, you don't have to talk. You see she loved me. She never kissed me. I can't remember her ever kissing me. And so a number of non-black people, sociologists and the like would look at old black people and say you know there's no tactile love in the black community. Mama never kissed me, she patted me on--she'd say sister come out here. Mama want to show you off. And I would go up, she'd say now look at--to her neighbors, look at these pretty little arms. Look at these long legs. You see that, perfectly round head. Look at--she--it was equal to be set--sat in her lap and hugged with the warmest embrace. So another black lady Ms. Flowers in Stems, and was so elegant, Ms. Flowers would read to me about twice a year, invite me to her home and she'd make tea cookies, big cakes like that, southern cookies and give me lemonade and she'd read to me. And after about six years she told me--I went to her house at her invitation and she said Maya, (unclear) read. You don't love poetry. And I wrote yes ma'am. She wouldn't even look at my tablet. And she pointed her finger at me which was so rude. You know black people don't like that. They say don't your finger in my face. She pointed me. I had never seen her do anything rude before. She said you'll never love it until you speak it, until you feel it come cross your tongue, over your teeth, out of your lips. You'll never love poetry. She harassed me for months. She'd come to the store, seem me in the row and I ran from her. But finally I, I tried it. I had memorized everybody and I tried "Sympathy" by Paul Lawrence Dunbar [African American poet]. It wasn't--I did not know at the time I mean I was twelve. I wrote "Caged Bird" [I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings] when I was forty. But "Sympathy" and Abbey Lincoln [Anna Marie Wooldridge, jazz vocalist, songwriter, actress] gave me the title cause I in--I recited it to her on the telephone. She said that's the name of your book. Abbey was married to Max Roach at the time and we had written together. The poem is I know what the caged bird feels on me. When the sun is bright on the upland slopes; when the wind blows soft through the springing grass and the river floats like a sheet of glass. When the first bird sings and the first bud opes and the faint perfume from its chalice steals, I know what the caged bird feels. And the last verse is, I know why the caged bird beats its wing, till its blood is red on the cruel bars. For it must fly back to its perch and cling. When it fain would be on the balice a-swing; and the blood still throbs in the old, old scars; it pulses again with a keener sting; I know why the caged bird sings. I used that title as the title for my first book. And it, and I've also used it as the title for--I extracted from it the title from my last autobiography, "A Song Flung Up to Heaven" because it says--it's not a carol of joy or glee, but a prayer that it sends from its heart deep core, from its heart's deep core, a plea that upwards to heaven it flings. I know why the caged bird sings. Story_ID: 953 Speaker 1: You love Paul Laurence Dunbar. Why is that? Speaker 2: I love (unclear). Speaker 1: Why is he your favorite poet? Speaker 2: Poet--he's my--well of course I'm fickle too. I might call Mari Evans or Edna St. Vincent Millay, my favorite, depends on what time of day. But Dunbar because Dunbar wrote in both standard English and in the English of the plantation and I had never heard--I had heard some Dunbar but I never heard any of the standard English poet--poems. I also fell for Robert Burns, the Scots poet because it was a puzzle to re--to try to work out what he meant. I had never heard Burns or any Scots poetry in Arkansas, in Stamps, Arkansas that I got a man to (unclear) of that. And I realized that that is true, that a human being is a human being. And so I tried to work it out. I've always been intrigued with puzzles, crossword puzzles, double-crostic, anacrostics, all puzzles. I once had a job creating crossword puzzles. So I loved, I wanted to hear how on earth Dunbar could work--could write something like "Sympathy" and at the same time, Go ahead and quit that noise Miss Lucy. Put that music book away. What's the use to keep on trying? If you practice till you're gray? You can't start no notes to flying, like the ones with rants and rings; from the kitchen to the big woods, when Malindy sings. You ain't got the natural organ, for to make the tune come right. You ain't got the turns and twistings, for to make it come out right. When it come to real right singing, that ain't no easy thing to do--it's a wonderful poem. So I, I mean he--I love him, still do. Story_ID: 954 Speaker 1: Dr. Angelou, do I know six--you're--what is going on in your head? And I mean--because I mean you're six to twelve, six-- Speaker 2: six to--almost thirteen. Speaker 1: --teen. Speaker 2: seven to almost thirteen. Speaker 1: Yeah. What is going on in our head? I mean you talked a lot about being a vessel for poetry but what are you thinking, what are you observing, what are you fearing? Speaker 2: Well I had Bailey and of course I didn't know that mama loved me so deeply but she was there. She was there like--I thought when I was very young that mama was probably god herself but she wouldn't tell anybody. Mama was very kind and she used to tell me because I kept the books after I was about nine and she'd tell me, Sister, mama don't care. Mama just going--mama don't know what she gonna do. She just gonna step out on the word. Mama gonna step right out on the word of god. And I could picture this tall woman, I mean when she died she was over six foot. So when--at my--when I was eight or ten she must have been about 6'2" and she wore long dresses, long, big aprons. And I could picture this tall, black lady just standing up in the middle of heaven with nothing underneath her, suns and moons scurrying around her. And I just thought she was great. She protected me so. So I wrote a poem for her which I turned into a song and about four years ago a producer came and asked me here in my kitchen to sing the song. So I sang it a capella. The producer took the song out to California and put a 100 voice choir under it and a big orchestra and it's the song on the CD, Church, which has Chaka Khan, Patti Labelle, Denyce Graves, all those singers on it and my song for mama. It says, "you said to call on your name and I'm calling. You said to trust on your word and I'm trusting. You said to lean on your arm and I'm leaning. I'm stepping out on your word--something." So it was Mama. I thought I was in the bosom of god really being with mama and having Bailey who is so witty and who protected me. So I listened. I just thought of my whole body as an ear and I could listen to everything. I listened in church. I listened in school. I listened to the kids playing around the store, playing the songs. Speaker 1: So you think mama always thought you were going to speak at one point? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: She knew. Speaker 2: She was sure. Speaker 1: She was sure. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. And she and Ms. Flowers worked-- Speaker 2: Were aces. Speaker 1: They would work together? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are you saying we have to turn--? Story_ID: 955 Speaker 1: I want to spin forward a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay. Ms. Clay? (BRIEF INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: When you were talking about the blues, I was thinking regal blue like a queen. You forgot that. Speaker 2: I actually did. Speaker 1: I want to spin forward to 1957 when you record your first album, Miss Calypso, cause I'd like to touch upon that period where you were--really had a musical career. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I want to also talk about Calypso Heat Wave. It was wonderful watching you in that. Speaker 2: Thank you. That was 1957 as well. I made my living, I really was a dancer. I was--I trained as a dancer. However, by the age of twenty-four, my arthritis came to live with me in my bones, in my knees and in my hips. And all these years it has refused to leave its perch. Of course dancers at my time, in my age, did not know that we shouldn't dance on concrete so stages were concrete. And so when I leapt, I would hit that concrete and of course there'd be no give. I don't know any dancer over fifty, fifty-five who hasn't had operations on their knees or their hips. So I couldn't continue to make my living as a dancer although I had been with Porgy and Bess as premier dancers. And I read--I sang the role of Ruby but I wasn't a singer. And all the real singers would tell me at least every other night, Maya, I'm sorry to tell you, you flatted that F or you flatted or you sharped that G. I didn't even know I was signing in the alphabet so--but after I found I could not make a living as a dancer, I began to sing. So I sang in nightclubs, joints and made a living, very good living for me and my son. The--and then I was asked to do Calypso Heat Wave. I was singing in a place in Las Vegas and so I would fly in everyday to do Heat--to do the album, the CD. It was then an LP. And I also wrote about six of those songs on the LP because I was told that if I didn't write them I couldn't do the LP. So I just sat down and wrote them. I didn't know and I think they paid me $500.00 for the whole thing. So then for Calypso Heat Wave, I also wrote a number of songs for that movie and did the movie. Speaker 1: But you make it seem so easy. I mean that's what I--I mean you were in a major film at that point in that movie and even with your dance career like--lets go back to Porgy and Bess. Who was the Bess in Porgy and Bess at the time that you toured? Speaker 2: Well when I toured, Martha--Ms. Leontyne Price [Mary Violet Leontyne Price, musician and soprano] and--was Bess and her husband was Porgy. Speaker 1: Was that Warfield? Speaker 2: William Warfield-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --was Porgy. She left the company and hmm, Martha Flowers and a series of other singers whose names just in this moment are lost in my mind, hiding somewhere in the wrinkle in my brain. There were--we played Europe, European areas and Egypt, Morocco. The company went on to Europe--I mean to Russia. I left them in Yugoslavia. Speaker 1: Now how did you come to know Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey, Jr., founder of the Alvin Ailey Dance Theater], cause you're in the New York-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Right, not-- Speaker 2: We met in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: You met in San Francisco, okay. Speaker 2: We were very young, both in our early twenties and I was a dancer and he was a dancer. And we met the way dancers meet in dance halls or in dance studios. And we liked each other so we put together a duo. I was Rita and he was Al, so we were Al and Rita. And we wore almost no clothes at all. I think I had a little, small little g-string and two tassels on my breasts or something and he wore a little g-string and, made out of cloth like leopard print. And we both slathered our bodies down with Max Factor make-up. Not one of us had a point, had a pimple on our bodies but we thought this would really make us theatrical. So we (laughing)--being greasy as lard and we'd sing and dance for the Eastern Star, the Daughter Elks, the Elks, the Masons, the black secret organizations. And they'd pay us all of $35.00 or $40.00 a night. And we just thought we were it. But we were serious dancers so that's how I met him. Speaker 1: Okay. And at that time you had your son already right? Speaker 2: Oh yes I had my son-- Speaker 1: So you're working, you're performing as an artist. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then you go to New York-- Speaker 2: I took my son. Story_ID: 956 Speaker 1: You took your son to New York. Now you said you--so this--why did you not pursue Los Angeles and this whole, the entertainment? How did you not sort of get sucked into that you know as a singer, even though you say you weren't, you know people said you were singing out of key? But-- Speaker 2: Oh that was just-- Speaker 1: That was just, that was kidding? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But that was--and that was in Porgy and Bess where among fifty singers, there were 140 degrees in music. Each singer, I mean the people in the background could have two degrees, one from Curtis [Curtis Institute of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and another from Juilliard [Augustus Juilliard, Performing Arts Conservatory, New York, New York] just to be in the background. So they were really, almost all had perfect pitch. And so they teased me mercilessly because I did dare to sing in front of them. But I was trying to go up in the world so I sang in Beverly Hills [California] at Dee Little (ph.) Club and on Rodeo Drive and I was paid. And then there was as little--this wasn't so little I guess. But there was a route that singers used and performers, Sally Blair, Bobby Short, those people in my age group, we would sing in San Francisco [California] at the Purple Onion, at the Hungry Eye, Los Angeles [California], Hollywood [California], at the Little Club out on Rodeo Drive. And then Chicago [Illinois], Mr. Kelly's and New York, the Blue Angel, the Black Orchid, the Village Gate and the Village Vanguard. And you just kept moving around the country so that's what I did. Speaker 1: You know there's been a lot of documentation of the Harlem Renaissance [African American literary, intellectual and cultural movement of the 1920s and 1930s] but not this period that you talk about in terms of all the, just like you were describing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The--where people would move and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the intersections between. Speaker 2: Well we were forty years after the Renaissance, thirty years after the, what is called The Harlem Renaissance. So although I met Mr. Hughes [James Mercer Langston Hughes] and he took me, invited me--he knew I was a dancer who liked to write poetry. He invited me to his house. I have some wonderful photograph-- Speaker 1: Is this Langston Hughes? Speaker 2: In Harlem. Speaker 1: Langston Hughes? Speaker 2: Langston Hughes--in Harlem. And I don't remember anything he said but I remember he was very kind. I remember books stacked up on the floor just like six foot tall stacks of books. And we walked like that like through a maze. The other members of the Harlem Renaissance were long since dead by the time I came along. Speaker 1: So talk about the Harlem Writers Guild. Speaker 2: The Harlem Writers Guild? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well there was John Killens [John Oliver Killens, writer] was really the founder. John Oliver Killens. And he had come out to San Fran--to Hollywood. They were going to do a movie from a book of his. I think it was "And Then We Heard the Thunder." No. And he came to a club where I was signing, the Cosmos Alley in Hollywood. And we made friends and he came to my--I invited him to my house and I read him some of my poetry which I had been writing all along. I started writing when I was very young, I mean before my teens I was writing. Bad poetry I admit, but it was poetry. I thought it was. So Mr. Killens encouraged me to come to New York and join the Harlem Writers Guild and really have somebody critique my poetry. Oooh, I did that. I brought my son and we lived in Brooklyn and I joined the Harlem Writers Guild. And there was Paul Marshall, Rosa Guy, James Baldwin, of course Mr. Killens, Sarah Wright [Sarah Elizabeth Wright], wonderful writers. John Henrik Clarke [Dr. John Henrik Clarke] and ooh, they were tough. They were very tough. But when I wrote "Caged Bird", I dedicated the book in part to them. Speaker 1: So would you meet, how often would you meet as a group? Speaker 2: Once a month. Speaker 1: Once a month. And would different people read their-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --work and be critiqued by (unclear)? Speaker 2: You would have to say, before you left one month, you'd choose a person for the next meeting and she or he would read from the current work. And they were ruthless. They had no "ruth". But they were, they helped me to become a better writer. Story_ID: 957 Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite story about John Killens that you'd like to share? Speaker 2: Oh John Killens? He was a--John Killens was not only a great writer, he was a great organizer and he knew enough about the human condition, the psyche that he could push you without angering you. He could insist without making you ill at ease. Or a little bit ill at ease but not so ill at ease that you wouldn't come back. I think he saw himself as a leader and he was certainly seen by all of us as our leader. He was friendly with other artists, painters, Jake Lawrence and all of the painters of the era. And he--they would come over and talk to us about their particular art form and that meant a lot. It widened our scope so that the playwrights and the poets and the novelists didn't think of ourselves as only locked to that tablet, we really also thought of ourselves as seeing the landscape seeing the sea view listening to the music. So John did that for us. Speaker 1: And James Baldwin [James Arthur Baldwin, novelist, poet, activist], tell me about your relationship with him? Speaker 2: Jimmy Baldwin was my brother friend. He reminded me so much of Bailey and I'm sorry to say that Bailey at twenty had become a drugger, was caught into that world and started going to jail and to prison. And it in no way diminished my love for him but it did mean I needed a brother. I had been brothered so. And so Jimmy Baldwin, I guess it was in the 50s [1950s], yeah, we had met in Paris and we liked each other. And he was small like my brother so I don't know why this is but I became--because of Bailey, I do know why it is. But I became trusting to small black men and a good sister to them. So Sammy Davis, Jr. [Samuel George Davis] was small and black and very talented and James Baldwin was small and black and very talented. And I found myself over the years very friendly with small, black, talented men. So Jimmy took me to his mother, he was one of I don't--thirteen children or something like that and he took me to Mother Baldwin. And he said, mom I'm bringing you somebody you don't need, another daughter. But this is one I want for my sister. This is Maya. So I said I'm glad to meet you Ms. Baldwin. She said now Jimmy's just told me that you're his sister. I guess I'm more than Ms. Baldwin to you. She was very important to me as long as she lived. And when my own mother died she telephoned me. She said baby, I know Vivian has died and nobody can step in the footprints of a mother. But I want you to remember you do have a mother now and I'm still your mother. She was very good to me. Jimmy, the most amazing story, Jimmy and Bailey had never met and Jimmy was supposed to speak in a small college out n Northern California. He got to San Francisco, got into a limousine. The driver came across the Bay, across the bridge and couldn't find the college. And so they were in a residential neighborhood and Bailey said to the driver, stop the car. He saw a man washing a car. He got out of the limousine and he crossed the street. He said excuse me, we're looking for Heddage (ph.) College or whatever. It's--I can't remember the name of the college. And so the man stopped washing the car and said yes I know where it is Mr. Baldwin and I want to thank you for being a brother to my sister. My name is Bailey Johnson, whereupon they fell upon each other's necks and embraced. So it was just meant for them to meet. Speaker 1: Did you and James Baldwin, did you ever argue or get into--cause--? Speaker 2: Well he wasn't right all the time. But sometimes when I'd argue with him and he'd come to meet in California or I'd go to him in South of France and we'd sit up drinking Scotch all night and he'd be wrong and right in the heat of my argument I'd look up and think, that's James Baldwin! And there would go my argument. But we had an argument about Eldridge Cleaver [Leroy Eldridge Cleaver] because Cleaver had written that book "Soul On Ice" in which he had just defamed Baldwin. And so Jimmy came to my house in New York one day and said well babe, I'm going to go out to California. So I asked why. He said I'm going to go out. They've put Eldridge Cleaver in Jail. I'm going to go out and help to get him out. So I asked why? Why the heck are you doing that? He has vulgarly talked about you. He--I, I can't stand it. No you can't go. He said well I'm going. So I asked why? He said because I thought you knew the son always kills the father. So-- Speaker 1: Now I want to go to I know why the Caged-- Speaker 2: I'm weary. Speaker 1: You're weary. Speaker 2: I'm tiring. Hold on just a minute. (BRIEF INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: I would suggest to you that in all sorts of places there, there are sound bits of poetry I've done. And I'm losing my energy. Speaker 2: Okay. Well then I will--can I ask one more question? Speaker 1: Please. Speaker 2: I know that, I'd like you to--let's see, why don't I do this. Speaker 1: Take your time. (BRIEF INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: You've had a--I have two questions left. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 958 Speaker 1: You've had a very strong--you talked about your relationship with James Baldwin. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you've had also a strong mentor relationship with Oprah Winfrey Oprah Gail Winfrey] and I was wondering can you talk about why that relationship you think was so strong? Speaker 2: With Oprah? Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Speaker 2: I think that each of us draws to ourselves those personalities we need and according to how powerful our needs are, so I think that--with that same power that we draw to ourselves those people we need. I met Ms. Winfrey when she was in Baltimore on the television--she, I think she was an anchor of a television show. And she called me before I arrived in Baltimore and asked if I would allow myself to be interviewed. So I said I'm sorry I'm going to be at the University and I simply don't have the time. She said Ms. Angelou, if you'll give me five minutes, that's all I ask, I will be ready for you. So she--I said all right, five minutes. So I went to the University and I was about an hour before I was to speak and she came to the green room door and she said I'm--introduced herself and said I'm ready for you. And just next door she had the camera set up, she had the cinematographer, she had a chair and there was a pillow in the chair which told me that someone had sat in there who was tall. She removed the pillow and said sit down. I looked at my watch. She had her questions and when we finished, I finished, she said thank you Ms. Angelou. And I looked at my watch, it was exactly five minutes. So I asked her, what is your name? And she told me. I said my dear, continue. You're going to do wonders. Continue. And maybe six months later, a year later or more, I was in Chicago and I gave an interview, a kind of press conference and she wasn't inside, she was outside with a group of reporters. And I went over to her and I said Oprah Winfrey. She said you remembered me? I said yes. And you remember my name too? I said I do, of course. You're going to do wonders and I know it. And it's--I'm still so delighted to see you. So we began to talk and that and finally she called and I--or I called and she came down to visit me and she's been a daughter of mine since then. I admire her. I admire her honesty, her talent, her generosity of time and heart and art and goods and resources. I just admire that so we get on very well. Speaker 1: One last question. Coming in here you can feel the warmth. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And everybody, I've heard many people talk about the lovely parties you give and how everyone sings and there's food and just a lot of you know camaraderie. And I also am struck by your genius which I'm sure you know-- Speaker 2: By my--? Speaker 1: --your genius. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: I want to ask you cause this is a question we ask everyone and that is, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't say. I cannot--I can tell you this, I have held nothing back. Everything I think, everything I hope for, everything I've been able to achieve is available. People will use what they can use. People will take what they can take. Those who can take it all will take it all. Some will say you know she was--one fellow told me and my niece recently, he said she's the first of the hip hoppers. He was about 20 years old. And he said do you know who you're with? And he--she said yes I think so. He said, she's the first of the hip hoppers because he heard me do some of the poetry that I had done just in the mode of Paul Laurence Dunbar and with the words on point and on time and in rhythm. So he didn't know anything else. Well that's great, I like that. So that's what he will know. Someone else will know or will say that I have wisdom and I pray for that. I work for it. Someone else will say I have soul. I pray for that. There are those who will say I bring people together, black and white, Asian, Spanish speaking, Native Americans, true, gays, straight, it's true because that's what I am. I'm all of that and I will not let anybody deny me and minimize, narrow down my life into some mean little tunnel. I'm not speaking to blacks and blacks alone or tall women or fat or thin or short. No, I'm to everybody. So everything I have, everything I have so far accomplished and hope to accomplish in the future is for everybody. You see there's a statement and it means a great deal to me. The statement is homo sum: humani nil a me alienum puto; I am a human being. Nothing human can be alien to me. I feel that way. I can take from Balzac [Honore de Balzac, French novelist and playwright] or Tolstoy [Leo Nikolayevich Tolstoy, Russian writer], from Wole Soyinka [Akinwande Oluwole "Wole" Soyinka, Nigerian writer]. I can take from Edna St. Vincent Millay, Shakespeare, James Weldon Johnson. I can take from Skip Gates [Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr., Harvard Professor]. I can take from anybody. From Kobo Abe, the Japanese [writer]--or for that matter, Oe Kenzaburo [Kenzaburo Oe, Japanese novelist], yes! And I want everybody to take from me, that's my prayer, whatever they find useful. Thank you very much. Speaker 1: Thank you Dr. Angelou. Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you...