 Story_ID: 20801 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers' archive. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Howard Glen Adams. Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, Glen, G-L-E-N, Adams, A-D-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 28, 1940, Pittsylvania County, Virginia, P-I-T-T-S-Y-L-V-I-A County, Virginia, which is the Danville area. But I'm actually am from the county, rather than the city. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired educator, but I'm currently serving as a, as my own consulting business. I have my own consulting business, H. G. Adams and Associates in Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: And just for the record, you specialize in recruiting-- Speaker 2: I specialize in Human Resource development, primarily, but I help in three areas. Setting up mentoring programs, and we do a lot of things around mentoring specifically with stem development, stem majors, stem faculty, stem graduate students, those kinds of things. We do mentoring on transitioning new hires into the work place. And we also work with teachers on classroom climate for improving the classroom climate for stem majors. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January the 8th, 2012. Speaker 1: February (laughter). Speaker 2: February the 8th, (unclear). Today's date is February the 8th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Norfolk, Virginia in the office of my business which is H. G. Adams and Associates at 110 Maycox Avenue, Norfolk, Virginia 2305. Story_ID: 20802 Speaker 1: Now, what we do, we ask five, light-weight questions as kind of a warm up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --before we go into depth. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First question is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I would say, yes, and probably my, my very favorite food is meatloaf, that I sort of specialize in making. I enjoy cooking, and so I enjoy cooking and eating my own meatloaf. But I, I'm just a basic food eater, so good food, period. But I would say meatloaf is probably my favorite. Speaker 1: Alright. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Not really. I wear more dark than almost anything, just based on what I do. So typically, you will see me with sort of dark, what I say, standard colors, blue, gray, brown is sort of my colors. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Ah, I like the winter, winter months a little bit better than I do any other thing. I can put on enough clothes in the winter to stay warm. The summertime, the heat just gets to me. So I probably am a little bit more of a winter person, and I like the outdoors. And so I enjoy winter activities, so, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like to cruise. We go on lots of cruises. In fact, we typically go on a cruise just about every other year. And so if I had to pick the favorite thing that I do--but I like traveling, so--but cruises is the best. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Get up with something on your mind." Speaker 1: Okay, alright, and that's the title of one of your books. Speaker 2: That's the title of one of my books, but I live by that. When you wake up in the morning, my father used to say, if you don't know what you're gonna do, by the time you figure it out, the day is gone. And so, get up with something on your mind. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 20803 Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and your father's side. But we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Delsia, D-E-L-S-I-A, Mae, M-A-E, Waller, W-A-L-L-E-R, Adams, A-D-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May the 16th, 1909, Pittsylvania County, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell me about the, your ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I can go back to my great, great grandfather and great, great grandmother on that side of the family. Speaker 1: What was his--well, you know quite a bit about them. What was his name, your great, great grandfather? Speaker 2: His name was Mack, M-A-C-K, Waller, W-A-L-L-E-R, and his wife was named Betsy Waller. Speaker 1: So they, from what I saw before we started this interview, they were born near the beginning of the nineteenth century. Speaker 2: Nineteenth century, yes. They were born at the beginning of the nineteenth century, right. And-- Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Were they slaves? Speaker 2: They were slaves, yes, they were slaves. The--and their son was George Waller. And his wife was named Matilda--no, no, no, it wasn't. His wife was named Georgette--Um, I should have known you were gonna ask me that. I can't remember her name. I'll get it for you, but I'll get it before you leave. Speaker 1: But in all likelihood, he was born into slavery too. Speaker 2: They were slaves, they were born slavery, okay. And they lived long enough to be freed. But their son, who was my grandfather, was named George Milner Waller, M-I-L-N-E-R, Waller. And he was born in 1879, and so, obviously, he was born free. And he was married to Mamie Bowe, B-O-W-E Waller. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is the story of these ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: On that, on my mother's side, Mamie Bowe's father was Indian. And, and so we have Indian ancestry on that side of the family. I don't, I didn't know him. And they owned land. George Waller, the--Milner's dad owned land, and that land is still in the fam--some part of the family still live on the land, up in the country. And I--Mack Waller was born in Henry County. He was not, he was not born in Pittsylvania County. But he was born on a plantation that belonged to the Hairston's in Henry County. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, there's a story behind who the Hairston's are and then how your family acquired land. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us-- Speaker 2: Well, the Hairston's were--the matriarch of the whole gang came from England some time in the, either late 1600s or the very early 1700s and started buying land just across the land over in North Carolina. And then he started purchasing land in Virginia. So at one time, the Hairston combined families, children and extended family, owned about thirteen plantations, either in North Carolina or in Virginia. And that family, I'm told, collectively owned about 10,000 slaves. So this was during slavery. And so both, both my mother's family and my father's family came off of some part of the--different plantations, but were slaves under the Hairston's umbrella, if you will. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, on your mother's side of the family, are there any stories of African identity on that side that have survived? Speaker 2: I don't know any. I don't, I don't know of any. I have not--I just got back that far, and I stopped, and I sort of--I figured--somebody else is working on it now, and hopefully, they'll be able to dig it up. But I haven't gotten any further than that. Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about what plantation life was like on a huge plantation like that and what they actually, what your ancestors actually did on that plantation? Speaker 2: On, on both sides of the family, somewhere along the line, the--George, the son of Mack Waller, was also the playmate of his, of the slave owner's son. I'm told that the slave owner died when my great grandfather was nineteen. The son was either seventeen or eighteen, and he inherited my granddaddy, but didn't know how to run the farm. So he allowed him to move in with him, literally, and got--he was, they were able to get married. So my great grandparents, even though they were slaves were married. And so that's how he acquired the land, the Waller land that's in the family, through that linkage. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright. So, I mean it's interesting you can go back that far, and you've actually written a book. Speaker 2: I've written a book about the Adams and the Hairston's on that side of where we came from. I've got information about the Waller's, but I haven't written that up yet. But I know, I know--I can go back and my grandfather, all of his siblings, I know who they were. I knew, I know who George, the first George, George, the elder had a couple of brothers and I know who they were. But I have not been able to go back and dig that up any more than that. Story_ID: 20804 Speaker 1: Alright. So your mother [Delsia Mae Waller Adams] was born in 1909, and her father was George Milner Waller-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: And in the same county. Speaker 2: Yes, in the same county. Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother say about growing up? What was growing up like? Speaker 2: She--they had a very--as, as comfortable as black folk could have at that time under the conditions, a very good life. She was, she finished seventh grade. There was no high school for blacks to attends; just a fantastic, I'm told, just, you know, she was an orator. She spoke very well, even up until she had a stroke. She was very good in math. And so she won a scholarship to go off to college at that time. Since there were no high school for blacks in the county, you either had to pay tuition to go to the city or you went off to college. And so she got admitted to the high school that Johnson C. Smith, and I don't know what the name of it was. But she also got admitted to the high school at Hampton and could have gone to either one. But they were both about 200 miles away, and she had an allergy. And her mother had died from that, from an allergy. And so as time came for her to--they'd even, I'm told they had bought this, the trunk, had packed, had her ready to go. But my granddaddy just backed out, couldn't do it. He couldn't let her get away. She was only thirteen years old, and she would have been gone, and she'd have been 200 miles. We had no phone. We wouldn't a known how to get in touch with her. So she didn't get a chance to go to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So for her, education was the most important thing. And she always, I mean talked to us all of the time about making sure that we all stayed in school and finished high school. So the, one of her proud moments was when all of us had finished high school. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, what did your mother do for a living? Speaker 2: She ended up being a cook at the high school. And she was the head of the kitchen at the white high school in the county and was there for forty years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 20805 Speaker 1: Alright, now, let me go to your father's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name was Daniel Boone Adams, Daniel Boone, D-A-N-I-E-L, B-O-O-N-E, Adams, A-D-A-M-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was born August 30th, 1905. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, of course, it seems obvious that he's named for Daniel Boone, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --is it true? Speaker 2: Yes, that is where his name came from, yes. So there were no other Boone's as far as we knew in the family (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Is there a story attached to why? Speaker 2: No, I have no story behind the name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he used it so, and we used it, so, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: I can go back the same way with him. I can go back to my great, great grandparents. My great, great grandfather was named Benjamin Adams. He was born in 1911. Speaker 1: Great, great grandfather? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Eighteen Eleven [1811]? Speaker 2: Eighteen eleven [1811], right. Speaker 1: Eighteen eleven [1811], okay. Speaker 2: And he was born on the--as far as I know, was born on the Berry Hill Plantation. So he was a slave. And as far as I know, he was born a slave. He was married, and he married Matilda Adams. She was born in 1909. Speaker 1: Eighteen zero nine [1809]. Speaker 2: Eighteen zero nine [1809], 1809. Speaker 1: Matilda Adams. Speaker 2: Matilda Adams. Speaker 1: Okay, now did they do--do you know what they actually did on the plantation? Speaker 2: My great grandfather was a, was a--he wasn't no, he was like the yard, around-the-house slave. I mean he wasn't in the field. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I don't know, I couldn't say he was, specifically what he did. But as far as I know, he was around the house. Speaker 1: So he may have been the gardener, may have been the butler-- Speaker 2: Gardener, that kind of--right, butler, he could have been a butler, right. Speaker 1: Valet. Speaker 2: Valet, right. And my, and my--and Matilda actually worked in the, in the house. So she worked in the plantation house. What she did, I don't know, I mean-- Speaker 1: They were house servants. Speaker 2: They were house servants. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And their son--so he's Benjamin. I call him Benjamin the elder. And his son was also named Benjamin Adams. And Benjamin's son was born in 1845. And he was, he was born a slave. And he was the first Adams to be--he and his wife, Celia, C-E-L-I-A, and I've seen it spelled Cecilia and I've seen it spelled Celia. But as far as we know, it was Cecilia. And she was born in 1850, I think I got the birth--the date right. And so they were the first of my, on that side of the family to freed. And so they were freed. But they stayed on the plantation, so they didn't leave. Speaker 1: Now, were they--did they work in the house as well? Speaker 2: He was, he grew up, yes. He grew up, the man servant to the plantation's owner's son also. And so, but he, he was a horseman. He took care of the horses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so once he was freed, then he became a horse trainer. And so I have bill of sales for him where he bought and sold horses. I have a bill of sale where he sold a horse in 1884 for $90.00. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was what they call a groom, I guess and-- Speaker 2: Yes, he was a groomer. Speaker 1: --a horse trader? Speaker 2: A horse trader, right. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: And they were freed, stayed on the plantation. They gave birth to my grandfather, Jube, J-U-B-E, Adams. And he was born in 1868, just right after slavery was over. And he grew up to be a Virginia gentleman. You are considered a (laughter), a Virginia gentleman if you own land and you were your own person. And he bought a hundred acres of land and built a very stately house which all of us had a chance to live in. And he was known as Mr. Adams. He was superintendent, he helped build the first school for kids in the area, and he was actually the superintendent of the school, although he was uneducated, I mean, you know, as education goes. He knew how to read and write, but he was--there was no school to go to when he came along. So I mean-- Speaker 1: Now, this is a break. Your grandfather kind of breaks away from the pattern. He doesn't stay on the plantation-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --and he's not, you know, he's not a servant on the plantation. So he has his own land. Speaker 2: He had his own land. Speaker 1: And then now, how did that--is there a story about how he got his own land? Speaker 2: Well, he as far--he bought a hundred acres of land from his playmate, the slave owner's son. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And had the bill of sale for that, paid $2,000 for it, cash, so the bill of sale says in 1912. And so he was a butcher on the plantation. And the good part about being a butcher on the plantation was, you weren't supposed to be hungry. If you were gonna slaughter, you definitely (laughter), you could you out a little extra stuff and take it on home. So we'd sort of laugh about that because, you know, he--and he, he was married twice and actually had eighteen children, eight by the first wife and ten by the second one. And the second wife came to the marriage with two children. So there were actually twenty, and so I grew up having sixteen aunts and uncles. Four them were dead before I was born. But I knew sixteen of them. Speaker 1: That's a large family. Speaker 2: Large family, and there are sixty four first cousins-sixty three, sixty three first cousins. And I knew all of them with the exception of three. Three of them were dead before I was born. Story_ID: 20806 Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did your father [Daniel Boone Adams] grow up and what stories did he tell about growing up? Speaker 2: He grew up--he was the, he was the chosen male, if you will. I wanna make sure I say this right. He was sort of the chosen male in the family. So he was the matriarch, if you will--the patriarch rather. I keep saying matriarch. He was the patriarch of the family. And, and so he went away, went to Roanoke [Virginia], went to work for the railroad. And my grandfather got ill and was dying, and so he came back home to take over the farm and raise six children that were still at home. So, he came back, and at twenty eight, he married my mother [Delsia Mae Waller Adams]. I think they got married when he was twenty eight, and which put mother at twenty three. Mother was twenty three when they got married. So I didn't know them. They were not--they were not youngsters when I knew them. He was a senior, he was, you know, he was a full grown man by the first time I ever knew who he was because they didn't have any children. My brother wasn't born until thirty--they got married in--Jimmy was born, like--Jimmy's what? Jimmy was born in '35' [1935], '34' [1934], '35' [1935], something like that. So-- Speaker 1: So they were over forty when they had you? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were forty years, yeah, by the time I came along. Speaker 1: Okay, so, did your father have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: No, he probably went, he probably ending going to about fourth grade. I don't know, I don't know why he didn't stay beyond that. But he was literate very well. I mean he spoke well, read the paper, chairman of the Deacon Board, Treasurer of the church, all those kind of things. So he was, and he--you know, and he was Mr. Adams. (Laughter) He was also Mr. Adams. So he was well, well, you know--but he didn't finish elementary school. And as I told you before, there was no high school. So there was no high school when he came along in that county. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: The first high school was built, I was nine years old when it opened. That's how close I came to not having a high school to go to. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think people lose sight of the fact that it wasn't that long ago that we had schools-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. That's what I tell people. There was no, there was no high school in my county for black folk till 1949. I was, I was already in fourth grade when they opened. Speaker 1: So, as you were saying earlier, your mother would have had to gone, go 200 miles away to go to high school. Speaker 2: Away to go to school, right. Story_ID: 20807 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Delsia Mae Waller and Daniel Boone Adams] met that they tell? Speaker 2: I don't know about how they met. I don't know. The communities were, you know, they, they weren't in the same little general community, but the communities--people went to the--churches only met once a month. So the church that my mother and them went to, met on the third Sunday. And then you'd go to somebody else's church on the fourth Sunday and the first Sunday and the second Sunday. So people moved around. That's how you met people. So when I was growing up then, then we went to six or seven churches. Of course, you might not go to the same one since it wasn't your church. You might pick another one that met on the first Sunday and go there, you know what I mean. So there were several churches. Speaker 1: Now, is this amongst the Baptist churches or Methodists or what? Speaker 2: This was Baptist, these were Baptist churches, right. Speaker 1: Baptist, okay, so these were all Baptist churches that were associated with each other. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were associated with each other. And, and, now, my father belonged to the Primitive Baptist church which were old Baptist, and my mother belonged to Missionary Baptists so there're different--there were different groups. But they met, and got married, and my brother swears out that my father was taking mother on the first trip to Roanoke [Virginia] and turned the car over. I can't verify that story so don't put that in there. But he, when I was--the first car I ever remembered--he always had a car. So the first car I remember was a 1939 Oldsmobile, and I was born in 1940. He still had it when I was--and so we always had a--and so growing up, we always had a car and a truck. There was always a car and a truck in the yard, always. Story_ID: 20808 Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to the Baptist designation. I heard this earlier in the week about the Primitive Baptist church. Can you give me what your interpretation is? Speaker 2: They are, they were, they were a little bit more orthodox than the missionary Baptists. They washed each other's feet. They did the right hand of fellowship. They sang a capella. There was no, no instruments in the church. The ministers were called elders. And the church absolutely was run by the members. I mean it was strict (laughter) and still is. The lead deacon was, was, I mean powerful in the church. So it was much different from today where the minister runs the church. There, the-- Speaker 1: The deacons ran it. Speaker 2: --deacons ran the church. And the lead deacon, when he spoke, everybody listened. So it was, it was quite an experience. But it was rich because it was well--although they were uneducated, it was, you were taught. You were groomed. You didn't just become a deacon. You were groomed. When you became lead deacon, you had been groomed to be that--in that role. And so it was passed down. They went by the book. You might not have agreed with what they did. They went by the--everything was run by the numbers almost. It was, it's amazing to go there still. To this day, it's run the same way. My cousin is the lead deacon. He's a Hairston. And he, his, his grandfather and my grandmother were sisters and brothers, I think is the way it goes. I think that's how it was. But anyway, he--but a very, very, very well organized, ruled tradition by the book. Speaker 1: Okay. So was the minister more or less in this situation considered talent more than-- Speaker 2: He was, but he was an employee, I mean in the greatest sense. He was called, okay, and they would sit you down. And if you didn't, if you didn't what you're supposed to do, they'd tell you, you're out of order. Brother Pastor, you're out of order. And he'd, and he'd say, no, you can't speak anymore. You're out of order. You don't see that. Oh, no, no, no, (laughter). It's powerful. I tell people about that. It's amazing. Speaker 1: Now, someone was telling me that they think that this church was a, had its roots in the days of slavery and that, you know, it came out of that-- Speaker 2: It came out of that. I, ours has been--we can go back and trace that one back to right at the end of slavery. I mean I told you that my dad and them went to school at the church. So it's been--I don't know that--I mean that building, the building that we went to. But that building's been there since the 1800s, so it's, you know, it's been, it was one of the early churches in the area. So my father, that's where they went to school, yeah. Speaker 1: Alright, so that's interesting. Okay. So, and when we were--before we got started, you were identifying one of the preachers as a whoop? Speaker 2: A hooper. Speaker 1: Hooper, is that-- Speaker 2: Well, they, rhythm, the rhythm of the, of the service. And so you, you know, they--call and response. It was quite a, quite a thing. And singing is just awesome. I mean you never, you have never heard singing, with no music, just absolutely just patting and all in rhythm. But I mean you could just feel it, and it would build. It was, it's (laughter), it's something to behold when you get, where they could sing. They were just awesome. Speaker 1: Do you have an example of the songs that they would sing? Speaker 2: Oh, it's one in my book. "You ought a come by Jesus: Hallelujah". [Singing] You ought a come by Jesus--and I mean just, you know, just--but I've got a, I'll show you one of the hymn books. It's in my--they got a little thing, a little hymn book that you can put in your pocket. It has no music to it. It's just, it is all rhymed. And they give out the words. So they line a hymn. They line the hymn because many of the people in the church couldn't read. So you gave out the words. And then you sing it. [Singing] "I came to Jesus as I was, I [singing] came" and you do the right hand of fellowship to the song. So, but they would give out the words first, and then they'd sing the song. Story_ID: 20809 Speaker 1: Alright, yeah-- Speaker 2: I was gonna say, so then you'd move it around. So we were, we were the Roanoke [Virginia]line, and there was somebody who belonged to another line. And they might a had ten churches that was on that, in that association. But they would go all the way to Macon, Georgia to go to an association. So I--and so this uncle that I showed you, we traveled to him to different kind of things. Sometimes he wanna go some place and have to come back 'cause you couldn't stay overnight 'cause there was no place to stay. So he'd get somebody to ride with him so he'd have somebody to talk to. So even as a kid, you might ride-- Speaker 1: Now, would he be like a circuit preacher or a circuit-- Speaker 2: Oh, he, he pastored a church every Sunday. So one of these little churches, he would have, yes. So at any given time, he might have two. Sometimes he might be pastoring three, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you all have the same pastor in each one of the six churches that would just move around each-- Speaker 2: You didn't--some of them, there were about--when I was growing up, there were about five elders that were stationed in the general community. And so one of them was at each of these. And then one of the little small churches might have, they might have to overlap that 'cause they might not have enough members even to have a, to have a minister. So some of them were that small. In fact, there was one that only had two members, two little ladies. And each--they kept it running. And so they borrowed deacons from one of the bigger churches because they couldn't, the women couldn't run the church. So they had to borrow a deacon. So you might--my father at one time served as a deacon to another church also. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's interesting. Speaker 2: Very interesting, yeah. Speaker 1: And what was the name of the church that your parents attended? Speaker 2: My father [Daniel Boone Adams] went to Piney Grove Primitive Baptist Church, Piney Grove [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And mother [Delsia Mae Waller Adams] went to Silver Creek Missionary Baptist Church. So they didn't go to the--so we grew up in two churches, Piney Grove Primitive Baptist Church and mother went to-- Speaker 1: Silver Creek. Speaker 2: --Silver Creek Missionary Baptist. Speaker 1: Now, was there actually a Silver Creek close by? Speaker 2: It was a creek close by, but it wasn't silver. I don't know where the name came from. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: I don't think the creek was--I shouldn't say it wasn't, but as far as I know, there was no creek there called Silver Creek. Speaker 1: And was there a Piney Grove near the other one (laughter)? Speaker 2: There were pines all around there (laughter), so, yes, it probably was so at the time. You know, people started farming and cut up everything, so they could have very well been pines when it first started. I'm not sure about that. But there're not many around now, I know. But, yeah. Story_ID: 20810 Speaker 1: Now, when you consider the talents and the personalities and dispositions and the looks of your parents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My mother [Delsia Mae Waller Adams]. I look more like my mother and my, and my mother's father. In fact, I'm almost his image. I have a little bit more of my mother's personality than I do my dad. But both were just excellent parents, I mean just excellent parents. We grew up, all of us are spoiled. There're eight of us, and nobody can believe that you can--in the country, you could spoil eight kids. All of us were spoiled. You could have individual time with my mother. So if you wanted to, if you wanted to have time with her-now, if you wanted to have time with her, you'd probably have to go in the kitchen because she cooked. We had hot meals all the time. We never ate cold meals. And so she baked bread three times a day. And so the best time to have quiet conversation with her was go in the kitchen and sit down and talk to her while she was cooking. My father [Daniel Boone Adams], you could go with him for a walk. You could down with him to feed or something. But there was no time when you couldn't have talked to him. There was nothing, there was nothing you could have done that you couldn't have gone home and told your dad about. Now, you might, it took a long time for you to get around to (laughter), get up nerve enough to go tell him what you'd done, but you could have gone and told him anything. And he would a sat down and listened to you. He would ask a lot of questions about it. He would of tried to ask you, "What are you gonna do about it? What do you think you're gonna do?" And if you had needed some help, he would have told you to go see his lawyer. We had a lawyer. So he always had a lawyer. Growing up, he had a, he had a shoe account HP Green Shoe Store in Danville, which is one of the--at the time, was one of the exclusive shoe stores in the whole area. And my father, as far I know, always had a shoe account there. So if you needed a pair of shoes, and said, "Dad, I need some shoes." He's say, "Go down there and tell Mr. Green to put 'em on my account." And we had, we bought other things, clothing at Belt Leggits (ph.). They dropped the Leggit part of it, but Belt Leggits Department Store was in Danville. And mother had an account there. So if you needed a shirt, you could go and say, "Mother, I need a shirt." She'd say, "Go down and tell Ms. so and so to put it on my account." Go down and get a shirt. So, so, quite, quite a good life. We were farmers, but with a good life. Speaker 1: Okay, well, it sounds like you weren't afraid of your father. Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Nobody had that kind of-- Speaker 2: You could use the car. You had to ask for permission, and he might say no. He didn't have no particular reason for saying no. He just (laughter) every once in a while he knew he was supposed to say, no, and so he'd say, no. But you could, you could have the car, and you had to work to help take care of it. But all of us grew up driving a car. And if it, and by the time I got--my, my older brother finished high school when I was a freshman. So when I was in the eighth grade, and moved to the ninth grade, he finished high school. And he got a car. So he had a car. He went off to Virginia State. So he had a car. So when he'd come home, then we had two cars that you could drive, okay. And he only took an Associate degree, so he finished. So he finished before I finished high school. When we finished, when my brother and I got to be seniors, we got the car. So we got his car 'cause when he finished college, he gave us the car, and bought himself another car. So we got his car. And so in high school we had a car. So we had the family car, plus we had his car. So that was, that was a good thing. Yes, we had--so, you know, you needed a car in the country 'cause everything was thirty miles away, fifteen miles away. Story_ID: 20811 Speaker 1: Alright, now, can you name your brothers and sisters and put yourself in the order in which they-- Speaker 2: Okay, my oldest brother is James Daniel Adams, he's the oldest. And Preston Clemmons Adams, he's deceased. Thomas Earl, and the Howard Glen. I'm next to Thomas Earl. So I--four boys older, and then the twins. Speaker 1: You, in 1940. Speaker 2: I was born in 1940. Then the twins. And all of us are about eighteen months apart. The twins, Martha and Mary Adams. They came along twenty two months after me, okay. And then 18, let's see, June to October. Millie was a year, and then to October, Millie was--Mildred Adams, the next girl, and the baby is Clarence Benjamin. And so, again, he's about 15 months younger than Mildred. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you grew up, it was you and your parents and your siblings. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And did you, any of your grandparents live with you or any other relatives? Speaker 2: No, no, no. We, my, my grandmother died when I was three years old. And she was still living in the home house. And so my father had built a house for himself. So we lived in there. And then after she died, we moved into the home house. And somebody else moved into our smaller house. So we lived in the home house from the time, oh, I was probably--we probably moved there in '46' [1946] maybe. So I was about six years old when we moved in the home house. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 20812 Speaker 1: Now, can you describe the area you lived in and tell us what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Okay, grew on a hundred acres of land. I was born on a hundred acres of land, change that. I was born on a hundred acres of land. When I was eight years old, my father bought another hundred, he and his brother. So we actually grew up on about 200 acres of land. We raised tobacco, always had a riding horse. So I always had a horse to ride because my, I told you my great grandfather was a horsemen, so there was always a horse. So even after we were all gone and the grandchildren came along, my father raised a pony for them. So it was always something to ride at the house. We grew up--our farm sat surrounded by white farmers. We were the only, so we were in the middle of--there were white farmers all around us. The road came into our property, and was passed, we cut through two other farms to get to where we lived. It was a, it ended--it was a state road, but it ended at our, where our house was. So we lived 10 tenths of a mile off of the main highway, fifty eight, Route fifty eight, that runs from Norfolk, Virginia to Hillsville. It actually goes to West Virginia. And it runs right through Danville. Most of my family worked for Dan River Cotton Mills. It was the bigger, it was the biggest employer in town, Dan River Fabrics, Dan River Cotton Mill and labor intense. So I had relatives who worked there forty years. I had one uncle who worked there fifty five years, fifty five years in the cotton mill. And most people were farmers and we raised--and the cash crop was tobacco. So we grew tobacco. We raised our, we raised our own chickens, had our own eggs, raised wheat that we would take to the mill and grind for flour. We raised corn, raised hogs, had cows for milk and butter. And so we had food. I mean I don't know nothing about not having food (laughter). I don't know anything about being poor. I mean I wasn't wealthy or anything, but I don't know anything about being poor. I mean I don't, I just don't--I, when you try to talk about it, I know nothing about that. I mean I don't, I don't, I didn't have a bad life at all. We had a wonderful life. I'm serious. We had a really wonderful life, had wonderful aunts and uncles. Christmas Day, the brothers and all the--all seven brothers lived in the area. So there were seven, my father--he and his seven brothers. Christmas Day, every one of them passed through the house before 12:00 o'clock that night, every one of them would come. I mean Christmas Day would not pass without coming to see Bro Dan. And we didn't have to go any place. Everybody came to our house. And so that was just, so it was traditional (unclear) for that, yeah. The sounds of the place. It was segregated. I didn't like it. I sat in the back of the bus. I could be told to get up and move and give somebody my seat. I know what that's like. I mean that happened to me in my lifetime. You couldn't go in the, you had to go upstairs at the movie. You couldn't go in the restaurants. You couldn't try on clothes in town. Now, we could try on shoes at Mr. Green's before I left home. I don't know when that took place, but I can remember them taking the size of foot, going and getting you a pair of shoes. But, you know, by the time I got where I could go get my own shoes, I could go to Mr. Green and get a shoe. By the time I finished high school, there was a Saitter's (ph.) for Men in town. It was one of--it was exclusive. It was an exclusive men's shop, fine clothes. When you got your own first job and you were gonna get paid once a month, I mean once a week, you could go to Saitter's and get an account in your name. So from the time I was a sophomore in high school, I had my own charge account. I could go buy myself some clothes. You start off, you could buy something that you had to pay for it like in a couple of weeks. And then if you did that on a regular basis, you could go get something a little bit more expensive. You could go get a pair of pants. And finally, you could go get a pair--a sports coat. And finally, you could go buy a suit. And so, until he closed, guys in my generation, when we came back home, we'd go to Saitter's and buy a suit. It was one of the best clothing stores I've ever been in. Speaker 1: In Danville. Speaker 2: In Danville, Virginia. So when you ask me about the place, it was, it was, it was okay. It was what you know about. But I didn't like it. I never liked it, and I knew I wasn't gonna stay. I finished high school June the 8th , 1958. I left June the 9th. I left that next day. Story_ID: 20813 Speaker 1: Now, let me, I'm gonna get to the high school part, but I wanna go back to maybe the relationships between the--you say your father's [Daniel Boone Adams] place was located between these, surrounded by white farms. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was his relationship to those other farmers? Speaker 2: They were cordial, they were cordial. My father was, he was a Virginia gentleman. So he didn't have to, he didn't have to be beholding to anybody. He had an account at the bank. We had--First State Bank opened, everybody can tell you the date. But if I got it right, it opened, it opened on a Tuesday, 1919. It was a black-owned bank. It's still there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father never went anyplace else. The man who ran it was named Mr. Martin. And everybody had to get in the line and go--if you wanted to make a loan (laughter), you had to get in line and go see Mr. Martin. So white folk had to get in line and wait their turn. So my father would not go to another bank 'cause he wanted to make sure that he went to the bank where everybody had to speak to Mr. Martin and call him Mr. Martin and where everybody got in line. Speaker 1: What was the name of the bank? Speaker 2: First State Bank. Speaker 1: First State Bank. Speaker 2: Opened in 1919 on a Tuesday, back--I should remember the month, First State Bank. Speaker 1: That's something. Yeah, there were--I've heard of other banks around the country, Binga Bank in Chicago [Illinois] and some others. But a lot of them, you know, came and-- Speaker 2: First State is still there. Speaker 1: First State's still there, 1919. It may be--is it the oldest or-- Speaker 2: I don't think it's the oldest. But it's one of the oldest, yes. Speaker 1: Continuously, yeah. Speaker 2: And so, we--there were two families that we were very--that my father had a lot of respect for and they had a lot of respect for him. There was a family that lived on the road going out from our place named the Owens, Mr. Owens. My father had a lot of respect for Mr. Owens, and Mr. Owens--so we grew up liking Mr. Owens. And we grew up knowing Mr. Owens' sons, who were my father's, just a little--Clyde was just a little bit younger than dad, but we knew him. And they were pretty well off, but they were decent, very decent people. But you could go, you know, you could go on people's property if--there was a path that went everywhere. So you didn't have to go the main drag. If you cut through the woods, you could cut off a mile. So you went through the woods to get someplace. So we went through the woods to go to school. So we'd cut across people's property to go to school. You couldn't do that today. They'd have it posted. So the world is worse than it was then. Speaker 1: Yeah, in some--okay, yeah. Speaker 2: And I tell people that. I mean people look at me and say, I mean, you know, right, we still own the--if you went through those people's land today, they'd run you off. They'd call and say you're trespassing. We'd cut through--there was a path that went through everybody's stuff. Speaker 1: So this was a local, I guess the local moray where (unclear) everybody got along. Speaker 2: Right, exactly, yeah, you know, everybody sort of got along, everybody got along. Speaker 1: But there's still segregation in the town primarily. Speaker 2: In the town, and if you needed something, you could go see them. Okay, if you needed something, you could go see them. And during that time, I mean people, you could call on folks. You could have called on somebody, yes. Speaker 1: White or black? Speaker 2: White or black, oh, yeah, okay. Story_ID: 20814 Speaker 1: Okay, were there any rumors or stories of anyone being mobbed or lynched or-- Speaker 2: The Martinsville Seven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It sticks in my craw to this day. They were, they were--it was seven guys. And they were accused of raping this white female on the railroad track. She was a prostitute. And they killed all seven of them. I was about--I wanna say it happened in either 1949, 1950. But don't never forget that. Speaker 1: Now, they were, from what I understand, they were arrested and held, I mean it wasn't a mob action. They actually electrocuted them. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, they electrocuted them. But I don't remember any mob killings, no, in my area. There probably were. I don't remember any. Speaker 1: Now, what's the story about the Martinsville Seven? Did they, was the feeling in the black community that they actually committed the crime or framed-- Speaker 2: We think, well, as I say, it was always that she was a prostitute, that she sold herself to them, and then she--either somebody heard about it or something. And so then she cried rape and so, you know, at that time, if somebody said you raped them, hell, you couldn't prove you didn't so you just, you know--so that's what it was. But I don't know. I, I don't have a better answer than that. But it was--I grew up, I knew Wendell Scott, the race car driver. So, you know, we knew about him, and he was tinkering with cars when I was growing up as a kid. He became famous after I left, but-- Speaker 1: Wendell Scott is the one's that portrayed by Richard Pryor in the movie "Greased Lightening". Speaker 2: "Greased Lightening", right. Well, I knew him, see. So you asked me about things that went on in the area, so I knew about him. We had, oh, God, there was a couple of famous, there was a--oh, I can't think of her name. There was a soprano that grew, that was from my hometown. But I should be able to call her name, but I hadn't thought about her. Speaker 1: Not Leontene Price. Speaker 2: No, no, no, nobody in that--a little bit earlier than she came along even. Speaker 1: Marion Anderson was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was from Philadelphia, but it there was somebody from Danville [Virginia]. And the, the case was defended by Martin A. Martin. I think I, and you'd better look that up, but I think I got it right, Martin A. Martin was, but he was an attorney and was sort of famous for that. But he was, he was--so that was one of the big things that happened while I was growing. And again, the opening of the high school was big. I mean that was a big (laughter), that was a major event. So you wanna ask, that opened in 1949. So I can remember that very distinctly. And when the high school opened, then we got buses to ride. Before that time, it didn't make any difference how far you lived from school, you had to walk, if you were black. So we walked three miles to school, and I mean people, you know, hear that three-mile story. It was actually three miles, but there were people, kids who walked six miles to get to the elementary school that I went to. Speaker 1: Okay, and when did the school open? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-nine [1949]. Speaker 1: Forty nine [1949], okay, that's-- Speaker 2: And so with the high school coming-- Speaker 1: --yeah, that's the same year as the Martinsville Seven-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is arrested-- Speaker 2: Arrested, right, yeah. Speaker 1: And they're executed in '51' [1951]. Speaker 2: Fifty--yeah, '51' [1951], right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And, and with the high school, because you had to carry people from such distances, the bus then started running. And they would drop kids off at the elementary school as they passed by. So that we got buses to ride. Story_ID: 20815 Speaker 1: Okay, so is this South Side High School? Speaker 2: Yeah, South Side High School. Speaker 1: Okay, South Side High School and it opens in 1949. Speaker 2: Nineteen forty nine [1949], right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First public full-scale high school in my end of the county. There was a training school on the other end of the county, but it was thirty miles from where, where I lived, thirty miles away. So that was too--you couldn't go. But that was boarding too at one time, but it was called a trading, training school, much like, you know, in the South you only had eleven grades. So they could say you didn't finish high school. Speaker 1: That's really-- Speaker 2: People don't know that. Speaker 1: That's diabolical, isn't it? Speaker 2: That's, you only went to the eleventh grade. So you couldn't say you finished high school 'cause you didn't finish twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of people before, who we've interviewed talk about going to another town to get that last grade, going by themselves. Speaker 2: By themselves, well most people-- Speaker 1: Hundreds of miles away. Speaker 2: --most people don't know that that, you know, people don't that that, I mean and I have to tell people that happened in my lifetime. So that isn't like, you know, I'm seventy one years old, but it isn't like that's ancient, you know. That happened in my lifetime. So. Speaker 1: So at any rate, this is the first--now, how big was your school, South Side? Speaker 2: There were seventy seven kids in my senior class. Okay, and it grew, you know, so it grew incrementally from the time it got started then. Forty-nine [1949], I graduated in '58' [1958], so nine years later, there were seventy seven students in the senior class. So you can imagine, reduce that by about six or seven every year. So that's about the growing, growth of it. The first class probably had about fifteen or sixteen 'cause people came back to finish, you know. Some people had been off to the war and some other kind of things and came back and finished school. So there were people who went to school with me who were adults who had come from the Korean War. And then they got a chance to go on the GI Bill so they went to school 'cause you get paid to go to school. You got a hundred dollars a month to go to high school. So there were older people in the class, yeah. Story_ID: 20816 Speaker 1: Okay, let me go back to the beginning of grade school. We always do this. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Don't feel like I'm picking on you. So where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started at the elementary school. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: One room, Stony Mill Elementary School, one room. Speaker 1: Stony Mill, now, was it near a Stony Mill? Speaker 2: It was not far from the Stony Mill, right, it wasn't that far from the mill. Speaker 1: Okay, and you started there when you were six? Speaker 2: Six years old, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, that's first grade. Speaker 2: First grade. Speaker 1: Alright, now, did you like school? Were-- Speaker 2: I loved school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a first grader, the school was too crowded. So first graders could only go a half a day. So we got sent home at 12:00 o'clock. Speaker 1: So would you say, looking back at it that you got half of an education as a first grader? Speaker 2: I wouldn't--well, I didn't because I was, you could, the teacher would let you advance, 'cause she let somebody who was in the seventh grade teach you. So the guy who taught me how to write was ahead of me. So I could script way before most people could. So I was a little bit ahead of people. My sister ahead of, you know--if you could--they would run you along. So you'd, she'd bring you books to read and stuff. So I caught my brother, I caught up with my brother. So I caught up with him. He's about eighteen months older than I am. We graduated from high school together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I caught him going along. Speaker 1: But it's still a fact that-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, yeah, it's a fact-- Speaker 1: --that your day was truncated. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was truncated, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, cut down. Speaker 2: Exactly. And I--that was an experience because they sent you home. We were three miles from home. And so here you are a sixth grader, so you couldn't--you see what I'm saying. And there were three of us, three boys in the first grade who got sent home, me, Carl Wayne and Irving. All of us graduated from high school together. Speaker 1: So you all would walk six miles back-- Speaker 2: We walked three miles through the woods. Speaker 1: Three miles. Speaker 2: Through the woods. Speaker 1: Through the woods. Speaker 2: Had to cross the creek, had to cross the creek with no, no bridge or nothing crossing, just hope across the rocks. And it had rained and flooded, and she let us go home, and we got down there, and we couldn't get across. And so we knew not to try to cross there, and so we just walked up the--I don't, I'm gonna say we walked the equivalent of three fourth of a mile before we found a place we could get across. And when we got home, my father had a fit that she had let us come home. She, and so he went to see her and told her, don't ever send those kids home after a rain like this 'cause they'd a--they could have drowned. If we hadn't a known, if we'd tried to get across there, we would a drowned. Speaker 1: Now, this was a black woman that was your teacher, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but she was from the city. She didn't, she didn't know. Speaker 1: So six years old, that's amazing. Speaker 2: (Laughter) But, now, the other thing I have to tell you about that experience, at that time, you could put your first grader in the road with the big kids, and they'd take care of him. Nobody would a let anything happen to us. If you had a small sixth grade--first grader, who got tired on that, somebody would a carried them. Somebody would a put them on their back and carried them. So it was just the way it was. And you could a gotten a beating on your way home. If you got out in the road and threw a rock or something, and you weren't supposed to do it, a seventh grader could give you a beating on your way home, and nobody would a said anything--in fact, you wouldn't a told nobody 'cause you'd a got another beating when you got home 'cause you would have been put in the road with somebody. See, you'd a told, you know, this is who was in charge. So, oh, no, it was a, you were groomed. But as I say, a guy named, we called him Bozo, but his name was, oh, my God. He taught me how to script. He was ahead of me. Speaker 1: Well, it sounds like people really took responsibility for each other in the community? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So, okay, so did you have any favorite teachers in grade school? Speaker 2: Ms., Ms. Poole, I remember her. Ms. Poole, I would say probably was my--I wouldn't say I had a favorite teacher. I always had, I never had a man. We never had a man. The teachers, the only school teachers were, were all women. Ms. Poole and Ms. Williams. Ms. Williams lived a long time. I used to see her. But I went home to speak for Martin Luther King's birthday, and I saw the lady who taught bible school when I was seven years old. She came, and I had known you were looking for pictures, I'd a brought it. I have a picture of her. But she taught--she ran the bible school in class when I was seven years old. And she's still living. So, yes, so, you know, you had, yeah, you--but Ms. Poole and Ms. Williams were my, of the people who passed through. And sometimes teachers would come out and teach in the county two years until they got some experience, and then you could go back to the city and teach. So the turnover was pretty--but Ms. Williams and Ms. Poole stayed around the longest of anybody. I remember them very well. Speaker 1: Okay, and how big was that school facility? Speaker 2: As I said, it started off in one room. Speaker 1: One room, okay. Speaker 2: And we got a second room when I was moving to the fourth grade. So going into the fourth grade, we got two rooms. So the first, second and third grade was in one room, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh grade was in another room. Two teachers. Speaker 1: Alright, okay, so did you go through your entire elementary school time in that school? Speaker 2: Yes, in that time, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I spent a little time with my grandfather at another school, but that was minor. Story_ID: 20817 Speaker 1: Did you gravitate to any particular subject in school? Speaker 2: I probably liked history best. In fact, I know I did. And so in high school, I just had a--and I don't know whether you're ready for high school or not, but when I got to high school, specifically, I had, I just had--I'd have a hard time there 'cause I had just dynamite teachers. I mean my high school teachers were, at the time, were super. They were just tough, so--but the guy who taught history, Kenny Henneh, he could make history jump out of the book. Speaker 1: What was his--how did he spell his name? Speaker 2: Kenny. Speaker 1: Kenny? Speaker 2: Kenneth, yeah. Speaker 1: Kenneth? Speaker 2: And Henneh, H-E-N-N-E-H, I think is the way you spell that. I'll look it up to make sure. I'll make sure before you leave that I'll get you the spelling right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he was, he was, he was--but the teachers, I mean my shop teacher was fantastic. My science teacher was fantastic. My English teacher was fantastic. Ms. Flood taught me English, and she would make you--I laugh because she saved all of the papers. She still, she could--before she died, she told me, "I still got your theme", that I wrote in the eighth grade. I mean she had a box of 'em. She kept them. And so we went to a brand new high school. The high school that opened in 1949, the city took it over in 1957. The city annexed it. So the city moved out into the county, and we had to build--they had to build us a new school. So they moved the school out. The school would have been thirteen miles from my home, where my older brother had gone, started school, but by the time I came along, they moved it. So it was nineteen miles away. So they moved it out. The city annexed and so the city took over that school, and we had to move out further. So the year, when I started eighth grade, the school was brand new. We moved into another brand new school. So, so it was still South Side, but it was just a new building. Speaker 1: So what was wrong with the old building? Speaker 2: The city, the city-- Speaker 1: The city just took it. Speaker 2: --the city annexed it and so, and the city then--it was the city's school. So the city kids went to that school, and they had to build us a new school for the county kids to go to. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So we actually passed by that school. So I tell people, I left a white school that I could hear the kids playing. I passed by another white school on my way. I passed by the old South Side High School on my way, and then I finally got to my school. But it was nineteen miles from my stop. So I rode nineteen miles non-stop to high school. We were the last kids to get on the bus. The bus was packed when I got on. Speaker 1: So it's a good half hour ride. Speaker 2: Yeah, it didn't have to stop anymore. Story_ID: 20818 Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me this. Now, here's a story here I don't wanna pass up. In 1955, a classmate of yours, Melvin Ferguson, it says here, was shot, no, he was hit in the head with a soda bottle. Speaker 2: Soda bottle, hit in the head with a soda bottle. Speaker 1: While on the bus, right? Speaker 2: No, he was--the kids threw the soda bottle out of the bus-- Speaker 1: From the bus. Speaker 2: He was walking. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: He was walking. And-- Speaker 1: Were you all walking together at the time? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Were you all walking together-- Speaker 2: No, no, we weren't with him. We just, we knew him. And, in fact, his cousin, I wanna say it's his cousin. Don't quote me on that, but the mayor of Danville is now a Saunders. And he is the cousin, I'm sure he's the cousin of this guy. But Mayor Saunders is a black guy that went to South Side High School, the same one I went to, from the county, but he moved into the city as an adult. He's now Mayor of Danville [Virginia]. But he was walking along the road, and the guy--and the people threw a soda bottle. And I wanna say it was out of a car, not the bus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you don't--I think I got the story right on that 'cause it was summertime. So I'm almost sure it was a car. Speaker 1: So these were some white teenagers? Speaker 2: Yeah, teenagers, and he--they killed him. I mean he didn't die right away. But he, he went in the hospital and the damage was such that they couldn't save him in that hospital. And it was the--he went to a black hospital where I'm sure we didn't have a neuro-scientist, we didn't have a brain specialist, all the kind of things that you had to have. And so for want of proper medicare, he died. And so we, you know, that would have happened to you. So one of the other things about, that I tell people about that time, and one of the things that you asked me about this smell and the sounds and the memories, I don't know when it began, but somewhere in the '40's [1940s] Duke University in Durham, North Carolina started taking black folk one day a week. You could go one day a week to Duke. Speaker 1: To-- Speaker 2: To Duke. Speaker 1: I mean and what-- Speaker 2: To the hospital-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, alright, okay. Speaker 2: --to the teaching hospital. And I might wanna say to you, it might not have been every week. You might, it might have just been once a--I don't know. But I know on a day, either once a week, once a month, whatever the case, but black folk could go. So I always felt better about Duke than I did the schools in Virginia 'cause you couldn't do that. So I remember that the first time I ever heard of somebody having a colostomy was my aunt, my great aunt had a colostomy at Duke University in 1949 because she had colon cancer. And they saved her life. We couldn't have done that at the black hospital in Danville. And she couldn't have gone to the hospital in Danville. Speaker 1: What was the black hospital called in Danville? Speaker 2: Winslow. Speaker 1: Winslow. Speaker 2: Winslow Hospital, closed now. And we had good family doctors there, you know what I mean. We had good--I mean I had a good family doctor. But I, but he couldn't have done that operation, didn't have the facilities to do it. You know what I mean, everything, so. Speaker 1: Okay, now, alright, so do you remember what the community's reaction was to the killing of your classmate? Speaker 2: It was, it was talked about in the community. And you had to forget it. There's nothing you can do about it. You couldn't have rallied at that time. You'd a went to jail, wouldn't have solved nothing. So you were just taught, "Watch where you go". Watch, watch, watch yourself. So it put fear into you. But there was nothing you could do about it. Speaker 1: Do you think in retrospect looking back at this, do you think that the white teenagers that did it, ever even knew that they killed-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they knew. They knew. Oh, they knew, yes, they--and we--and, and people knew who they were, wasn't nothing you could do about it. And so you, you--but you were told how, you were taught how to handle that so that you could survive. I mean in other words, it was bad, it didn't impact you, nothing you can do about it, so just watch yourself. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a year before the Montgomery Bus Boycott-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter)-- Speaker 1: And five years before the sit-in's in the big city. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this was, yeah, this was, yeah, this was-- Speaker 1: Now, six years before Freedom Rides, all that. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, all of those things, right. Speaker 1: And those events were met with violence. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so you're talking about a real tense time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 20819 Speaker 1: Liked history in high school, did well in, I did well--I wasn't a, I wasn't, I wasn't one of the top students in high school. I should say I could have been better perhaps, but I hated the farm, so I got a job. So I worked after school, my--from the time I was in the tenth grade I know. I had a job from the tenth grade on. I worked after school. So, you know, but I did alright, and I--it just so happened that the guys in my high school did well. So you hung with guys who got their lesson. So the top two students in my class were boys. Out of the Top 10, six were boys. Out of the Top 25, 13 of us were boys, 13 or 14 were boys. So we did well. Speaker 2: Yeah, you were telling me earlier that the other families that seemed to be doing pretty well in town had sons. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Now, what were their names, the other family, what were their names, last name, the-- Speaker 1: Well, the Hairston's, but there are big families up there. There are big families up there and all of them were connected through these plantations. But the Martins, the Hairston's, the Adams', the Smith's, the Mottley's, Clarks. The Clarks had a whole lot of, still have a whole lot of land. They built a family retreat. They can seat 250 people. So there're, you know, so there're big families up there that been on the same land for a long time, big families. Speaker 2: Okay. Did you know the Conyers? Speaker 1: Didn't know them, no. Speaker 2: Okay, alright, now. Now, you were working--you got a job in the Greyhound Bus Station. Speaker 1: Greyhound Bus Station. Speaker 2: And you worked in the kitchen? Speaker 1: I, I basically ran the kitchen at night, junior, senior year in high school. Speaker 2: Okay, now what was that experience like? Speaker 1: Fantastic, you, you met people traveling from all over the United States basically. So you'd run into somebody from New York. So I knew--I could even call the buses out. I mean I knew where the buses were going, so I dreamed of getting out of there. But you met a lot of people passing through. And because they couldn't go in the restaurant to eat, say if a--and we were a meal stop. We were a dinner, meal stop, for instance. We might have been a lunch meal-stop going the other way. But we were meal stops. So say the bus coming, came in from Richmond [Virginia] and got in at dinnertime at 5:30, 6:00 o'clock in the afternoon, you could, you could--you had enough time there to buy a meal and eat. If the bus was loaded primarily with white passengers, the waitresses were gonna serve them first. You would be standing at the window, and they would be coming down the line. You could see them, but you couldn't come in there. So they got served first depending upon who the waitress was. There were a few waitresses that would occasionally turn around and wait on somebody at the window. Speaker 2: Okay, now, so the logistics of it during segregation were that inside, white people--whites can get off the bus, go inside the station-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and get served in a line and eat inside. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Black people had to come up to the, a window-- Speaker 1: But, but there was a little small, if you could imagine this room here was a little waiting room for blacks. And in that little waiting room then, there was a window behind the line. So line passed by here, and you're standing at the window, and white folk are walking down the line. You could see them, and then you'd holler your order in through the window. So what happened was, because I worked the kitchen, I would go wait on them. I'd serve them so that they had time to eat. Speaker 2: Now, the logic of this, now, you have black staff that's serving the food-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but for some reason the black and the white people are segregated when they're eating it. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Exactly. Speaker 2: And, but so, did people think this--I guess they must have thought it was absurd, but they had to abide by it, right? Speaker 1: Well, I don't know that, I don't--you know, you didn't--every once and a while somebody, you'd--I saw people get arrested because they wouldn't get out of the line, and then call the cops. They'd put you in jail. So basically, if you were trying to Georgia on the bus, you don't need to be in jail in Danville. So you just got, you just lived with it. I mean you took you sandwich and got pissed off about it, but you got your sandwich and went on about your business. Speaker 2: Now, the people that got arrested were people traveling on the bus that didn't know the rules-- Speaker 1: They might have known the rule, but just decided I'm not, I'm just gonna, you know. So I've seen people get in the line and wouldn't get out, yes. And so I've seen people get arrested. Speaker 2: Did you ever see someone be allowed to get in line and get their food? Speaker 1: No, no, other than I have seen an African come through with a turban on his head, and they wouldn't have made him get out of line, which is amazing (laughter). I've seen that. Speaker 2: I've heard this before. I'm -- Speaker 1: No, no, I've seen it. (Unclear) (simultaneous), I worked in the bus station. I've seen an African come through with a turban on his head, and they didn't make him get out the line. Speaker 2: And he's probably darker than the-- Speaker 1: Darker than I was. (laughter) Speaker 2: I don't know what I have to do to become an expert on the logic of this, but-- Speaker 1: Okay, but that happened. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, alright. So, but you worked there throughout high school? Speaker 1: I worked there throughout high school. Story_ID: 20820 Speaker 1: And now, is there any--I don't wanna get you out of high school without talking--did you all have a prom and all that? Speaker 2: We had everything. We had a prom. It was full-fledge high school. We had a football team, basketball team. Speaker 1: You said you ran track. Speaker 2: I ran track. My brother, the one that died, played football. The other two brothers didn't play. Clarence played a little bit, my baby brother played a little bit. He hung around sports a little bit more than we did. But none of us were real athletic. Speaker 1: Was that the big sport in town, football? Speaker 2: Baseball. Speaker 1: Baseball. Speaker 2: Baseball was my, because you didn't--you could pick up a game. You know, if you had a bat and your ball, you could go get, round up some neighbors and play a game, you know, you could go play. So, or you could say, we're gonna meet after church and go play. So, yeah, so we played more baseball than anything else. Speaker 1: And did you, was the--did you have a favorite baseball team? Speaker 2: Oh, the Brooklyn Dodgers and the Giants came through town. The Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants came through Danville on their way from Spring training every year. So I saw Jackie Robinson play. I saw Campanella play. I saw-- Speaker 1: Willie Mays-- Speaker 2: --Joe Black play. Okay. Speaker 1: Willie Mays, did you see him? Speaker 2: I don't remember him. Speaker 1: Was he in the Giants? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was in the Giants, but I don't remember-- Speaker 1: Not till later. Speaker 2: Now, he could have, but I don't remember him. But Monty Irving, Jackie Robinson, Campanella, Joe Black, that group I saw. Now, let me tell you about that. We could, we could go see the game. There was one little section we could sit in. You couldn't sit everywhere in the stadium, alright. I wanna say it cost $0.50 cents to get in .25 cents. It was no more than .50 cents. I could have been .50 cents. It could have been .25, but it would have been even. And you had money to get in. The dressing rooms tilted from the playing field back on a tilt, so you could climb up on 'em and lay down and wait for the National Anthem to play, and then everybody would jump off. So we'd off jump off and run and get in our little section. And the police wouldn't move while the National Anthem was being played. And so they'd come and try to find out who jumped over. Well, nobody told on anybody. So they had to put somebody out. So somebody would get put out, and then you'd have to go pay, and then everybody would just chip in and pay them back. But, so I never had to pay. So I saw them, I mean basically from the time I was eight years old, I went to see them play when they came through. Now, it stopped, they moved, probably when I was in high school I'm wanna say. But I don't know that. I can't remember exactly when they moved. But they moved. Speaker 1: Both teams moved, I guess in around '55' [1955], '56' [1956]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so they moved. That's what I'm saying. I was in high school. But they came through. They played. I saw them play. So you wanna ask me about the sounds. When the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants came to town, black folk had something to go see. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute now. This is again, another contradiction and seeming contradiction in life when you've got--you have, baseball is integrated with black players on white teams, and yet Danville is not. Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was not. Speaker 1: It's segregated. Speaker 2: Segregated. Speaker 1: With a black section of-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Now, I don't know where they--I don't know whether they stayed with somebody in town. We didn't have a black hotel. We had some rooming houses. I don't know where they stayed. I don't even know whether they stayed overnight because at that time, you were on the bus. So you could have been riding on the bus, got back on the bus and went over to D.C. and slept on the bus on to D.C., you see what I'm trying to say, cause they played another game some place. So, if you went on to Richmond even, there might, there probably was at that time, was a black hotel in Richmond, but we didn't have one in Danville. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. That's interesting. Speaker 2: But I saw them play. Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to get an autograph or anything? Speaker 2: I didn't. I don't remember doing that. And I can't remember people saying that, but I would say that maybe some of the more uppity people in town probably did. We didn't get a chance to touch hands--touch bases with him. Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't, Jackie Robinson didn't get a chance to or Campanella, a chance to come over and talk-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. I don't remember them ever coming over to the stands. I don't remember that, and I would have remembered that. No, I don't remember that. But I remember seeing them out in the field [playing]. Story_ID: 20821 Speaker 1: What about Joe Louis? Do you remember--were his fights-- Speaker 2: Now, let me tell you about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We got rural electrification, 1948. They ran the lines through. So prior to 1948, there was no electricity. Nobody had it, okay, if you lived where I lived. I mean white or black, you know. The lines might a went down in certain, on the main highway, but if you weren't on the main drag, you didn't have it. So out in the rural areas where my family lived, there was no electricity, so nobody had it, white or black. So when my grandfather built a house, he put carbide lights in it. There was a tank out in the backyard, big, that held acid and water. And the fumes off of the acid ran through a pipe. Up in the ceiling, you could strike a match and you had lights. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Alright, but we didn't have--you had wood stoves, wood heaters and everything. We didn't have any electricity. So electricity came through '48' [1948] or '49' [1949], '48' [1948], I wanna say. Speaker 1: Did you all have a radio before the electricity? Speaker 2: Battery. Speaker 1: Battery, okay. Speaker 2: So, if you wanted to see the fight, you had to go to the county store where the fight was showed on television, and they had electricity 'cause it was on the main drag. And white folks sat on mail kegs and wooden benches and soda crates to watch the game so they could sit down. When they got situated, then you could come in and sit down, and stand behind them. You could come in. So we could come in and make a circle around behind them and watch the game. But you couldn't cheer. You couldn't, you couldn't--well, if Joe Louis was fighting a white guy, you couldn't cheer. Let me put it like that. So you, you actually were back there hidden, you were hidden (laughter), you know what I mean (laughter). You can't imagine that, but everybody. You know, people would be throwing punches under there, but you couldn't say nothing. So you fought the fight after the fight was over. When you got back in the road to go home, then you fought the fight, see. So, yes, I saw boxing (laughter) on a television, standing in a circle in the country store as a kid. We had a, we had a organized, white ball team and a good stadium, the stadium is still there. And so there was a team called the Broadville (unclear), Broadsville, oh, my Lord, I wanna say the Bronzeville Tigers, but I don't, Broadville somebody, that was black. And so they played. And so my cousins played organized baseball. And so we played on a Saturday afternoon, and so there was a nice stadium there to play in. When, when we played, and it was just all black teams playing, then we could go, you could go sit in the stadium. When there was white people playing, you could go in the side door and be inside the fence, but you couldn't sit down. So we were in the outfield, and so, and you watched balls go over the fence, and they couldn't find them. So we knew where the ball landed. And when the game was over, you go get the ball. Speaker 1: Is that how you got your baseballs? Speaker 2: How you got your baseballs. And I ended up with a, I mean almost a brand new glove. The guy left his glove laying in the, in the infield. And we saw it, and he had forgot he left it out there. And so you--I remember my brother grabbing my hat, and we're gonna run to there. And when you get there, fall on the glove. When you get up, get up with it. And so we did that. We took off, playing tag, went and got--fell on that glove, man, got up, and shot back through that hole and was gone (laughter). So we got a brand new glove, 'cause you had sort of a--you had a glove, but a raggedy one, old, you know what I mean. You had a glove but not a good one. And this was a good glove, yes. But there were, you know, this was, this was the way life was, that's all. I can't tell you nothing else. Story_ID: 20822 Speaker 1: But we had proms, yeah, we had proms. And we built the scenery for it. We had plays that--I mean we had plays by a lady named Ms. Stith. She lives in North Carolina to this day. She was a little-- Speaker 2: S-T-I-T-H? Speaker 1: S-T-I-T-H. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She was from North Carolina. She was the Drama teacher. Man, she put on some plays. You know, she put on some plays. So I was in "The Bishop's Candlesticks", "A Man Called Peter". Oh, we had some awesome plays, and we built the, built all the scenery. So you learned how to build the scenery. The, the, my, the, my junior year, the theme for the prom was "The Dreamboat". We built a boat, and you came up and walked up on the gangplank and went over in it, and you danced in the boat. And my senior year, it was "Moonlight and Roses". We built a picket fence all the way around the gym, white, covered it with roses. Oh, man, it was awesome (laughter). The scenery was fantastic, oh, yes. So we had a good time in high school, good teachers, good principals, fantastic principal. Speaker 2: Who was your principal? Speaker 1: Mr. Turner. His--William Turner as the principal of my high school. His brother was the principal of the high school in Brunswick County, and there was another brother--there were three brothers that were principals of high schools in Virginia at the same time. In fact, the one in, at, up at Lawrenceville, in Brunswick County, tried to hire me when I finished Norfolk State. And I got a job from him, but I, I ended up getting a job in Norfolk, so I stayed down here. But I would have, I would have--that would have been my choice, my next choice of a job, would have been it, that high school in Brunswick, in--but, yeah, William Turner. Speaker 2: Okay, alright, so, now, did you--now, you made good grades and you graduated with Honors, right? Speaker 1: I graduated with Honors. I wasn't, I wasn't at the top though, but I graduated with Honors. But I wasn't gonna go to college, wasn't going to college. Speaker 2: Now, this is 1958 that you graduate. Speaker 1: Fifty eight [1958]. So I finished high school on a Saturday, left the next day, left going to New Jersey. Speaker 2: Had you planned that? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, planned it. Speaker 2: Had planned it out? Speaker 1: Planned it, had my ticket, had my luggage, everything, ready to go. Speaker 2: What did your father think about that? Speaker 1: Nothing, you could go. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If it doesn't work out, you can come home. Speaker 2: Had anyone else in your family done that? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Everybody. Speaker 2: Everybody went (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Everybody, everybody--at one time, all of us lived up there. But I was the first one to go to New Jersey. My older brother who went off to college, he was in Akron, Ohio. My next brother was in Atlantic City, but I was the only--I went to, I went to Patterson, New Jersey. I picked a different town. Speaker 2: Where did your brother who lived in Ohio, where did he go to school? Speaker 1: He went to Virginia State [University]. Speaker 2: Virginia State, okay. And did a job take him to-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he got a job in Ohio, went to work in Ohio. And I picked Patterson, New Jersey off the map. I didn't know where I was going. Speaker 2: You just wanted to be someplace-- Speaker 1: I wanted to be close to New York City. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I didn't wanna go to New York City. Patterson, New Jersey is twelve miles away. And I knew, there had to be restaurants on the road between Patterson and New York City. And I'm a restaurant man. I can get a job. I left home on a Sunday afternoon, caught the bus at 3:30, got to Patterson, New Jersey the--I got to New York City, drove--I got in the Port Authority at 6:00, about 5:30 Monday morning. And I had never seen that many people in my life. The bus that I came in on landed on the third floor of the Port Authority. I didn't know you could drive up that high. And buses went as high as five floors (laughter). So my bus landed--stopped on the third floor in the Port Authority. Speaker 2: Had you ever been away from Danville [Virginia] before? Speaker 1: No. I had been to Norfolk [Virginia] one time. I had been to Richmond [Virginia] one time. You know, I had been to Lynchburg, little towns, just overnight or something, but, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, never been away. Speaker 2: New York City. Speaker 1: So I got on the Greyhound Bus, got off in New York City, 5:30 Monday morning, and people were rushing off to work. And everybody passes through Port Authority. I didn't know that. I couldn't believe my eyes. I mean everybody was running, trying to catch the train, trying to get to the bus, trying to get where they were going. I mean if you've ever been in Port Authority, you know what I'm talking about 'cause it's the crossroads. Everybody, everybody. And at that time, it was safe. So everybody rode the train. Everybody passed through Port Authority, everybody was on the bus passing through Port Authority. So I got off and I had to catch another bus. So I had to find my bus going to Patterson, New Jersey. And I knew there was a Y [YMCA] there that was residential. Mr. Henneh had sold me a membership to the "Y" at home. If you belong to the "Y", it's cheaper when you wanna live in another "Y". So I get to New Jersey, asked the guy at the bus station where the "Y" was. He says, "Right around the corner". He showed me the "Y". I went there. It was $3.00 a night if you were a member. It was 3.50 if you were not. So I got my .50 cents back the first night. I said, I--okay, I'm gonna pay for three nights. I'm gonna pay for Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. If I don't have a job Wednesday, I'm leaving here going to Atlantic City where my brother was. So I got up Tuesday. I went to sleep, walked around the city to learn the city. Got up Tuesday morning and went to look for a job. I road six miles on the bus to the, the Joe Arson Bridge is twelve miles away. I went half way; got off the bus and walked all the way back. I stopped in every restaurant. By the time I got back, I had three job offers. I picked the one that was closest to Patterson that was gonna pay that week. I asked the guy, I asked everybody, "When can I get paid?" Most of 'em were gonna hold a week's pay. The little Jewish delicatessen said, I'll pay you Saturday. If you--I need somebody. I'll be here tomorrow morning. So that was Tuesday. I went to work Wednesday. I worked Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday--we catered a wedding Saturday, got finished and packed up and came back and emptied the station wagon about 8:30 Saturday night. He paid me $60.00. I had never had that much money in my life. My first pay check was $60.00. I ain't never going back to Virginia ever. That was my, that was how I got that, "Never--okay, I--the second Sunday that I as there, the second Sunday that I was there, I found a black church that I wanted to go to. And we'll start this story there. I'll have to tell you about that. Story_ID: 20823 Speaker 1: I was telling you about, about getting there and my mother had three requests that don't do drugs, go to a good church, call home, let me hear from you, alright. That's all she (unclear). And I told you, she wanted everybody to finish high school, but we were leaving then so we all scattered around. So all of us called home every, every week, okay. So I needed to find me a church. But I'd never been to a white church--have to tell you this story. And so I saw the church. It was "the" Catholic--I don't remember the name, but it was "the" Catholic Church in Patterson, New Jersey. And I thought to myself, okay, I'm free now. I can go to a white church. So I put my blue, my best blue suit from Saiters for Men that I had bought for graduation and stepped up into the church. And there was this--everybody was dipping their hand in the holy water. I didn't know what it was, but I didn't, wasn't gonna put it on my suit. So I'm not putting no holy water on my suit and so I passed that up. And I get in there, I didn't know the service was gonna be in Latin. So it was in Latin, and so they were mumbling in Latin. And they would stand up, and then they would sit down, and then they would kneel, and then they would stand. And so I thought to myself, when I get through with this today, this is the last time I'm coming here (laughter). But that was my first Sunday there. So I got there Monday, and that Sunday, I went to this Catholic church. My father's thing was that you weren't supposed to have hair on your neck, get a haircut. So it was time for me to get a haircut, so on my way from this job that I had found, I had passed by a barbershop. So I decided, okay, Thursday or Friday, when I'm on my way in, I will get off the bus here, get my hair cut, and then I'll walk back to the "Y". So I got off, went in the black barbershop to get a haircut, and I'm talking to the guy and just struck up a conversation, tell him I'm from Virginia, just got there. He said, "Where you go to church?" I said, well, I don't have a church now. He said, "You do now. My church is right across the street, Calvary Baptist Church; come there Sunday. He said, you--it'll be your church home." So alright. I know nothing about it, but Calvary Baptist Church. So I get up Sunday morning, put this same blue suit on, and I step up to Calvary Baptist Church, and on the steps was Deacon Charles Williams, about 6 foot 3. At the time, he was sixty-some years, from Henderson, North Carolina which is just across the line from Danville. I walk up to him. He's, he's a greeter, and he kisses every lady that passes by, Deacon Williams. And I introduced myself and told him where I was from. He said, "Son, you're home. Everybody here is from down there." He said, Reverend is from Oxford, I'm from Henderson. There are people here from Lynchburg, come on in. So he took me in, took me in the back room where the deacons meet in the morning to say prayer and all with the minister. They said prayer with me, introduced me to Reverend Kern, Charles Kern, from Oxford, North Carolina, excellent minister; had a son who was my age. But he was, he was a year behind me. So he hadn't finished high school. He was a senior in high school, and I'd already graduated. And the daughter is two years younger than I am. They were teenagers, and they belonged to that church. So all of the teenagers of that caliber went to that church. So I get to the church, and there're just beautiful women, beautiful young ladies, I mean (laughter), teenagers, you know. So I, I struck up a friendship with them, started going there every Sunday. And it didn't take me very long to realize I'd made a mistake, that if you're gonna compete against them, they're gonna beat you. They were better educated than I was. They'd read more books than I had. They had been able to go to "the" library, okay. They'd had better equipment in the school, East Side High School, which was the school that Joe Clark did the, okay, that school. Speaker 2: Oh, in the movie with the bat [Lean on Me]. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that was before it turned into that. It was, it was awesome. So these kids had gone to that school. And they were going off to college. And I'm thinking to myself, if they need to go to college, surely, I need to go. So I better go to college. So I made up my mind then I'd go the next year. So I didn't know, I didn't have any money, but I know I should apply to Virginia State [University] and Norfolk State [University] 'cause I could come back home and go to school as a Virginia resident. So I applied to both of them, got admitted to both. My aunt lived in Norfolk, and she said, if you wanna come here and stay with me--she was single, and you don't mind sleeping on a hide-a-way bed, you can stay with me. So I moved in with her, rent free, and she lived on Reservoir Avenue which is three blocks from Norfolk State. And now, Norfolk States comes all the way over there, but it was, at the time, it was just three blocks away. And so I walked to Norfolk State every day. And so I came down, would go to school down here, got here in September, went to work at John O'Mare Market, which is, was the "the" supermarket in town as a bag boy. They wouldn't get you do nothing else. Speaker 2: So was this like--so you just spent the summer in Patterson [NJ], is that it? Speaker 1: Every summer. I went back to Patterson every summer. Speaker 2: But you just spent that initial summer-- Speaker 1: I spent the whole year there. Speaker 2: Oh, so you spent a whole year around to the next-- Speaker 1: The next year, the next year. Speaker 2: Alright, okay. Speaker 1: I spent a whole year there. After about four months, I decided I was gonna get out of the restaurant business, and I went and took the test--Revlon's cosmetics was hiring in the manufacturing place. And people I knew who had gone over, and they couldn't pass the test. So I thought, let me go see what about this test, just for the heck of it. So I went, passed the test. The guy hired me the same day. So I started working at Revlon's. Speaker 2: So what did they have you doing? Speaker 1: I was up in manufacturing. I, you start at--you're the low end 'cause it was unionized. So I started off at the, as a material handler up in manufacturing. And I became an assistant batch maker, and I went back every summer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I worked at Revlon's every summer except one. One summer they were on slow down so I didn't get back, but basically, I worked there every summer. So that was my summer job and went to that same church. I'd hook back up every summer when I got back, made good friends, had good colleagues there. The September after I got there, then my, my brother and a cousin came up for the summer. And then they went back. And, and that September, the brother that finished high school with me came up, and he stayed. So there were two of us up there. The next year, the brother from Ohio moved over. He came over, and by that time he was married. So we all moved into this, a bigger rooming house together. So every summer when I came back, I lived with them. When I was a junior, the twins came up in the summer. And they were, and so they started coming every summer. And my senior year, the baby girl came up and stayed like two weeks. And I don't know, Clarence came up that summer too 'cause--no, I was probably out of school by the time he came up, the baby boy. But anyway, they all lived--and they never went back. So all of them went to New Jersey, and all of them retired from New Jersey. Speaker 2: It's interesting, just because you picked that off of a map-- Speaker 1: Just because of me. Speaker 2: --without-- Speaker 1: And I probably can identify 200 people who followed me from all over. If they didn't follow me, they followed somebody who followed me. So it's just a bunch of folk ended up in Patterson, New Jersey because of me going there. And when I got there, there was a, they made something on every corner, heavily manufacturing, little small factories. You could literally walk out almost and get a job on every corner. Speaker 2: Okay, (laughter) that's interesting. Story_ID: 20824 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did you know--Lymon Beacher Brooks was the president of Norfolk State. Speaker 2: Of Norfolk State. Speaker 1: Now, what was your relationship with Lymon Beacher Brooks? Speaker 2: He was, he was the president when I was a student, and I was a student leader. So he was--by the time I got to be a senior, he had taken a particular interest in me. I wouldn't have called him a mentor at that time, but he had taken a particular interest in me. So he knew me well by the time I was a senior and would ask me to do little things. I got invited to little things. I might of got invited to a reception that somebody else didn't get invited to or something. When I graduated, I went to work at Jay Cox Junior High School which is right in the general area, right where Norfolk State is. And by that time, I had gotten back in the restaurant business. So I ran a fast food, Carl's Drive-In, my senior, my junior, end of my junior year and all of my senior year at Norfolk State [University]. I was night manager. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Carl's-- Speaker 2: Carl's Drive--fast food, like a McDonald's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but right on the campus, literally, almost, you know, I mean right by the campus and right across the street from the high school, Booker T. Washington High School is right across the street. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't wanna get you graduated yet from Norfolk State. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let's go back there for a minute. Like what was your major in-- Speaker 2: Biology. It was biology and I was a biology major. And I, I picked that simply because it had good equipment that I had never had a chance to use. I was going to be a history major. In fact, I sent my application in to be a history major. And I got down a week early just to look the place over and get set up and everything. And as I was walking around, I walked through the labs, and I liked the way the labs looked. I changed, went back down and changed my major to biology. Speaker 1: Did--now, was there a particular teacher in biology that helped you, I mean that-- Speaker 2: In high school? Speaker 1: No, in, in-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, the teachers, the faculty were good, but I didn't know them at the time. I mean I just changed my mind, just, just changed my mind because of the equipment sitting around. I just--you could walk through and see it at that time. You didn't have to have everything locked up. Speaker 1: So it just kind of caught your-- Speaker 2: Just got a feeling, got a feeling that I'd like to do this. So I decided to major in biology. And so there was a good group of us who started out together, freshmen, freshmen. The freshmen class in biology was a pretty tight group. And so I made it through the freshman year. It was a struggle. I was behind. When I say I was behind, I hadn't had advanced chemistry. I hadn't had a good lab. I mean I had a chemistry class, and the teacher was good, but we didn't have no equipment. You know what I'm trying to say. I'd had a good biology class, but I didn't have no equipment, so I didn't know how to use the equipment and stuff. So I was behind, and so it was, it was harder than I thought it was gonna be. And I went home, and I was talking to my mother for Spring break my freshman year. She asked, "How's it going?" I said, well, it's going alright, Mother, but I'm not doing as well as I thought I was gonna do. So she said, she said, are you passing everything. I said, yes, ma'am, I'm not failing nothing. I'm just not doing as well as I thought. She said, "Are you studying hard?" And I was studying, so I said, yes, ma'am. She said, "Are you giving it your very best?" And I, you had to, you couldn't, you couldn't fib on that. You had to, you had to think about that. I mean am I, you know, am I giving it my best? And, you know, in hindsight, I probably could have given it a little bit more, but I mean I wasn't slacking off. I didn't miss no classes, I didn't cut class. I didn't leave early on Friday, none of that. So I was studying. And I'd study with people, and I went to tutoring and everything. So I said, I said, yes, ma'am, I'm, I'm doing it. She say, you go on back down there. You gone be alright. You keep giving it your best. She said, your best is good enough. You don't have to do no better than that. Your best is good enough. I put that in my book. That was good advice. "Your best is good enough." So I went back. The second year, my wife came as a freshman. And I was taking chemistry by that time. I didn't take freshman chemistry my first year. And she had had advanced chemistry. And she was on the other side of the, on the table on the other side that you could look through. And I could see her all the time. And she was brilliant and good looking. So I decided, hey, you gotta--you gonna have to hang out with somebody (laughter). It might as well be somebody who's good looking and who can do some chemistry. So we started dating, and we dated off and on all the way through, although I had a couple of girlfriends at the time. But I mean she, you know, we dated. And by the time we were juniors, we were pretty serious, and seniors, we were, we were--she was my girlfriend by the time we were seniors. And so we graduated together. But I went through. I was a, I went out for track, decided I couldn't do all of it. I couldn't work. I tell kids that you gotta decide what you can actually do. And I had to put it in the right order, so I learned how to prioritize even as a freshman. My number one priority was to have a job. You don't have a job, you can't go to school. I mean I couldn't--I had to support myself. So I had to have a job. This job was steady. It didn't pay well. It only paid .75 cents an hour, but I could, I could get 30 hours in just on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Nobody wanted to work on Sunday. I worked every Sunday almost. I worked 12 hours on Saturday the whole time I was at Norfolk State. I'd go in 8:00 o'clock on Saturday morning, and work till 8:00 Saturday night. And so I could take care of myself. School would end in May. The next day I was on the bus back to New Jersey, and usually, I'd get out in the middle of the week. So let's say, I always finished on Wednesday or Thursday. By Friday, I was back in New Jersey. By Monday, I was back at work at Revlon's, and I'd work right up until Labor Day, whenever school was--I wouldn't even go home. I'd come back here to school, and then I'd take a long weekend and go home just to holler at everybody. But most times, depending upon when school opened and how long they'd let me work. And so at the end of the year, there, but, of course, they would be closing down, and a lot of kids would wanna take some time off. Sometimes I'd work 16 hours a day. So my last check would be big. I'd, I'd get, you know, double-time, time and a half. I'd work (laughter), I'd put in all the hours I could put in so I could get a big check. They'd mail it to me after I was gone. I'd get back to school, so I'd have a big check. Sometimes my last check would pay my tuition 'cause tuition at that time was 270 a half a semester, I think, 270--about $500.00 a semester, a thousand dollars a year, a little bit less than a thousand dollars a year. I could pay that. So I didn't have to borrow money. I paid my way through. I--from the time I left home, I never wrote home for a nickel. I never wrote home for a nickel from the day I left home in 1958. I can say that. I've been able to support myself from that day. Story_ID: 20825 Speaker 1: So did you have time for any extracurricular activities at Norfolk State [University], clubs and-- Speaker 2: I danced, I'm a dancer. And we could go to the USO which was walking distance. I got off from work at 8:00 o'clock and the dance started at 9:00. I danced, and I was in student government. I was president of the Freshmen Class. Julian Earls, I want you all to put his name on the list too, Julian Earles was the--he was president of the sophomore, no, he was president of the Freshman Class. I was president of the Sophomore Class. He was president of the Junior Class. I was president of the Senior Class, and I tease him to this day. His name is Julian Manly Earls, Dr. Julian Manly Earls. Speaker 1: Is he in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: He lives in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Cleveland, okay. Speaker 2: He was, he is retired director of the Louis, of the John Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio. And I tease him because he was brilliant. He was a Physics major, and as smart as he was, he didn't know that you--that if you were president of the Senior Class, your ring was free. I was president of the Senior Class, and so I got my ring free, and I show it off to him all the time 'cause I still have mine. I was president of the Senior Class in high school, and my ring was free. And I was president of the Senior Class in college and my ring was free. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: The system works. It doesn't work for everybody. Only one person gets their ring free. That was me. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Alright. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. So in my, in my talking to kids today, I, I remind them that the world works. But it doesn't work for most people. And because we get mad about it, we don't let it work for us either. So it ends up, we don't benefit from it. The world works. Speaker 1: Just a question about Julian Earls, is he related to Felton Earls? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: Dr. Felton Earls. Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: He worked for the Harvard Project. Speaker 2: No, I don't think they are. But he's from here. He's from, he's a Virginian. He's from, he was born about twenty miles from where we're sitting. Speaker 1: I've heard of three Earles that are PhDs or doctors. Speaker 2: He's awesome, this one is awesome. He was, he was at the top of the class, went to--let me get my schools straight, University of Rochester, I wanna say. I wanna say the University of Rochester, got his Master's in a little--just about seven months; went to work at, at the time it was called the Louis National Research Center, went to work for Louis. They passed over him for a job, and he quit, let everybody know why he was quitting, and the guy who they passed over him, got him hired him, committed suicide. They invited him back, and he got the job back, rose up through the ranks and became the Director of the Lab. But he took time off and went back to get his PhD. He got his, he finished all his coursework for a PhD in Radiation Physics at the University of Michigan in eight months. He got a PhD from the University of Michigan and picked up a second Master's on the way and did it all in less than two years. Speaker 1: Yeah, he may be talented, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, he's awesome. I'm serious. He's one that, he's just brilliant. I mean, you know, and my wife says, and she says and he's good looking on top of that. I never put that in, but she always says he's also good looking. He's a wonderful speaker and he's--I mean he can speak. He's just a, he's--and he's a Norfolk Stater, but we graduated in the same class. And so he and his wife, me and my wife, we all graduated the same class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my wife has a PhD. I don't think his wife does. He has a PhD. Story_ID: 20826 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well what were your plans as you were getting ready to graduate from Norfolk State [University]? Speaker 2: I was gonna teach. So I was in education, although I was a science major, I took education courses. So I did student teaching. So I knew I was gonna teach. Speaker 1: Were there any other teachers or figures on campus that stand out before we leave Norfolk State? Speaker 2: At the time, when I was going, people--Dr. Woods, Dr. Roy Woods. He was the Physics, he was head of the Physics Department. Dr. Gist, I can't think of his first name, Gist. He was the Chemistry professor--he was head of Chemistry, the chemistry professor. My, my mentor was Dr. Louis G. Austin, Louis G. He made me. Speaker 1: Okay, how so? Dr. Louis-- Speaker 2: Oh, he made, he made all of us. He made me, my wife--my wife worked for him. He taught us what it--he taught us how to function, how to be successful, what it took to do serious work. He was a scientist, okay. He wrote papers then. He got published (laughter). He taught everything. He taught everything. But he was just a wonderful role model for us. And today, I have, I was in his group. I have a PhD. John Rollins was in his group. He has a PhD. My wife was in his group. She has a PhD. Georgia Dunston is head of Microbiology at Howard. She was in his group. Yvonne Newson--and what I should tell you is, I got my PhD from Syracuse. My wife got her PhD from the University of Florida. John Rollins got his from the University of Buffalo. Georgia Dunston got hers from the University of Michigan. Yvonne Newson got hers from the University of Chicago. All of us came out of his lab. This was one man, so he was awesome. His name was Louis G. Austin. So, yes, there were people who impacted me. Now, the man who had as much influence, who didn't teach me was Mr. Clay, mate. He was the advisor to the Student Government Association. He taught you how to walk the line as close you could get without being illegal. Speaker 1: Mr. Clay? Speaker 2: Mr. Clay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He taught drafting. But he was always the chairman of the advisory group for the Student Government Association. He came to all your meetings. When you were getting ready to go see the president, if you didn't--if you weren't asking for enough, he would tell you how much more to ask for. If you were asking for too much, he'd tell you that too. You're asking for too much. You're not gonna get that, cut it down. He taught us how to be politicians. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And folk who served under him, all of us have done well, Mr. Clay. He called everybody "mate". Mate, yep. He had as much influence outside of the classroom as anybody did on the inside. Story_ID: 20827 Speaker 1: Okay, well, while you were there now, Civil Rights activities are jumping up all over the South. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] is going in the South, SCLC [Student Christian Leadership Conference]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], everybody. Speaker 2: We were a little bit ahead of, of the rise of those. We were within about three months of Jesse Jackson and them starting the sit-in's in Greensboro [North Carolina]. We started them here. We had a Woolworths and a Kresge's and a Grants, five and dime stores. And they were national chains. And so the Movement decided that if you picked on the national chains, you had a better chance of breaking them than you did if you messed with the local folk. So we would close them down. And there was one movie in town that was also national, but I don't remember the name of it. I didn't go to the, I didn't get in the movie line. But I was active in the sit-in's. We went all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we shut them down all the time. We shut them down at 12:00 o'clock all the time. We'd go right in, after they cooked, right at 12:00 o'clock (laughter) we'd go in, shut 'em down. And it-- Speaker 1: Were you ever arrested? Speaker 2: Only three people got arrested. We didn't get arrested. We, we walked right on the edge of the law. And let me tell you what I mean by walking on the edge of the law, the counter, they would let people come in, white people come in and sit at the counter, and you could take the stool tops off. So when they got up, they'd take the top off so you couldn't sit down. And when a white person came in, then they'd put the stool back down. So we decided--and they put a rope around it. So you could stand behind the rope, and you weren't trespassing, but if you went under the rope, you would be trespassing 'cause you didn't have a seat, alright. This is, you're walking on the edge of the law. Speaker 1: Okay, so you would all come up to-- Speaker 2: We'd come up to the rope, alright, and they'd tell you to move so somebody could get through. You'd take your time, but you moved so you didn't get put in jail. And finally, we had to decide, we gotta get under the rope. So we gotta have a stool. We had to have a stool. And so we, on this particular day we were trying to look to see who on the other side looked like he might tell us when he's ready to get up. Rather than calling the guy to come and get the stool, he let us know he's getting ready to move. So somebody whispered over and asked him, said, can we have your stool when you move? He said, I don't give damn who gets it. So he didn't want nobody to know he gave it to us. Okay, so when he got ready to get up, he just sort of nodded, and he got up. So we scooted under the thing, and John Askew got on the stool. And the guy came and John Askew was small (laughter), he was the smallest of all of us. So the guy was gonna pick him up with the stool on him 'cause he wouldn't get off of it. So we went under that rope and held him on the stool, wouldn't let him pull him up. So we shut 'em down that day. They had to shut down. We had a stool. There was, and we were gonna get the next one. I mean we were gonna, now, we're under the rope now (laughter). If somebody else gets up, we're gonna get a stool now. We're over here. Speaker 1: So this is Woolworth's-- Speaker 2: This is Woolworth's. Speaker 1: --and they're desegregated in some parts of the country and segregated in other parts? Speaker 2: Yeah, and segregated in other parts. And so they finally then broke down and invited us down to have a meal. And so I have a picture of that in the book of us, the sit-inders who--and so there were four people from my hometown then, from Danville [Virginia], out of 20 people who were recognized, four of us were from Danville. That gives you some idea--of all the kids from all over, four came from my high school. Two came from my class, and two were in the class before me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were, and there wasn't that many of us down here from Danville. But four of us, won, were recognized at the end of it. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Now, you were a member of the Danville Christian Progressive Association at all? Speaker 2: No, no, no. I was gone, and I didn't go back to participate in nothing. I mean I just would run through there, holler at my parents and on to New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Run through there, you know, my--I would work at the John O'Mare Market until 12:00 o'clock Christmas Eve. The Greyhound bus left at 1:05, get on the bus at 1:05 and got--my father picked me up at 7:00 o'clock Sunday--Christmas morning. I got home Christmas morning, every day--every year. I didn't leave till--'cause I could work all day Christmas Eve, and people gave a little bit better tips on Christmas Eve. So I worked every Christmas Eve till 12:00 o'clock. Story_ID: 20828 Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated in 1964-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --right, with a BS in Biology. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, alright, yeah, I see a note about John Manly Earls now. I already wrote it down (unclear) (simultaneous) you told me. Okay, so what was your plan after graduation? Speaker 2: I knew I needed a job. I wanted to teach. So I applied. I wasn't one of them people, so I applied to twenty places. I put out twenty application files. And I got four offers out of twenty. I got four offers. I didn't interview at some of 'em, I mean but I, actually, out, of the places. I interviewed in [Washington] D.C., I interviewed in Baltimore [Maryland]. I probably would have taken the job in D.C. I didn't quite like the way they treated me in Baltimore, but I got an interview, so I made the cut. But I got four offers in Virginia, and Norfolk was the better of the four based on-- Speaker 1: And these are offers to teach biology? Speaker 2: Teach biology. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, and general science, biology and general science. And so I stayed in Norfolk. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were hired by Jacox Junior-- Speaker 2: Junior High. Junior High, and there I taught science, not biology. I taught life science and physical science. Story_ID: 20829 Speaker 1: Alright, well, what was it like teaching-- Speaker 2: Oh, fantastic. We, I was in a, I was in a crowded junior high school, eighth--seventh, eighth and ninth graders, excellent students. So we had the gamut from the very good to the very poor, top-notch teachers. The system was segregated. So if you wanted to teach, and you were black, you were at a black high, black junior high school, black elementary school. So I had fantastic teachers. They had--now, let me tell you about that. Virginia was segregated, and Virginia State [University] was the school that had a graduate program for blacks in the State of Virginia, couldn't go to, you couldn't go to the white schools, right? But they didn't have your program. You couldn't have got a Master's degree up there in some subjects. So, the governor sent the money (laughter) to Virginia State. You could apply and take it and go where you wanted to go. So people went to NYU [New York University], Columbia [University], [University of] Illinois, Indiana. So black folk were well educated--white folk don't know that. We went to a whole lot better schools than they went to, and got paid to out of, and got paid to go. So when I get to--(laughter)-- Speaker 1: That's another aspect of, this is just unbelievable. Speaker 2: So when I get to Jacox, the teachers there had Master's degrees. They'd gone off to school. You could take a vacation and go to New York in the summertime. Speaker 1: And this is not typically true of the rest of the white Virginia. Speaker 2: Nah, no, no, nah, but I'm saying, but that's, you know. So, anyway, so we had excellent teachers. So I was tutored by the best, had a dynamic principal. She was just good, Ms. Gordon, ran a top ship. And I heard that she was tough so most people were sort of scared to go to work there. Well, I'm accustomed to working. I, I mean expect to, I expect to work well. I expect to get my job. I expect to teach every day. So it didn't bother me. So I got there, and I'm teaching and I'm having fun. And so, she would, she would ask me--and I'm running the hamburger joint at 5:00 o'clock. So I don't need to be going nowhere, so I stayed. I wouldn't leave till 3:30, 4:00 o'clock some time and go to the place, might take a nap and get up and go to work, 6:00 o'clock. So anyway, I walk her down the walk a lot of evenings. She'd be leaving. I'd be leaving. So she said, Mr. Adams, how are you doing? And I got the same parking space every day right beside where she parked, so she knew I was there; said, Mr. Adams, How're you doing? I said, I'm having a ball. Everybody else having problems. I ain't having no problems at all. I'm having a time, I'm having a good time. I'm having fun. So she said, I got to come down, I got to make an appointment. She'd make an appointment to come to your class. I said, Ms. Gordon, you don't need to make no appointment to come to my class. You can come any time. We teach in my room every day. You can come any time you want. You just come. You can come any time. So my classroom became sort of the showplace 'cause she knew she could come any time she wanted to. I mean if she wanted to--if somebody came to visit and wanted to see a science class, she brought 'em to my class. And the kids knew. I mean as soon as she'd show up, everybody would sit straight up. I mean, you know, I'd laugh and say, now, if you act when--it's a zero. You don't want me giving no zeroes. If you, if you do it nice, everybody gets a plus, might as well get a plus. Kids would sit right straight. Soon as she leave, Mr. Adams, we get a plus. I said, everybody, I said, "Today, you're so good you got two pluses." Don't mean nothing. You know, teachers don't know how to teach. I mean they don't know how to have fun with the kids. So I had a good time, had a good time with the kids. I taught, I stayed back in the evenings so if you needed extra help. If you wanted to play around with the equipment, I'd stay in the afternoon. If you wanted to come and hatch some eggs on the weekend, we'd fix an incubator and get some--I could get in the building 'cause I had a key, so the kids could come and check on their eggs on the weekends. So kids, oh, yes, so we had a good time. I stayed there three years, but I didn't like junior high school. I mean when I say, it--I wanted to teach biology. And so at the end of my third year, they had not inte--they had integrated the kids, but they had not integrated the faculties. So black kids were going to the white high school, but there were no black teachers. Speaker 1: What did they do with the black teachers? Speaker 2: They were at the black schools. Speaker 1: Oh, there were still students at the black schools? Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: You, you could select black kids, you know, just a few here and there were scattered around at the white schools. Speaker 1: Okay, the black students can voluntarily go to the white schools? Speaker 2: Yes, white schools. Story_ID: 20830 Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: But, so they opened up then, and I'd been asking to get transferred and they, they would always tell me they didn't have no transfers. They didn't have no place for me. So I couldn't get transferred to a--because the only place I could go was to Booker T [High School]. And there was a line of folks trying to get into Booker T if you wanted to go to the high school. I didn't know anybody, didn't have no legacy to Booker T, didn't graduate from there. You know what I'm trying to say, so. So my third year, they opened up a new high school. Now, they're gonna hire, and they're gonna integrate the faculty. So I go downtown to the school board. I let the personnel guy know, don't even send me another contract. If I don't get high school, I'm gone, I'm quitting. And the word had got around that I was good. So the guy said, we don't--I said, oh, no, you're gonna have openings. Don't tell me that again 'cause you're opening up a new high school, and you're gonna integrate. I'll go anywhere. It doesn't bother me. You don't have to ask me will I go to a white high school. I don't care. So he said, well, let me get back to you. He called me back. He said, "Which one you wanna go to?" So I said, let me go look around. So I went and looked around and I picked one of the--I didn't go to the new one. I went to one of the other ones. And so I got a chance to go to high school. Speaker 1: So this is Norview? Speaker 2: Norview, got a chance to-- Speaker 1: Now, this is Norview High School that the Norfolk 17-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Andrew Heidelberg was there. Speaker 2: Andrew Heidelberg, he played football there. Speaker 1: Patricia Turner. Speaker 2: Yeah, they all went there. Yeah, yeah. Okay, so I--that's where I went to school, went to work there. And so they transferred, the year that I went, they hand picked up. I was the, I was the teacher in science. A guy named J. T. Harris was the teacher in math. Walter Green was the guidance counselor. Ruth Duke, business, ah, I can't think of her name. The family had money. Anyway, she was in social studies. All of us had Master's degrees, every single one of us. I was the youngest of the group. All of them were Master teachers. I won't put myself in that group. They were Master teachers, you hear me? (Laughter) The people who replaced us were not of the same--and so they, and then they put white people where we came from. And so--and they were not of the same caliber. I mean I'm gonna be honest with you. They were not of the same caliber of the people that they switched. They also sent people downtown. The people that they sent downtown who got promoted to be supervisors and stuff like that, which they should have had years ago, were just awesome. So very quickly, you know, we, we rose up through the ranks and just, I mean spread out very quickly through the system. And the guy who went with me in guidance became the head Guidance Counselor at Norview before he retired. He was the head guidance counselor, but he had a Master's Degree with he went there. Speaker 1: So this is nineteen sixty-- Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay. Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], '67' [1967] (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, so this is actually ten years after Norfolk Seven-- Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), ten years, ten years later. Speaker 1: And we interviewed Andrew Heidelberg and Patricia Turner last Spring. We heard the horrible story-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they, they--it's just, it's unbelievable. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Anyway, so I get over there, and, and now I'm teaching. I would have twenty four kids, and I might have five blacks. They were all white. So I was the--and so now, we're the first black teacher that the white kids have ever had. And, you know what I'm saying, and so-- Speaker 1: How did that work out? I mean what-- Speaker 2: Well, it depends on who you were. But because they had handpicked who they sent, most of us didn't--well, I mean, Ruth, Ruth could have taught anybody. You know, Walt Green didn't need, you know, you could have taught Jesus if he had showed up. It didn't make no difference to us. So they handpicked the people who they sent the first go round. And we didn't, we didn't hear of any incidents. The kids tried you out, oh, yeah, they tried you out, but you know, you set the same rules. If you were fair with the kids, kids didn't bother, they didn't bother nobody. And so I only had a couple of kids who test me, you know. I only had the, I taught there three years, and I only had to send one kid to the office, okay. I had to, I had ran--I had a run-in with one other kid, one boy, that didn't wanna behave himself. And he went to see the principal. And the principal tried to figure out why I wouldn't honor what he wanted me to do. I said, oh, no, no, no. I told him he couldn't come back in my class. He had to stand outside today. He couldn't come in today. And if you are coming up here to tell me he's gotta come in, I quit. He said, oh, no, no, no, no. Where you want him? I said, I want him to stand by the door. I said, what did I tell him, class? They said, you told him he was early for tomorrow, but he's late for today. He got to stand outside. He said, Son, you stand right here by that door; says, Mr. Adams, if he moves, let me know. The word got around. Don't mess with him, he crazy. He don't, you know, he told the principal he'd quit. So I didn't have any trouble. I stayed there. I mean I had a ball, and I still hear from them. I mean I still hear from those kids. So I took them to Washington, D.C. I got pictures of that. We take, I took two buses to D.C. We'd go up on a Friday, and we'd come back Sunday. Speaker 1: Did you teach all the grades? Speaker 2: I just taught tenth grade biology. Speaker 1: Tenth grade biology. Speaker 2: Tenth grade biology. When I got over there, that's all I taught, was tenth grade biology, yeah. So, I got my niche, stayed there for three years and I got invited to come back to Norfolk State [University] to become the first director of the alumni affairs. Norfolk State is a relatively small, new school. It, it just had its first Bachelor's class in '58' [1958]. So we're talking about a relatively new school. Story_ID: 20831 Speaker 1: Now, had you--now, you were working on your graduate degree. Speaker 2: I had a Master's. Speaker 1: By then. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, I already had my Master's by then. Speaker 1: You were working on that from the time you left (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, when I left, I went to grad school right away. I started grad school that September. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went every Saturday to Petersburg [Virginia]. I went to Virginia State [University] every Saturday working on my Master's. So I got my Master's in a hurry. And then I went up there in the summer. So every summer, I'd go to school. I'd leave on Monday, get back Friday, work Friday, running the hamburger joint Friday and Saturday, study Sunday, go back Monday morning. And there was a lady who had a 98 Oldsmobile, and she didn't wanna drive. She'd drive over and get in the back seat and go to sleep. I'd drive to Petersburg and drop her back Friday. And she drove--we went up every summer together. She was working on a Master's in Library Science, and we taught in the same school. So I drove her car up. I didn't even have to drive my car. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Okay, so-- Speaker 2: But that's how that was. Speaker 1: So you go back to Norfolk State, now how did you find out about this--they knew--you were well known by that time? Speaker 2: By the time, by that time, I was volunteering. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was actually working in alumni as an alumni volunteer from the time I graduated 'cause by this time, Norfolk State's in my blood. I'm a Norfolk Stater so I would go over. And so after a while, I got a little office on campus. I had a little space. So I started putting records together and making some contact with other alums and trying to build the program and that kind of stuff, and the president knew about it. And so he invited me over to come on full time. Speaker 1: Now, who was the president at that time? Speaker 2: Dr. Brooks. Speaker 1: Dr. Brooks, that's right. Speaker 2: So he hired me, okay. And so the year before I went on full time, he started paying me about ten hours a week as a volunteer, and so that we had somebody permanent there, just in case they needed to show off somebody who was in that area. They would wait till I got there in the afternoon, and then they'd say, well, he's not--he won't be available till 3:00 o'clock 'cause I could usually get there around 3:00 o'clock. So I'd usually go there from 3:00 to 4:30 or so every day. Yeah, so, that's how I got to Norfolk State. So I got there, and I stayed three years, and I fell in love with Administration, 'cause I thought I was gonna go back to the classroom. I was gonna get promoted in the school system. I knew that. I mean I'd been tapped already, so it would a been no--I mean I was gonna be an early principal or something. I would have gotten promoted, no, no question in my mind. So they had to do the first wave of people that they'd passed over all these years. And so they had gotten some of that underway. So had I stayed I would a got promoted. So I decided to, that I--but I got over there and fell in love with it, but I needed a PhD. You can't work at the college level without it and not rise within the ranks. So I went to Dr. Brooks, and they allowed me to go back to school. So I went to Syracuse [University] and got a PhD. Story_ID: 20832 Speaker 1: Okay. So why did you choose Syracuse [University]? Speaker 2: They had money, didn't cost me nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm not--I applied, I applied to four places, Wayne State [University] 'cause I knew somebody there, Indiana University, my wife knew somebody there, Ohio State [University], I knew somebody there. In fact, Ohio State was where--he just died. If you don't have him in there, he got to be in there, Frank Hail-- Speaker 1: Oh, Frank Hail, yeah. I've been through the-- Speaker 2: Okay, well, Frank Hail-- Speaker 1: --Frank Hail on campus. Speaker 2: The person he, he replaced the person that I knew, had invited me to come up to Ohio State. And we knew somebody at Syracuse. Speaker 1: Not Lawrence Nelson? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Lawrence Nelson. But anyway, so we went to Wayne State [University] first in Detroit [Michigan], got there, and it didn't take us but a half a day. We realized we can't come here. This is a bad place for us. So we scratched it off the list. Syracuse was Number Two on the list, Ohio State was Number Three; went to Syracuse, dead of the winter, drove up there from Norfolk [Virginia] in February, icicles hanging everywhere, snow everywhere; got up there and walked around and we were gonna get back together at 12:00 o'clock, see how we're doing, my wife and I. So I saw her almost skipping to me, and I was skipping to her. I said, how'd it go? She said, I've already been admitted. I don't have no money yet, but I'm in. And my guy says if I come, he'll have me a Master's degree by August. By--from September to August, she could finish. So that--and she was just gonna do a Master's. And so I'm skipping around. I liked what I was doing. I'd been, I hadn't quite been admitted, but I was gonna get admitted. I could feel it, and I was looking for money. So I said, okay, we'll stay one more day and see how it goes. So the next day, I got admitted. I had to meet with some people. So I got admitted to my department, and by the end of the next day, I had money. So we had enough money. We had found housing, everything, knew where my daughter was gonna go to school. So Tuesday afternoon, we jumped in the, in a Renault [car] and headed back to Norfolk, drove all the way back, same day. And came back and we had already sort of got our bills together, but we cleaned up our bills and rented the house we were living in Virginia Beach, put the stuff we couldn't take with us up in my mother-in-law, up in the attic at my mother-in-law's house, my in-law's house, and got in the U-Haul and hooked my car behind the truck. And my wife drove her car, headed off to--and we had to get to New Jersey. And if we could get to New Jersey, the fellows were gonna take over. So started up in the parking lot and the bumper was too soft on my Volkswagen to pull it. So we done had a bad start. So I, I called my father-in-law to find out what we were gonna do, and he said, well, I can't go, but my wife can go with you. And she can drive. So she drove my wife's car, and my wife drove my car, and I drove the truck. And we drove up to, drove to Patterson, New Jersey, got there in the, at night, bicycles tied on the back. Somebody stole the bicycle overnight. Somebody stole the bicycle. We could hear it. They came and got one of 'em and before they got the other one off, we went out and got it. But anyway, somebody stole it 'cause we had--just couldn't get it in the truck. And the fellows took over and drove me up, I didn't have to drive no more. They drove the rest of the way, set me up, and jumped in their cars and went on back. And we got up there, moved into a little raggedy apartment, went out and bought us some throw rugs for the floors, and I went to school. I went to school night and day, seven days a week. And I finished in a hurry. I finished my coursework. In fifteen months I was through. Most of the time it takes at least three years. I was finished in fifteen months. I took twelve hours in the summer, and made all A's. I mean I took twelve hours in the summer. I ain't bragging, but I, you know, so I got finished. And it was scary, I mean it was scary (laughter). I was doing so well, I, you know how you think, something gotta go wrong. It was just going too well. Story_ID: 20833 Speaker 1: Well, I was getting finished, and the vice president of Student Affairs opened up at Norfolk State, and Dr. Brooks told me to come home, come down here, I wanna talk to you. He offered me the job, and I didn't wanna take it 'cause I had to quit in the middle of my program. And everybody tells you, you can finish away. You can write your dissertation any place, but I--that was a mistake, but I decided I--everybody kept telling me, you can't turn that job down. So I took the job. So we moved back. And I, I couldn't do the work part time, so I stayed three years, and we picked up and went back up to Syracuse, and I finished. And I, it didn't take me but three years all totaled, but I did 18 months the first stint. Then I worked three years and then I went back and did 18 months and finished. When I finished, then I went to--I left there and went to [University of] Notre Dame. Speaker 2: Okay, what position did you take at Notre Dame? Speaker 1: I ran the--I was Executive Director of the National Consortium for Graduate Degrees for Minorities in Engineering and Science, Inc. And I, the job was to build a program that provided graduate education at no, at no cost, to Afro-Americans, Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans and Native Americans who are vastly underrepresented at the graduate, were at that time, in those areas. So we could give you a free ride. And we built a program. We were trying to see--we had to build partners who would support that. So my job was to build the partnership. I came on board, and there were eight schools. I stayed sixteen years. When I left, there were 75 schools. There were, there were eight labs when I came. When I left, there were 90. So we could send kids for summer internships at 90 labs around the country. And when I say "labs", I'm talking about like Xerox labs and IBM labs and Exxon and DuPont and all of the big companies were supporters. And so that was what I did. I built a program. Speaker 2: So this is 1978? Speaker 1: Seventy eight [1978], I went there in 1978 and stayed till 1996. Speaker 2: Okay, Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana. Speaker 1: South Bend, Indiana. Speaker 2: How did you like South Bend? Speaker 1: Got there the right day, got there the right day. Everything I touched turned to gold. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, the dome was already gold. Speaker 1: It was already gold. I became Irish, didn't become Catholic, still Baptist, but became Irish. I, I'm telling you, I built a program. I mean I was--that's how I got known. I got, you know, I, I mean I--I identified the Ursula Burns and the Dean of Engineering at Hampton, Sheppard, the Dean of Engineering at Tennessee State is mine. The Dean of Engineering at Cornell is mine. The Dean of Engineering at University of Maryland is mine. I got, I got about 21 black female faculty members who are at least at the associate professor level. I've got about, I don't have quite as many males. I got six, I got six couples on the faculty at the University of Puerto Rico, six, that I identified and got to go to grad school. So I changed, I changed education in this country. The first black female to get, become a full professor at North Carolina State is mine. The, the, the Executive Director of Engineering Education, his name is Norman, Dr. Norman Fortenberg, he's mine. His wife is Vice Provost and Dean of the graduate school at the University of Maryland in Baltimore County. She's mine. So, I've got over 3,000 Master's level engineers out there working. Speaker 2: Okay, that's quite a-- Speaker 1: So that's what I did. Speaker 2: I failed to ask you what your dissertation was? Speaker 1: Higher Ed Administration, Higher Education Administration. I wanted to be an administrator. Speaker 2: And what was the title of the dissertation, do you remember? Speaker 1: How to--I wrote a, I studied students' undeclared majors, "Can you facilitate and keep students, retain students who don't know what they wanna major in?" We just let them sort of float around and sometimes they'd stay a year, sometimes they stayed two years, and then they'd drop out 'cause they don't know what they wanna do. They don't know what they--they don't know how to pick anything. So my thing was, we can do better than that. We ought to teach a class on how you go about deciding what you wanna major in. So I actually designed a class, a mini-class, taught it and then we tested students who took the class and kids you didn't take the class to see what impact you had. So, yes, that's what I did. Story_ID: 20834 Speaker 1: Okay, who is, now, back at Notre Dame, who is the head of GEM before you? Speaker 2: I was, I was actually the first--there was one guy who came but didn't last. So I was actually the first, really full-time, who, you know, who stayed Executive Director. The first guy probably stayed about five months when it was getting started. So that's why I'm saying, it was already there. I didn't start it. It had eight labs and eight schools when I got there, budget of about $400,000. And when I left it was $5 million. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright, so this is--how did you, how were you able to build it, I mean-- Speaker 2: I'm gonna talk, I--so networking is real important. The system works (laughter). You just have to let the system work for you. They're gonna, you know, my attitude when I was raising money is, "you're gonna fund somebody". I'm gonna make the case that you gotta give me some money. If you're gonna fund anybody, you gotta give me some money. I'm the best thing going. And I was able to convince people that that was true, okay. If you're gonna cut off somebody, you can't cut me off. You gotta get somebody who didn't do what they said they were supposed to do. We did exactly what we told you we were gonna do. We told you were gonna find some students, and we found them. We told you they were gonna go to school, and they were gonna finish, and they did. The whole time I was there, we ran along at about 90--about 87 percent completion rate. It was the highest in the, of anybody other than international students. We had schools where we were 100 percent, 90--we had like 300 people who had graduated from Stamford, about 93 percent completion rate. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Excuse me your microphone fell off. Speaker 2: Alright, are we back on? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Speaker 1: So, so the job was to go find a partner who, it was mutual for you. You need to be developing the talent base, but you say you can't find the students. You've got funding to do that with, and you're gonna give it to somebody, but you ought to want results. We can find the students and give you results, okay. And so people would say, well, we can't get black students to go to Aiken, South Carolina. We can get 'em to go anywhere you want 'em to go. You tell us where you want a student. We'll get you a student to go. So we'd move a student from Chicago [Illinois] to Aiken, South Carolina. We sent one boy there, and he couldn't even drive. He didn't know you could drive a car. We--they sent him to driving school. He got a, he got a car while he was down there (laughter), you know, so, yes. So, the job, my job was to build a partnership that had a need to develop a talent base in science and engineering and it ought to work. Schools would say, we don't know how to identify the students. We, the students won't stay. If we admit them, they won't graduate. That's gonna be our problem. They're gonna graduate. They'll go to class. We'll make sure of that. They'll go to class, so our kids went to class. We got grades. If you don't, if your grades are not good, we--you couldn't make a "C". You get a "C", we cut your, we cut fellowship off. You lose your money. Kids graduated. So you asked, everything we touched (laughter), it came out the way we said it was gonna. So we started, we started writing what we were doing. So we published some books. We put on national conferences. That's what that picture is on the wall We won an Emmy for a program that we broadcast on "Why Go To Graduate School?" on PBS. We did some uplinks nationwide. We, we did things that people--I mean we put on national conferences where we brought big dogs. Cy Ramos, the R-TRW, came to speak. We had the, we had the welcome given by the president of Stamford University. We, we did some things that just had not been done before. So, but we had partners. It wasn't me there, it wasn't me. We had this partnership of people. When you saw John White, John White was the Dean of Engineering at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology]. He was the president of our Board. The president of, the president of DuPont served as chairman of our Board, okay. So we had good support, and that made all the difference. Story_ID: 20835 Speaker 1: So you had to coordinate that? Speaker 2: We coordinated all this, but headquarters was Notre Dame. So I wanna make sure I get a plug in for that. Notre Dame was headquarters for us. Didn't, they picked up headquarters' costs. It didn't cost us anything to be there. They gave us space. They hired all of us. We were Notre Dame's employees, but we were paid from the Consortium. We ran our budgets through the University's finances. We got audited by their auditors, everything. Speaker 1: How large of a staff did you have? Speaker 2: By the time I left, I had fourteen people. When I went there, there was three of us. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, and did you work with the Upward Bound programs? Speaker 2: No, I knew them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew them. We were, we were not Notre Dame. We were the National Consortium. We could have been any place. It's now in Washington, D.C. They moved it after I left. But we were the National Consortium, headquartered at Notre Dame. And so Notre Dame was headquarters center for us. They provided space and services for us. Speaker 1: Well, who was president of Notre Dame-- Speaker 2: Father Hessberg. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, Hessberg was-- Speaker 2: And he, he was honorary chairman of our Board. So. So when you said that, that went a long ways. So Notre Dame was, was fantastic for us. And it was a fantastic place for me. Speaker 1: Did it create like an instant credibility in some way-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it did, instant credibility. But it still does. I mean when you say the name, Notre Dame, I mean people just, you know, it opens doors for you. It's, it was, and it wasn't fantasy. You know, I mean I think people from the outside would think that they, this is, it couldn't be true. I tell people that I think about the fourth or fifth year I was there, we had seven seniors on the basketball team, seven, one white, one Hispanic, five blacks. All of them graduated with their class in four years. I don't mean five years later or six years later. They graduated with their class, and they played football and three of them were drafted in the pros. You got me? Tony Rice came to Notre Dame to play football. He was a quarterback. He was ineligible his first year. He had to sit out the first year. They admitted him, but he didn't play. He graduated with his class. We don't have nobody who come and play football. IF you stay four years, you graduate. I mean I can say that. Speaker 1: How did you manage to do that? I mean-- Speaker 2: You go to class. Speaker 1: --what's the--yeah, okay. Speaker 2: No, you go to class. If you don't go to class at Notre Dame, you don't play. This doesn't have nothing to do with coaching. If you don't go to class at Notre Dame, you don't play. It's an administrative decision. This doesn't have nothing to do with the coach. So everybody goes to class. We don't have no soft majors. You can't get a PE degree at Notre Dame. Everybody is in a legitimate major. You go to class. You need some help, you can get tutoring at 12:00 o'clock at night. But you have to go to tutoring. If you don't, you don't play. If you needed to take a class, and we were going to play Purdue [University] and the bus left at 12:00 o'clock, and your class was, you test was at 2:00, you could stay and take your test, and we'd send you down later. Story_ID: 20836 Speaker 1: What is, now I think anybody watching this has some idea, but tell us what your philosophy of success is? Speaker 2: Get up with something on your mind (laughter). If you've got something to do, go do it. You have to get the work done, no excuses. My philos--there are no excuses, none. So I don't accept excuses from me, no excuses. So don't tell me why you're late. Don't tell me why you didn't bring your book. That was a dumb mistake you made. So I don't mean that in the sense of, you know, you just--you have to say to yourself, I just can't make that mistake. I have to go get this work--I gotta go to class, okay. I can't, I can't run track and do all these things. I can't go home every weekend. Although other people do it, I can't do it. I'm not smart enough. When you're able to say that to yourself, you can beat the world. So what's success all about? It's doing what you have to do when you have to do it, no excuses. It's simple. Speaker 1: And who do you credit--I mean is there any--is your family you think you get it from mostly--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, my family, my family. They didn't like excuses, okay. I told you my mother, (laugher), you know, my mother got up and went to work every day, you know, and my father worked every day. I mean, you know, you just have to--you gotta do what you gotta do at the time, all right. And, my mother's thing was, "Tomorrow will be better than today, but it's predicated on what you do today." You can make it so. You can make tomorrow better, based on what you do today. But if you don't do nothing today, tomorrow doesn't get better. So my philosophy is that the individual makes the difference. Now, do you get some breaks? Yes. But breaks come, they don't knock on the door. I got a saying that Coach Ubanks from Morgan State [University] said, "Opportunity knocks", he said, "but it didn't pick a lock". It doesn't pick a lock. You got to open the door. It doesn't mean anything. So, you know, knocks come all the time. And so when people tell me, say, God, you've been lucky. I said, nah, luck was eighty five miles to Virginia State [University] on Saturday. And most people wouldn't go. They'd say, I just, I'm not gonna give up my Saturday morning. They tell me today, say, God, you've been lucky. No, luck was 85 miles away. One year, I went every Saturday. I didn't miss a Saturday from September till may. I went every Saturday the school was open. You had to be there at 9:00 o'clock, and I was never late, never. I took pride in that. Opportunity will knock, but it doesn't pick a lock. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So the individual makes all the difference. So if you ask me what, you know, what--you know, that's what I have, I've taught that. I have instilled that. I drive it with people, has nothing to do with nothing. I mean I teach people that, you know, the world is full of all kind of folk, but it ain't no love affair. It's business, it's business. So we might not even like each other, but we can get along. I need you, you need me. Let's get over our differences, and let's go get something done. We can make each other look good. So sometimes, I mean when I was running the GEM program, sometimes use that. They used it. They needed to be able to say that they were doing something around diversity. I needed money. We both needed each other. That isn't no bad--it's a win, win situation. I didn't have no problem with that. It's business. Story_ID: 20837 Speaker 1: Now, you've written several books and booklets, and so what are some of the titles and what are-- Speaker 2: Okay, one of them is that one, "Get Up With Something on Your Mind", all right. The, I wrote a lot of what I call "self-help" guides which are 14, 28 page, little documents, specific, "How to Have a Successful Internship Experience", "How do you go into a company and perform very well and get invited back the next summer so you don't have to worry about it? You might not go back, but you want the invitation to come back. So you, I want you--I wanted my students to have the attitude, if you don't--invite anybody back, it's gonna be me. When I'd leave Revlon's in the summer, the personnel guy would always tell me, "If we hire anybody, Adams, you're Number One". I knew that leaving. So when you leave--so we wrote a book on that, how to do that. We wrote a book how to master the graduate school process. How do you go to graduate school and finish yesterday? How do you get finished in a hurry? What does it take to get finished? We wrote a book on "Career Management 101" about how to sit down and plan to find a job and then get the job that you want and then go to work and perform well and get promoted, and don't have to worry about it. You don't have to--you don't have to worry about the economy being bad. If the place runs, I'm gonna have a job. If I don't, I go somewhere else and get myself another one. So you just don't have to worry about that. I never worried about that, never worried about a job. So I, I tried to give people the nuts and bolts, easy ready, self-help stuff on how to get to the next step of where you're trying to get to. When I first started doing graduate education, we didn't have things written in the language that's--what is a PhD? Most people don't know what it is. What's the difference between a PhD and an MD and a, and theological doctorate? What, you know, a science doctorate? What's the difference in those things? So we had to demystify graduate education, I call it. So a lot of what I, what I wrote was that. How do you decode what students need in a very simplistic kind of way so that one, they'll read it. It's readable, and it's quick and it points directly to the question that they most like have. Story_ID: 20838 Speaker 1: Okay, so retired today, you serve as a consultant. You still do motivational speaking and-- Speaker 2: Right, I do training and motivational speaking, brother. I, I was at Unilever yesterday. They were, they were doing mentorship training. And so they were bringing their sales, new sales people who had got promoted into sales. And North America and Canada came together yesterday for training. And I was one of the speakers for that at Englewood Cliffs, which is where headquarters is for Unilever. And so I do work for them. I do work for Abbott Labs, a number of the companies. I do Intel, I do work for Intel. I do a lot of work for universities on the topics we've been talking about, career management, success in graduate school, success in STEM, I mean, how do you do that? Tomorrow, I'm speaking for the National Association of Professionals in Student Affairs Personnel, which is the umbrella group for the historically black colleges. And they're gonna meet. They're gonna be Norfolk. So they're meeting downtown--in fact, they're here now. They, they kick off tonight and tomorrow, I'm the keynote speaker at 12:00 o'clock tomorrow. So I do those kind of things, okay. And I'm gonna be talking to them about leadership, how does a student affairs person lead student affairs in a time when it's, there're a lot of questions about why we need these kind of activities. They're sort of peripheral, so they say, to academics. But they're not. Students spend much more time away from class, during the--they're in the dormitories, in housing, eating, recreation, all of those kind of things. Somebody, student affairs heads up all of that, okay. So we've got to talk about having a living-learning center, and why we need that. We ought to take tutoring to the dorms. We ought to be giving lectures in the dorms where the kids live. That's what we do at Notre Dame [University]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did--do you have a, is there any big, future plan that you have now, even--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm writing my last book (laughter). I shouldn't say it like that. But I'm writing a book. I'm putting all of the stuff that I learned about graduate education together, and so I'm writing a book now on the PhD specifically. How do you get a PhD in a hurry? Okay, why does it take people six and seven years when you should be able to finish in four and five? How do we cut some time off? Speaker 1: I've heard it doesn't have anything to do with how bright you are. But you have to know how to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You have to be smart-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you've gotta be smart, and you've gotta be astute, and you have to be able to write. You gotta be able to stick to it, okay, gotta be able to get along with people, handle the politics. We talk about all of that. How do you handle the politics? Politics is high. Make somebody mad, you're never gonna get out, never gonna finish. So there're people who are never gonna finish. They just stepped on the wrong toes. And you can't dodge it. It's there. Speaker 1: What happens if you step on the wrong toes? Speaker 2: Go back and apologize. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, right away, even if you didn't, even if you didn't do it. You have to apologize. And when people tell you, you didn't, you have to say, "I know, but I'm still sorry. I shouldn't have even let myself get close to that; mistake on my part." You gotta apologize. Then you move on. If you don't apologize, can't move on. Memories are long. They don't forget. And the faculty can come and ask you a question any time they want to. When you're putting your proposal together, they can ask you a question that you can't answer. They can always say, "I vote, no". Then you didn't pass. One person can, not pass you. When you're defending your dissertation, one person can block it. Story_ID: 20839 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Graduate education, opening doors for students who traditionally didn't go on to graduate school, opening doors for them to get in and get out and actually finish. So to be able to say that I was responsible for, you know, 4,000 graduate degrees, that we funded through the GEM program, and they got their degrees from the best schools. I told you, we had, we have over--when I left we had over 300 students who had gotten Masters degrees from Stanford [University], 300. That's awesome. I shook the hands of 27 students who got Masters degrees and three who got PhDs in the Winter quarter at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology], in one quarter, all my students. They invited me down, 27 (laughter)--30 students who were underrepresented minorities graduated from Georgia Tech which is one of the top engineering schools in the country. They're in the top five in everything, literally. Or they're in the top 10. They're Number One in electrical, in--they're Number One in Industrial Engineering. They're about Number Five in Chemical Engineering. They're probably Number Three in Mechanical Engineering. They're one of the top schools in the country. We had 30 students get legitimate graduate degrees there in one quarter. I shook their hands. They invited me there and put a robe on. And I, when the students came off the stage, I was standing there to shake their hands. The president introduced me. That was a high moment. So to be able to change education in this country, to the extent that we made a case that, it doesn't cost you anything to go to graduate school if you're good. It doesn't cost you anything. But for some reason, the money never got to minority students. When I went to Syracuse, they didn't know how to fund me. And everybody in my department was funded (laughter), that went full time. Everybody who was full time was funded. It made no sense to me at all. So I don't think most people know that. I mean white folk don't know that you don't have to pay. It's a well-kept secret. The only people who know about it are international. All the international students that you see in graduate school are free over here, all of them. So we're funding the Japanese, the Chinese, the Indians--I mean I'm not knocking that, but they're all free. At one time, a couple of years ago, 63 percent of the students who graduated in engineering, in electrical and mechanical engineering at VPR International, 63 percent, at the big engineering school in Virginia. It's the biggest one. So nobody, none of us are going, white or black. That's not good. So I, I feel good about that. I made a case for that. That should not be. We ought to take American citizens, and when we do that, we ought to be comfortable with some blacks coming, some Mexican Americans coming, some Indians who've been here forever. There's a young lady out there named Avery Damon. She's the first Native American female to ever get a PhD in this country. She's mine. She graduated from Stanford [University]. She's a professor at University of Michigan. Speaker 1: She's the first--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: First. Speaker 1: I never would have guessed that it would have taken this long to-- Speaker 2: They've been here forever. And people say they can't find 'em. She wasn't lost, you know. The guy, there's a guy working at Intel. He has a Master's degree, travels all over the world. He gets up all the time and talk about me. He was gonna--he's Native American. He's from Navajo reservation. He said I was gonna go home that day, Dr. Adams, and I heard you speak. Somebody told me to go hear you speak. So I went back and unpacked my bags and stayed, went on to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and got a Master's degree and ain't looked back. He wasn't lost, nobody knew how to find him. They didn't know how to get him in school, didn't know how to talk to him. So, that's what I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had a, I had a--I had this cast around me that allowed me to do that. I had the John Whites at Georgia Tech. I had President Kennedy at, at Stanford. I had--oh, God, I can't call his name, the president at Berkley [University], I knew them. The directors of the labs, I knew them. You know, the chairman of the board at DuPont, I knew him, chairman of the board at Dow [Chemical], I knew him. So I had these kind of people who heard that, who heard this message and believed in what we were selling and bought into it, and lend their support to it. And it worked. Story_ID: 20840 Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you ever--do you have any regrets about any major things at all that have happened? Speaker 2: I wouldn't change a thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've been asked that question a number of times, "If you could live your life over", I'd be a better student. That's the only thing I'd tell you. I wasn't bad, but I'd be a better student. You can't make that up. You either do it when you're supposed to--I don't know care how good you get later on, you can't make up what you didn't do when you were supposed to do it. We don't tell kids that. We should tell kids that. I don't, I'm probably, me and, you know, and--because I speak all over, I get people to say things that they normally wouldn't say. For instance, I got a "C" in freshman chemistry. It's one of the best grades I ever got in my life because I passed freshman chemistry. And I was way behind, way behind. My wife had had advanced chemistry, you hear me? She (laughter) just hadn't had chemistry. She had had advanced chemistry. She had a Master teacher teaching it with equipment. So I was behind from the day I met her, okay. I tell people about that. I talk about that CEDO. But I didn't give up on it. I didn't miss no classes. I tried to work all the problems. I couldn't work 'em all, but I worked on the problems. I gave that speech at Stanford, and President Kennedy was the president--his name was Kennedy too. He was the president at the time. He got up behind me. He said, Dr. Adams, I'm gonna admit it. I got a "C" in freshman chemistry. I don't think he'd ever said that before. But you, but I'd always tell the kids, but you, you don't--you have no business getting a "C". If you had advanced chemistry, you can't settle for no "C". A C's not good enough for you. But you don't have to apologize if you get a "C" 'cause my mother told me, your best is good enough. So I don't have no regrets. I tell my wife all the time, I'd marry her again. I never ask her whether she'd marry me again. I don't know whether she would or not. But I'd marry her again. I don't, I'd wanna have the same daughter. I have no problem with that. I gotta a wonderful daughter. She's a full professor at Virginia Tech in engineering. And so all of us have PhDs. My wife has a PhD from the University of Florida. I got mine from Syracuse [University]. My daughter got hers from Texas A and M [University]. All of us have PhDs. Story_ID: 20841 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That we go to school. I, (laughter), if I can get that on the agenda, I'd be satisfied. If I could get preachers to preach about it once a month, one Sunday a month so it'd encourage you all as you go around. If they would just put it on the agenda, one Sunday a month. They ought to invite all the kids to sit on the front row one Sunday a month. They don't do that. The kids sit in the back and don't even listen to the sermon. They ought to invite--I don't mean come up for children church. I'm talking about the service, not on the fifth Sunday. I'm talking about one Sunday every month, all the kids. The deacons have to move in the back. They're already going to Heaven. These kids, they're the ones we're losing. We need to move the kids up to the front. And we need to talk about this. We need to talk about taking your books to school. We need to talk about getting along with people. We need--everybody, all the kids. This is not a black thing either. This is a kids' problem. We make excuses for kids. We, we go fight their battles for them. We go get on the teacher. You can't teach anymore; you cannot teach anymore. You have to water it way down. And the only way you can do it is, is that you just give so much of yourself. Now, my wife taught AP biology, once we moved here, part time, at Collegiate. And she had good kids. They were just average, but they were good kids. And she would come in early in the morning, and she'd stay late in the afternoon. All the teachers were gone, way time. They'd run out the building ahead of the kids. The only way you can make up the difference is, you gotta give them some whole lotta, extra time. And once the parents find out that you got their best interest at heart, then you can teach the kids. You can demand of them what they're supposed to do. We're going to a graduation at Stony Brook, a little black female's gonna be an M.D. My wife taught her. The lady told us, said, you got one of the first invitations. We just want you to come. She wouldn't have done this, she talks about you all the time. If she hadn't met you, she wouldn't have done it. My wife will take up new books. The kids had to learn how to keep a science journal. Well, you're supposed to read 'em. My wife would bring a stack of 'em home and read 'em all weekend, correct 'em, take 'em back; wouldn't give the kids a grade because she didn't, she didn't like them. She'd make them do 'em over again. Story_ID: 20842 Speaker 1: So my regret is that we don't make education work. We got sorry and lazy teachers. Everybody know who they are. And everybody complains that they're underpaid. We knew what they were gonna get paid. I taught. I knew what the salary was gonna be. I taught every day. I didn't make no excuses. When you don't wanna teach anymore for the salary, quit. Education in this country is pitiful for everybody. I don't if, where, you can send your kids to private school, unless it's one of the outstanding ones. And most people can't afford those. It's just ordinary. My wife taught at a private school that was ordinary. It was better than the public school, but it was still ordinary, and people were paying expensive money to send their kids there. It ought to be better than that. So we haven't done that every well, and so we, we need to go back and revamp education. And you can run for Governor and not even talk about it. You can run for City Council, and you don't have to talk about education. You know what I mean. You shouldn't be able to be president. We ought to ask about that every single time, what you gonna do? And when you gonna do it? And how you're gonna do it? That doesn't even come up. We ask, how do you feel about abortions? How do you feel about gun control? We had 10 things they voted on Tuesday here in the legislature, and all of it was on guns, didn't nothing to do with education. So you ask me if I could change something, what would I change? That was what I'd change. I'd change education in this country. And if I was a little bit younger, I would get back in the, in the stream and fight. I'm fighting on the outside. I'm fighting at a different level. I still fight about graduate education. I fight about STEM, but the kids--if you can do that, you're way ahead anyway. So I'm, you know,--they need some help too, but we ought to go back in the trenches. See, today, if you're not on schedule in third grade, it's over. And you don't hear that. If you're off schedule in the third grade, you're not gonna make it. Speaker 2: Really, you really believe that? Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no, it's ain't if I believe it. It's true. If you not on schedule in the third grade, it's over. And I don't mean a few people don't get through, but the majority of the kids, we know in third grade that they're a failure. They're not gonna make it. They can't read. They can't sit in their seats. They can't put their clothes on right. They can't look you in the eye. It's over. And nobody's talking about it. We don't do nothing in church. We don't do it in the community centers. We don't do it no place. Speaker 2: So in college, on a college level--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But you, see, that's, that's the select group that we get through. We're gonna get some, we get some people through. That's a select group, and that's a--and then, see, we don't graduate them. If you look at the, if you look at graduation rates, I mean we ought to be embarrassed at that. I mean in the United States, of the kids who say they wanna major in science and engineering, now, you--some people gonna make a mistake. But we shouldn't be losing about 40 percent. Forty percent of them change their majors. That's ridiculous. Not that many kids who can't do science and math. They go into something else. Something's wrong with that. And basically, it's wrong because the freshman year is not designed to, to teach you what you didn't get. We just say, you ought to had it already, and we go ahead and teach you like you have. Well, you didn't have it (laughter). So when do we stop kidding ourselves? Story_ID: 20843 Speaker 1: Do you think that a student can make up some of that time in the--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You can make up some of that, sure, you can. Speaker 1: --in junior college or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I made up some of it, I made up some of it. You make some of it, yes, oh, yes. But it takes money, but it takes, you know, we--up where I'm from, we got a big prison up there. And it's a cheap one. It cost $20,000 a person to house a prisoner a year. They got one over in the, about three counties over, it cost you $24,000 a year to house--in Virginia, to house a prisoner. Now, you know what it costs in New York, and they're running over. Tuition at Norfolk State [University] is less than a thousand--$10,000. Speaker 1: So you think the priorities are off? Speaker 2: And if you get a job, we'll get our money back. We get, we're gonna get our money back over forty years, and nobody talks about that. So, I sit here, just to sort of tell you where I am, I sit here and I think about, and I write, and I go talk and, you know. I went, I went yesterday. I trained a, I was in a training group yesterday. There were about 60-some people in the room, two blacks. I gotta get back on that. I wanna know why. We market, those are the marketing people who sell to Wal-Mart. We got a whole team that live down where Wal-Mart is located. Why don't we have some blacks in here training to go down there and sell to Wal-Mart? We buy there. I gotta find out why we're not, why we're not training there, you know what I mean. And I don't mean that negatively. I'm not trying to replace nobody. But that's a fact. We buy at Wal-Marts. Be buy products that they sell, and I know you can find somebody, you know, I'm not lost, okay. So why didn't, why don't we have somebody. You've got an internship in the program in the summertime. Why don't we have some kids that we bring in the summer to learn what you're doing so they can make up their minds if they wanna be in your business? Why aren't we doing that? We're gonna talk about that. But I do that. So we pressed some people, and we see what's going on. And some companies bought into it, and we did well. And some didn't, you know. But we got some big dogs that went through my program or that I met or that encouraged and then they're at IBM. They're at DuPont. They're at Intel. They're at, you know, they're--we got some students who are, I mean young people who are doing well. We've got some scientists out there, you know, who are doing well. We've got, a guy named Green, PhD, at Oakridge National Laboratory. He's a, he's a mainline division head. He's in my daughter's generation. I just told you, I got five deans. I got five deans (laughter) from my program. I got five deans. They invited about 300 schools--well, it's more than that today. But they're not all, it's not a whole lot of engineering schools in the country. I got five, I got five deans and two of those, three of those are at mainline institutions. When I tell you that the dean at Cornell [University] is mine. The dean at University of Maryland College Park, I'm (laughter) not talking about the Eastern Shore. That's my student, okay. Speaker 1: Are there any other organizations trying to do the same thing? Speaker 2: There are, yeah, in business, in business. Oh, I don't know what it's called, but there's a--LEAP in law, I think it's called LEAP-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --Law. There's something in medicine. Yeah, there're other people who are doing what I'm doing. NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers] is trying to, you know, trying to do something in chemistry, chemical engineering. No consortium quite like the size and scope of what we were able to do, that we were the biggest ones doing that. We were bigger than the business people. We had more money than some of them had. The good news about the business one, some of the people who went through it now in leading positions so they're back. There's a guy out there--if you're looking for somebody in business named Melvin Stith. He's the dean at Syracuse [University]. He's an endowed dean at Syracuse. He's a Norfolk Stater from Orange, Virginia. He was at Syracuse at the same time my wife and I were there. He's got a PhD. His wife is there. She's got a Ph--all of us are Norfolk Staters, all of us went to Syracuse and got a PhDs. He went around, got promoted at Florida State and taught at, taught at South Florida too, I think, for a little while. But he ended up being chair of marketing at Florida State, and now he's dean at, back at--he's an endowed dean back at Syracuse. But he, but he went back then and got on the board. He's on the board of the business one, group. And he was, and he got the scholar--the fellowship for the Master's program to go to--get the Master's when he was a student. So he's back--so you got, that's sort of the buffer that would, the bridge we're making now, not a buffer but bridge that, looking at how do we, you know, how do we do this? We made some progress, okay. And where we are doing well, we're doing well. So the GEM program is having impact with a very select group of students who already can do math. You understand the difference. But the kids that didn't take no math, they lost. We left them behind, and so that group is so big that that's where we have to worry. If we can get you, keep you on track and you learn how to read and you learn how to write and you take the right kind of courses. But if you look at a school, and you look at AP courses, didn't make any difference where you're talking about it, you look at a senior class, unless it's a top-notch school, less than 50 kids will have taken advanced placement all the way through, courses. And we're offering advanced stuff now in everything, history, biology, chemistry, physics, math, everything, economics. You can graduate, you can have--you can test out of your freshman year when you finish high school now. None of, most of the kids are not doing that. So it's not just a black issue. It's a kids' issue. And we don't have it on the agenda. And because we are not talking, the conversation I'm having with you all here today, I sit here and think about this all the time by myself. It doesn't get on the main agenda. Story_ID: 20844 Speaker 1: Alright, yeah, how has the political climate changed in terms of companies who are not really, don't feel compelled to offer so many internships or support for graduate school anymore because of politics? Speaker 2: The climate changed and the bottom line changed. The speed with which you have to have a return on investment changed tremendously. And so, so the cost of doing business went up. So there are a lot of things came to play here, that the shift, if you're not careful, went about. It started with that. The players that we had convinced that this was in everybody's best interests to do this, moved off the scene. You got new players who came. And they grew up at a time when, for them, the world never was bad. It was always--they didn't know nothing about when there was no schools, so they say. They didn't know when you sat in the back of the bus. The people that I was talking to were ahead of me. The chairman of the board at, at DuPont was ahead of me. John White was in my age group. So he didn't, he didn't experience all of it, but he knew about it. So it was, you know, it was something like he couldn't act like it didn't happen. He knew about it. He didn't know the whole story, but he knew about it. So I could tell him about me, John, we're the same age. You could go into things, I couldn't, and so he would listen. Today that person who replaced him, that didn't happen to him. And it didn't happen to my daughter. And they are of the same generation. So the players changed. The politics then came about to say, we solved that problem. That's like the guy saying, I don't worry about the poor because we've got that safety net for them. So the climate changed to say that it's not real anymore when, in fact, that I tell people, just to show you how real it is, I travel. I mean I travel extensively. And so I fly enough so that I'm platinum on Delta, okay. What that means is I can load early. I get bumped up to first class. They have these priority lines. People come and ask me all the time, "Are you sure you're in the right line?" They always ask me that. And I'll be dressed. And I'll say what is it about me that looks like I can't read that sign that says priority. I didn't know you--I said, oh, yeah, I'm priority. I'm a two million miler on Delta. I'm in the right line. But I get, I get asked that--my wife is amazed 'cause she will--she says, when you tell me that, I would think it couldn't be true. I mean that happens to me all the time. So when you talk about the climate, the climate changed because on paper, it went away. It's gone. We wrote a rule that says you can't do that no more, okay. But the system didn't adjust to that. Speaker 1: Yeah, this-- Speaker 2: So the system still puts guidelines to what it wants to do. It still can decide, like monies that go to graduate school is owned by a professor. The professor writes a grant to the National Science Foundation, which is everybody's money. It's everybody's money, but then he decides who gets it. So if he decides he didn't wanna give me a fellowship. I don't get one. It's that simple. Most of the people who go to graduate school in the sciences, they're on somebody's research grant. That's how the world works. So you still have to, you have to be, you have to--somewhere you have to have a call on that. And so you have to work back to the National Science Foundation. So I have to, you have to go to meetings, and you have to make them put that on the agenda. And so they sort of write the language to say something a little bit different so you can't--we wanna note know--today we make you tell us what your diversity plan is. You might not do it, but at least you have to life. You have to have a diversity plan. Several years ago, you wouldn't have to write that in. So you have to get that in the grant now, to say what you're gonna do, how you're gonna serve everybody. That's all we're asking. You know, how you're gonna do that. But we, but again because we don't do it down here, see, we don't do it down here. So you get, you don't get placed in the right classes. Nobody asks that question down that low. You know, why is it, why is all the special kids over here and they're not over, you know, it's not scattered around? That's not, not true. So the climate changed, the politics changed, the system changed. But the people who run the system of the new generation, where they buy into the fact that it's not true anymore. So when you listen to a politician today, that's where they're coming from. Story_ID: 20845 Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me about your family. Now, you've got a, you're married and got one daughter? Speaker 2: One daughter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's just, just the three of us. Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: But you have a huge extended family. Speaker 2: Extended family. I got--and all these kids, these kids, I mean I got kids who call me daddy. And they, and I hear from them. I mean I got lots of them out there that, that, you know, they will say that. We got, we got a young man now who we're sponsoring at Virginia Tech. We got him, he's in science. We're gonna, we're paying his tuition this year. He got to go to work this summer. He got to go to work this summer. He got to send my wife some money. If he doesn't send some money, then we got to cut him back. He gotta go to work this summer. He gotta save his money. That's what you gotta do. You can't throw it away. He don't need no two-bedroom apartment this summer. We gonna send him some place where he can live in a dorm. We're gonna try to send him to NASA where they pay for housing. You know, but I'm just saying, so you have to work with the kids. So, yeah, I got this extended family. We're trying to, you know, we're trying to practice what we preach. I'm also, I'm a resource to a lot of folk. I mean I'm--I answer the phone. You can send me an email and ask me for some information, and I'll try to get it back to you. So I get a lot of, so I sit in here. I keep this office for that reason. In fact, the boxes sitting over there today, I'm mailing to somebody. I'm sending a box of stuff to somebody, and it's free. I'm just mailing it out. I can afford to do that. So I give away a tremendous amount of stuff. I give the books away. I go to conferences, and I sign the book and give 'em away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've been blessed, alright. Opportunity knocked and I answered the door. Speaker 1: Now, is your daughter in the sciences? Speaker 2: She's an engineering professor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She got a PhD in Engineering, right. All of us are in the sciences. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you said that before, but I just wanted to make sure we said it. Speaker 2: And she, she did her undergrad at A and T in Engineering and it just so happened that Harold Martin who is the chancellor now was dean of Engineering. He's a Martin. His family is from Pennsylvania County. He's not, but his family is. Speaker 1: Is he related to the lawyer that was-- Speaker 2: The Martin A. Martin's. I have never asked him, but I'm gonna say yes. I'm gonna say yes. But I don't know that because just--the Martins up there are big. So they're all related. But you have to go back a while to figure out which plantation they came off of, but I'd say, yes, probably so. But we knew his, we knew his family very well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he's now chancellor, and then she was, she was the first one to go to University of Virginia, alright. So we finally--then when she came along and so when she grad--when she finally graduated, okay, we've been to the University of Virginia now. So we, she, she got her Master's from there, and then she went to Texas A and M and got a PhD. But again, she applied to the University of Virginia and was accepted and got in there. But a very good colleague of mine invited her out to the University of--Texas A and M, who is one of my mentees, who happens to be a white female. So I got white females also that I have mentored. And she will tell you that I'm her--but she's provost today. She's a white female. She's provost. She's my mentee, and I've known her since she was an assistant professor, just getting started and excellent--and so she became Stephanie's mentor then, yeah, my daughter's mentor, right. Story_ID: 20846 Speaker 1: The final question is like legacy, so I don't know what part of it that you've already said that you-- Speaker 2: The kids, the young folk-- Speaker 1: But the question is, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I just gave it my best. I worked with young folk, okay. I, I worked with young people who--I enabled young people to be better than they thought they could be. That's the word I want you to remember I said. I enabled a whole lot of young folk to find themselves and grow and become all that they could be. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: There's a young lady out there named--and this couple, you probably ought to--I told you about Norman Fortenberg. He graduated from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]. Her name is Janet Rutledge, his wife. She graduated from Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology], PhD in electrical engineering. And she'll tell you that--I told her she had forty years to work if she didn't go to grad school. She said, nobody's ever told me that. She said, and I told her, you don't have to rush. Your forty years will wait on you. You can either do it with a Bachelors or you can do it with a PhD. You just to decide how you wanna do it. She said, once I heard that, I decided to go to grad school. She is the vice provost and dean of the graduate school at university--under at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Robusky-- Speaker 1: Oh, Freeman Robusky. Speaker 2: Freeman, yeah, I know him very well. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But I wanna think that that's what I did and I built partnerships. I didn't do it. I was able to get people to talk to each other that had never crossed those kind of paths. I had a guy on my board from Aiken, South Carolina, PhD, white male in chemistry, old guy, used to come to the meeting all the time. He was a tremendous ally. We built those kind of partnerships. He knew what we were talking about. He just had never done it. He got me at Aiken, South Carolina at the lab, and he made sure they stayed in the program. He could do that. So we need to build partnerships. We need to, we need to go across the chasm that divides us. We wait, everybody is waiting for somebody else to make the first move. We have to make the move. We have to go. Story_ID: 20847 Speaker 1: Alright, this a picture of me on vacation in the Caribbean, and we, it was--I'm in the forest at the time looking at some of the foliage, and I happened to be standing by a tree that had fallen over. Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, next one. Okay, tell us about this one. Speaker 1: Okay, this is--on the left is my nephew, Michael Rice, who's an engineer, and he's helping me hold an award that I received from the National Society of Black Engineers, and I was named an outstanding educator by them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's me and my wife, Eloise, Dr. Eloise Davis Adams at a New Year's Eve party. Speaker 2: That's the dessert tables at the family reunion, the Adams Family Reunion that meets every two years, fourth of July weekend with lots of food, lots of hugging and kissing. We will have 300 to 400 people every time. We've been doing it for about 80 years. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: And that's another shot of the food table. Now, people are actually passing by, getting food, family reunion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sunday service at the home church, Piney Grove Primitive Baptist Church. On the left is Aunt Martha, I'm in the middle, and Aunt Emily is on the right. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: That's me and my siblings. On the back row, the fellows, starting to the, to my--how do you want me to say that? Speaker 1: Left-- Speaker 2: Left to the picture. Speaker 1: Left to right, yes. Speaker 2: Left, okay, that's what I was gonna say. Left to right, the fellows on the back, that's James Daniel, Preston Clemmons, Howard Glenn, Thomas Earl, Clarence Benjamin. Those are the fellows. On the front row are the sisters. The two end ones to the left is Martha and to the extreme right is Mary, they are twins, and Mildred is in the middle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And here are the twins when they were babies. Martha is on the left, Mary is on the right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a picture of us, a group of us who were surrounded by the astronaut. And that's me on the, sitting down beside the astronaut. Her name is Joan, but I don't remember--I don't know her last name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can look her up, but I don't remember her last name. Speaker 1: We're, this is me with the principal of Barney Elementary School in Detroit. And I was there speaking to the students and the person on my--to my right is the principal of the school...