 Story_ID: 2428 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: I'm Kent Amos, K-E-N-T, A-M-O-S. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C. on the 21st of May in the year 19 and 44 [1944]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a entrepreneur. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: I have no idea. (Laughter) What is today's date? Today is the-- Speaker 1: Ninth. Speaker 2: Okay, it's June the 9th, the year 2003.. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the family room at my home 2720 Unicorn Lane NW, Washington, D.C. 20015. Story_ID: 2429 Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food. Pie and ice cream. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Brown. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Cayman Islands. Speaker 1: And do you have-- Speaker 2: Let me back up on that time of the year, Christmas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Christmas is my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: In whom to much is given, much is required. Story_ID: 2430 Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your family history? How far back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: Well, and I have to qualify the answer that my brother [Benjamin F. Amos, Jr.] is the family historian, and it's my somewhat jumbled recollection. But let me give you what I understand to be our family history. On my father's [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] side, there were--going back now several generations, and I'll get the greats in there when I figure it out. The name Amos, as I understand it, comes from a Jewish slave owner who had three children by his slave mistress. Those boys, the Amos boys, were ultimately educated by the Mennonites, up in Pennsylvania. And the, the home that the Amos family built for their education by the Mennonites is the foundation of, now, Lincoln University [of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. And the home, Amos home--actually, I have a, a rendering of it upstairs--is now a Pennsylvania historic landmark. They had children, those boys had children. One of those boys turns out to be now, I guess my great, I guess the--one of the boys is my great grandfather, great, great grandfather. And then the, the, the white guy I guess was my great, great grandfather. And then--now, and they had two boys and again, my grandfather was one of those. That's not right. My great grandfather was one of those. And he had my grandfather [Ernest Amos]. Well, that guy, the one who was my great grandfather. I'm trying to get it all straight here now, went on to be in the military and served in--he went into the Civil War as white. When they had the colored troops, he converted over and actually ended up in the Buffalo Soldiers, the 10th Calvary. Interestingly enough, my mother's--my father's mother and father's parents were Buffalo Soldiers, (unclear) in different units, but they were both in the Buffalo Soldiers. But anyway, he had came back here along with his brothers, and one of whom went to work for [U.S. President] Teddy [Theodore] Roosevelt in the White House [Washington, D.C.] as his valet, James Amos. And his brother, my grandfather, my great grandfather, had my grandfather, who he, Teddy Roosevelt helped to get into Julliard [School, New York, New York]. So my grandfather then went to Julliard [School, New York, New York] or the precursor to Julliard and then came here [Washington, D.C.] and had my father. Speaker 1: He was the, he was a musician? Speaker 2: My grandfather. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My grandfather [Ernest Amos] was a musician at Armstrong Senior [High School, Washington, D.C.]. He was pianist and voice. He was voice. And he went to Armstrong Senior High School. And then he graduated from Armstrong--I mean and then he went and taught there for almost forty-seven years. And two of his prize students were Billy Eckstine in his voice classes and Duke Ellington in his piano classes. And he met my grandmother [Virgina Davis Amos] there. And they had my father who was a, was an attorney. And then there's me. Story_ID: 2431 Speaker 1: Now on my mother's [Gladys Capps Amos] side, my--I can go back on my grandmother more than I can my grandfather. My grandmother came from Delaware, from Cheswold, Delaware. Her mother came to the United States as an indentured servant from Sierra Leone as a seamstress to a white woman who was a, of nobility, if you will, or the upper class, let's say it that way, in the economic order. And so they, they landed in Delaware. And my grandmother came from her. And she met my grandfather in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. My grandmother was a domestic servant, and she worked as a charwoman in people's home. And in so doing, met my grandfather. And he had my mother. Then again, there's me. So I can back on my father's [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] side a little better than I can on my mother's side. And my brother [Benjamin F. Amos, Jr.] can do it better than I can. Speaker 2: That's interesting history, though. I mean that, that you can go back that far. So you can go back basically to 1840, 18-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the early 1800's we can go back to. Speaker 2: Okay,-- Speaker 1: On one side. We can back to the mid-1800's on the other side. Speaker 2: Okay, so this-- Speaker 1: Interestingly enough, as I mentioned to you earlier, the--I know you're not supposed to use references like that, but anyway, I mentioned that I have a aunt, my mother's first cousin, actually. This was really a cousin, but we call her Aunt, is a hundred and one, this month as a matter of fact. And we went up and celebrated her hundredth birthday last year. And I was talking to her not too long ago in preparation for her hundred and first. And she was extremely lucid in her knowledge of, of history and--not only our family, but just it is fascinating thing to go through. It's something that I would encourage anybody to do if they can find anybody of that era to talk to them. It's a fascinating discussion. Story_ID: 2432 Speaker 1: Tell us about your, your father? Can you give us his full name and spell it for us (unclear)? Speaker 2: His full name is Benjamin Ferdinand Amos. And he-- Speaker 1: What was his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born here in Washington, D.C. on the 13th of October in 1911. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was he like-- Speaker 2: Eleventh, October 11th--no, that's right. October 13th, 1911. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what was he like and what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: What was he like? My father was a strong man. He was of his era in that sense. He, of course, grew up in segregation. His, his parents knew slavery, not, not that they were slaves, but they, they came from a era and a time when, when slavery was, was in the presence of his parents. So he understood that. His grandparents, great grandparents were, were slaves themselves. So he came along at a time when this country was different than it is today. And he's a product of that era. He was a very strong man, a very determined man, and a very smart man. As a young man, I didn't appreciate how smart my father was, as many of us do. We always believe we're smarter than everybody and especially our parents. But over time, you begin to realize just how smart your parents are. In my father's case, he was a very bright man. He finished Lincoln University in Pennsylvania where he finished in math in the top of his class. He went on to ultimately go to law school where he finished with a--over 100 average, and the highest average at the Washington, at the Washington Law School. I forget the name of it to tell you the truth. But he ended up with a 102 or 103 average for, for his four, three years in law school. And to this day, it's the highest average of that school. He went on to be a criminal lawyer, meet my mother [Gladys Capps Amos] when he was in, actually, in undergraduate school at Lincoln. My mother went to Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] where she was preparing to be an Educator. And from that union came my brother [Benjamin F. Amos, Jr.] and I. My father was a compassionate in the sense that he believed in his family deeply. He wasn't emotional in the compassionate sense. In other words, he didn't show emotions and that kind of thing that men tend to do better today than again, they did then. That's again a part of his era thing. But he was absolutely devoted to his family and committed to, particularly, his boys, my brother, I have an older brother and myself. And I am very much my father's son. And that's a major statement, by the way. Story_ID: 2433 Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother. Can you give us her full name and spell it for us? And her date and place of birth. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Gladys Mae Capps Amos, and she was born on April the 29th in 1913 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. And I didn't spell either one of them. I can give you those. Speaker 1: Capps is spelled with two Ps or-- Speaker 2: Yes, C-A-P-P-S. That's her maiden name. Speaker 1: All right. And Gladys? Speaker 2: G-L-A-D-Y-S. Mae, M-A-E. Speaker 1: All right. Well, what was she like and what did she do? Speaker 2: My mother was an educator, born--again, her, her mother was not an educated woman. Excuse me. My mother's mother or my grandmother was a, again, a domestic. She only went to the third or fourth grade, somewhere in there and worked in people's home all her life. And my grandfather, my fa--my mother's father was a postal worker. So the education in her family actually started with her. And her brother did not go to college so she was the first one in her lineage to have a college degree. And she went to Cheyney University in [Cheyney] Pennsylvania where she became an educator from that experience, and went on to teach in the D.C. public schools for 37 years in one capacity or another. And she was an early childhood educator. And again, she was the, the typical, again, mother of her era, very loving, very committed to her children. She was the one the kids would go when the father sternness would come up. And both of my parents, mother and father, were very fastidious people, very neat and very orderly in their lives and in their approach to life. And again, I picked that up from them. Story_ID: 2434 Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on growing up and give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I grew up again, since I was born in 1944 in an era of transition from birth through today. I was born during the--World War II, toward the waning days of World War II so I, I saw the remnants of World War II in [Washington] D.C. In other words, they had all the temporary buildings on the Mall that are gone now. And in fact, a memorial was--where the Vietnam [Veterans] Memorial [Washington, D.C.] is today, used to be temporary structures that were used for the War Department. All along the Mall in those days were all the old temporary buildings. My father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] worked in the War Claims Department. I remember streetcars in D.C., streetcars being, being railed in--cars for trans--public transportation. Got to describe it for those who don't even know what a streetcar is. It's a, a single vehicle with, with tracks and a wire overhead that they would run on. They were powered by electricity and the streetcars were interesting because they were on track. If one of them broke down, you could find yourself seeing a whole row of streetcars backed up because it was no way around them. They just had to sit there. And I remember that vividly, seeing the streetcars on the streets and knowing the tracks. It was a fun thing to do. We didn't have underground or overhead rail in that day. We didn't have subways. And we didn't L's [elevated trains] as some cities do. We had streetcars which were on the, on the street themselves. And they had these platforms in the, in the street that you'd have to get on, get on and off of them. Story_ID: 2435 Speaker 1: I remember going to the movies around the corner in Chita Rivera's home, who went on to become a noted Broadway actress and movies, etc. Had a chance to see her a few years ago and remind her of our early days in her home and we had a good reminiscing about that. But her parents ran the local theater for, for black because, of course, we had segregation in those days. And they had the net, not the networks, the movie theaters had created these basement theaters where an individual would show first- run movies. I saw all the Abbott and Costello [comedy team] movies. I saw all the Westerns of the era in the basement of their home, all the horror movies. 'Dr. Frankenstein' and 'Dracula' and 'Wolfman.' All those movies were, were seen in, you know, a space not much bigger than this, if it was actually even this big, on folding chairs, on a screen that was probably a sheet and, and--but that was the movie theater. And then, when you-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) So they would have the movie (unclear) theater in their basement basically? Speaker 1: In their basement. And it was a whole network of these all over the, the country, particularly, the South. Primarily the South because--and people say [Washington] D.C., South? Yes. D.C. was segregated and therefore, they had to have a venue for their, outlet for their movies. And they, they set this network up. It was a, it was a offshoot of what--what's the name, Micheaux did-- Speaker 2: Oscar-- Speaker 1: Oscar Micheaux [film director]. He, he had some version of that, and when that was ultimately subsumed by the big studios, they continued that practice as I've described it. So anyway, we, I went through that. Story_ID: 2436 Speaker 1: And we were a very closed community. In other words, we went to school. We went to church. We went to the grocery store with the same set of people. Everything was in walking distance. And it was a happy time, a good time. It was a safe time, and you didn't feel the pressures or the--didn't appreciate the, the, the horrors that segregation really meant until you got older when you would, would come out of that world and begin to see what, what it meant to see signs that said 'For Colored Only' and you go-- Speaker 2: There were such signs in Washington, D.C.? Speaker 1: There were such signs in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: In the nation's capital (unclear)? Speaker 1: In the nation's capital in the '40s [1940s]. It wasn't until 19, of course, 1954, with [the Supreme Court decision of] 'Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas'] that the schools began to desegregate. And by that time, I was in the fourth grade. So I went to, legally segregated schools through the first three years of my, of my--well, starting kindergarten, first four years of my formal education. Speaker 2: Now, when did the signs come down in D.C.? Was--did they come down the same time that [U.S. President Harry S.] Truman desegregated the [United States] Army or? Speaker 1: No, I think they really came down--I think he did that in '48 [1948] or '49 [1949], if I remember correctly. The signs in D.C. really began to come down in the early '50s [1950s], probably '50 [1950], '51 [1951]. I think they, they, they trailed the desegregation of the Army. I remember having to go to segregated theaters, colored entrance, and again, for that happen, it had to be in the early '50s [1950s]. But anyway, the time, I was grew up near Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. My father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] was friends with some of the notables from Howard. Thurgood Marshall was his [fraternity] Dean of Pledges in college. Charlie Drew was a neighbor and a friend. I mean-- Speaker 2: Charles Drew, the doctor? Speaker 1: Charles Drew, the doctor. Our family goes back a long ways. And so, his sister, Charlie's sister, and I served, today, serve on the Library Foundation Board of District of Columbia. So, I mean our families were tied together. All the Howard complex of people, with my father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] being the attorney in the neighborhood and then his best friend was a doctor in the neighborhood--cause every, cause everybody practiced out of their homes in those days, whether it was medicine or, or a law or whatever it is. They primarily practiced out of their homes. So, cause again, our, our family physician was down the street, and we'd walk down there. And his, his office was in the basement of his house. And he lived upstairs. That's the kind of environment that I understood. And if you had to go to the hospital, you'd go over to Freedman's Hospital [Washington, D.C.] which is where I was born, which is now part of the Howard University complex. Story_ID: 2437 Speaker 1: And the Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.] used to be old Griffith Stadium. And that brings me to another thing I remember. The old stadiums, which they're now building new stadiums to replicate the old ones in a modern way. Camden Yards in Baltimore [Maryland] is just Griffith Stadium modernized. And that's true of all of them around the, the country that they're building. And I, I think that's a good idea. But I remember going to Griffith Stadium, again, segregated days where you had to sit in certain parts of the stadium. You couldn't go in all of them. Of course, in those days Clark Griffith, not Clark Griffith, what's his name? Owned the [Washington] Redskins [National Football League team], Marshall, George Preston Marshall. I think that's his name. Anyway, he, he was playing to the southern audience for his, his Redskins. And it was a very segregated team. It was the last team in the, in the NFL [National Football Leaque] to, to desegregate with Bobby Mitchell when he came here from-- Speaker 2: Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Cleveland. And we know, know Bobby real well. I actually saw him a couple of weeks ago at a social function. And I remember, my father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] was an avid Cleveland Browns fan, and when Bobby Mitchell came here [Washington, D.C.], he was so happy to, to see Bobby Mitchell here. And, and I remember the desegregation of the Redskins. And the Washington Senators [Major League Baseball team] were the same. You know, I, I don't even remember who, who desegregated the Senators, to tell you the truth. In fact, I'm not sure they ever desegregated. They may have gone to, they may have moved to--where'd they go? Minnesota, Milwaukee [Wisconsin], one of them teams up there. Speaker 2: Minnesota, yeah, the Twins. Speaker 1: The [Minnesota] Twins [Major League Baseball team], yeah, before they even actually desegregated. They, they could have done it before here, but I don't even remember their desegregation. So those are the kinds of things. Story_ID: 2438 Speaker 1: From a schooling standpoint, like I said, I started out in segregated schools. So Lucretia Mott [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] was my first elementary school. Then I went to Gage [later Gage-Eckington Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and then I went back to Mott. And then finally, when desegregation hit, I came up here to this part of the city [Washington, D.C.] and--the desegregated part of the area and I went to predominantly white schools, predominantly Jewish schools for that matter. Interestingly enough, the, the Gage School that I went to which is now owned by Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and is about to be converted into housing. It's been empty for over twenty-five years, but--and the Mott School that I went to is torn down. It's a, it's a parking lot. But anyway, the Gage School, just prior to desegregation, I was again in the fourth grade, third or fourth grade so I was what, seven, eight, nine years old. I forget what I was in those days. Anyway, the point is that when we were told we would have to go from Mott to Gage, all the kids in the neighborhood were terrified because Gage to us was a school for big white kids 'cause we couldn't go on the playground during the day. The gates were locked and what was on the playground at the school were, were teenage white kids. And when we said we had to go to school with these big white kids, that's all--and we had to go to Gage, the first thought was we're going there with big white kids. And we were trying to figure that out. And, of course, we were all scared and terrified. And we went there the first day. We were looking in the rooms, trying to figure where are these big white kids. And they, of course, were not there. I found out years later with my work with children that Gage was the school for unwed mothers and incorrigible boys. So they basically, the city, public schools, were, were putting their undesirable children in the middle of a black community. They would bus them in every day. Buses would literally pull up onto the playground. The kids would get off. They'd go into school. And they'd bus them out in the evening. Speaker 2: But they, they changed it over, I guess, when you all started going there? Speaker 1: Of course, when we went there, it was all black. It was predominantly an all black school. In fact, it was an all-black school. Speaker 2: But it was-- Speaker 1: And all little kids. Speaker 2: In the middle of the black community (simultaneously)-- Speaker 1: In the middle of the Black community. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So it was a way of hiding their shame, if you will. My words. Story_ID: 2439 Speaker 1: My first church was the St. George's Episcopal Church at 2nd and T Streets NW [Washington, D.C.]. I am now a part of the Baptist tradition in the Baptist church, but I started out in the Episcopal church. I grew up in the Episcopal church, and--but subsequently, again, in more recent times I joined the Baptist faith and tradition. Speaker 2: Did the church play a big role in your upbringing? Speaker 1: Well, I'd say faith did, and church to a certain extent. As a kid, church is always something you have to do, particularly, from my era, again. There was a requirement that you go to church every Sunday. You're going to go to Sunday School. You're going to go to church. That wasn't a discussion. That was a requirement. And, so therefore, faith entered into my life very early. Faith was a part of the, the home. We prayed at, at meals and we talked about God. We talked about forces greater than self, if you will. So that tradition was a part of my, my upbringing, more than church so to speak. And I wasn't clear on the role church played as much as I was on the role that God played. And I'd say that's still the case with me. I have a good appreciation for God and, and I have an enjoyment of my time in church. And that's important. I think the, the church experience or a, a tie to organizations that are committed to faith is an important part. But what's more important than the institution is the concept. And the concept being that there are forces greater than self that, that help you get through your life's journey. And if you believe in that force and you understand and appreciate that force, it also helps you realize how insignificant you are. And to the extent that you begin to understand how insignificant you are, you're able to face life a little bit differently. Then you don't take things as seriously cause, you know, this thing will go on before you and after you. And don't make it that big a deal. And, and trust that which is more powerful than you. So in that sense, faith has been a very instrumental--a very, very important part of my life. I remember when I came home from Vietnam, I, and I started, just started working for Xerox [Corporation], I would go to church every Friday night to--actually the shrine over on--the Catholic church over on, on Michigan Avenue [Washington, D.C.]. And because they had those little prayer rooms and little catacombs down in the lower area, areas, and it was on my way home. And I would do that in lieu of going out with the guys. And the guys would all go out drinking and carousing on a Friday. And I'm not a drinker. I never have been. So I would do that. And my wife [Carmen Amos] would say, "Where are you going on Friday nights?" And I would tell her I was going out with the boys so I could be one of the boys. But the reality of it was, I was not. I was actually going to church to commune and to understand what I'd gone through for that week and try and help myself in the weeks to come. And that's kind of how I look at church today. I, I go to church every Sunday, and I go for purposes of really going--transitioning week to week. To say that that's a point where I really, you know, reconnect, you know, plug the system into the God force that, that really drives me. Not that I'm not connected on a regular basis, on a daily basis for that matter. But that's a day when I consciously turn the switch on, if you will, and understand how important that is in my life. And it is the most important thing in my life, ultimately, because it, it drives the fact that I have a family, a loving family and all those other things. But I believe, without a God force, this lowly thing would have been gone a long time ago. Story_ID: 2440 Speaker 1: You say, you say you went to some Jewish school and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, no, I went to public schools. I went to public schools, but they was predominantly Jewish. They, the children who were going there, the young people who were there, my classmates, if you will, were of a Jewish tradition. The school was predominately white and, and the whites were predominately Jewish. Speaker 1: Did you, your parents move or something (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, when I went to the fifth grade, the sixth grade rather, my parents moved to a section of the city [Washington, D.C.] that was heavily Jewish at the time, not too far from here as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay, so what were the names of those schools? Speaker 2: I went to Rudolph Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] for my sixth grade, where I met my lifelong friend Barry Rand who went on to become a Senior Executive at Xerox [Corporation] and Avis [Car Rental company]. And then from there I went to Paul Junior High School [Washington, D.C.]. And from there I went to Coolidge, Calvin Coolidge Senior High School [Washington, D.C.]. And I graduated from Coolidge in 1962. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what did you--what do notice that was different about the high school in the Jewish--I mean the grade schools in the Jewish community as opposed to the black community? Was there, was there a difference (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure I, I can really say at the time I noticed anything different other than the ethnic difference of predominately white and predominately black. What I did observe, and I think that I can remember, is that there was more similarities than the differences, that there was a communal way that the community that I found myself now attached to, would view itself. Their holidays were celebrated among themselves. Of course, they became almost public holidays for us because the school would close or it would be empty. Wasn't nobody there, so for all intents and purposes it would be closed. So I could tell that. I could tell the relationships. That was very similar to what I had gone through. I was not necessarily a part of it because there were different, different cultural traditions. But there were some relationships. We, we became friends and, and we, we shared those friendships. So it was the beginnings of understanding the diversity of our, our society in its rudimentary ways, as which children do. Story_ID: 2441 Speaker 1: So how did you do in school basically as a student (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: As a, well, as kids, my children will remind me because most of them went to the same high school. And my records were available to them or they'd make them available to them, one way or another. I was a marginal student. I was a, you know, basically a C student all through high school. Unlike, my father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] who was an A student. But I was a C student. I wasn't no major force on the academic side (laughter) by any stretch of the imagination. Speaker 1: Now, did your parents really push academics at home? Speaker 2: They did. They stressed it quite a bit whereas my brother [Benjamin F. Amos, Jr.] on the other hand, again, was a very good student and went on to--interesting enough, he--I was more the fastidious personality kid in the house. And my brother was the, the, the introverted kind of kid. But he wasn't a nerd. He was more eccentric, if you will, but was a much better student than I was, probably because he's a lot smarter than I am. He is, but, but he did real well in school. But if you looked at the two of us, you'd think I'd be the one doing well, and he'd be the one doing poorly. But it was just the opposite. We both ran track. He ran, set a lot of records, and I came along and broke them. He went on to American University [Washington, D.C.] and I did as well. And he graduated, and I failed out. Story_ID: 2442 Speaker 1: You said you ran track. Now, what events did you run? Speaker 2: I was primarily a sprinter and I--actually, I started out as a high jumper. My first events in track and field in the early days, late elementary school or early junior high school, was high jump. I started out as a high jumper and discovered I was really actually better as a sprinter because I couldn't jump that high. I did all right, but I was primarily a sprinter. And I ran hundred, two hundred and four hundred. Well, in those days, it was 220 and 4, 440 in the hundred yards. But today it's called hundred, two, and four as all meters. But I didn't run meters. I ran yards. On cinder tracks. Talk about differences. We ran on cinder tracks, dug holes to create your starting blocks. That was a different time. Speaker 1: You wore spiked shoes too, right? Speaker 2: Very much so, spiked shoes. I mean you had some that were very, very deep. So, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what other activities were you involved in at the high school level? Speaker 2: I was involved in a band. I was involved in--I played football. I played basketball. I was no major star in either one of those. My, my sport, again, was Track and Field. But I played the other sports. And I was in the band. I ultimately became Captain of the Military Band as it was a part of the show band. I led the bank, drum major. And I was a drummer by craft, but that's why I ended up being the drum major because I wasn't a good drummer either (laugher) to tell you the truth. But-- Speaker 1: So you played football part of the time, and then you were in the band too? And, or how did you (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So a couple of years you were in the band and a couple years-- Speaker 2: No, I played footballs years, but when, when we're not doing football season, I'd be in the band and the band played for other events other than football games. Story_ID: 2443 Speaker 1: Would you consider yourself a real social-- Speaker 2: Yes, I was a very active, social kind of kid. Roller skating and dancing. I was voted the best dancer in my high school [Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. You know, how they do that your senior year thing of 'most likely to do this,' 'most likely to do that.' Well, I was the best dancer in the school. Speaker 1: What were the dances that were out then? (Unclear) Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, obviously, the, the jitterbug or the bop as it's called today. Hand dancing I guess they call it today. I was very good at that. And, of course, I guess a lot of those dances like the twist and all those came along, actually after I got out of high school. But the primary dance in those days was, was the, was the bop or hand dance as you know it today. And I guess some of the more exotic dances came along a little later, twist, jitter--well not jitterbug. Twist, the slop and all those kinds of things. I guess the slop was going on a little bit. Don't get me describing-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you were right in the, right at the beginning of the Rock and Roll era. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, we went from the Flamingos [music group] serenading to TheTemptations [music group] serenading. I mean we, we, I, I covered that, that era. And that was different sounds. But they both, they were different sounds, but different eras. And my, my first recollection of music was really the, the R&B [rhythm and blues] world of the Flamingos and The Five Keys and the Five Satins and the, and that era, Fats Domino. Speaker 1: Doo-woppers Speaker 2: The doo-woppers. Yeah, the doo-wopper. That's a good example of it. [American] Bandstand [dance music television program] came along when I was in high school. And then we went to Rock and Roll. But it was Doo, Doo-Wop era. That's a good description of it. Story_ID: 2444 Speaker 1: Now, do you, do you remember when you first saw television? Speaker 2: Yeah, my wife [Carmen Amos] and I were talking about that other day as a matter of fact. We were talking about the things that have happened in different eras and different lifetimes. And we were talking about our own perspectives on television. And it came later in her life, cause she's younger than I am, significantly. Of course, that's not really true, but I got to say that for the record (laughter). But anyway, but we talked about how we, we remembered television. And for me it, it was in the very early fifties [1950s]. I don't--I remember radio as a young kid. I remember, you hear the stories of how people would gather around the radio to listen to 'The Shadow Knows' [radio program] and the Saturday night fights were on the, the radio and all that. And 'Dick Tracy' and different shows on radio. 'Amos and Andy,' on radio. I am one who remembers those things. And I think we got our first television in 1951 or '52 [1952], somewhere in the very early fifties. But up, from '44 [1944] to, to the early fifties, it was all radio. So yeah, I do remember it. And, of course, it was a very small screen, black and white television. And, of course, I also remember that it came only on, only a portion of the day. And there was the anticipation. It had this dumb thing up on the, on the screen. I guess it was a, a light check or whatever they did in the bid. But on the screen was this buzzing sound going on-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) did they use a Indianhead? Speaker 2: No, it was actually a, a, some kind of graft. That's about the best way to describe it. And I remember, very much remember sitting there looking at this dumb thing, looking at your watch or looking at the clock, waiting for the moment for it to come alive. And there it'd be, you know, people on, on this thing called television. And, of course, at the end of the day, it would go off. And on these--and we had three channels maybe. You had, you know, ABC [American Broadcasting Company], NBC [National Broadcasting Company] and CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System]. Then later on, we had a local channel, Channel 5, which became, became part of Fox [Broadcasting Company]. But the point is, I remember the early days with just a handful of stations, three or four and coming on and going off. And, of course, if you take that forward, I also remember the first time we had color and the first show. And they had the peacock [logo] on, on NBC. And how the, you know, only one show had color cause we didn't have a color T.V. and you'd, you'd scamper around to, trying to find somebody who did to see what it looked like in color. And, of course, we ultimately got a color T.V. So, yeah, I do remember that. Story_ID: 2445 Speaker 1: There's something to be said about those kinds of memories. I'm very blessed, very fortunate to have come along at a time--people say, "Would like to do it all over again?" And I'm sure these young people, they have their own recollections of the difference between 8-track tapes and CDs [compact discs] and some of them don't know that obviously, but they, I think there were very significant cultural changes that I experienced whereas these kids are seeing subtle growths. And those are differences. I mean going from radio to television is a, is a iconic kind of change, if you will. It's a major shift in, in things. Whereas going from one version of CD's to another version of CDs is a different kind of shift. One--like one computer to another is different even if they're more powerful. But they weren't--it's still a computer. So I'm real fortunate to have experienced those kind of things. And the segregation I talked about earlier, having gone through that. That, that, that, these kids don't know anything about. And it's good they don't on one level, but they missed understanding the human dynamic that has taken place with that kind of, that upheaval and the structural change that's important to the growth of, and a maturity of, of, of a people. Story_ID: 2446 Speaker 1: Growing up in [Washington] D.C., were you, were you keenly aware that this was the nation's Capital and the center of gov--of government (unclear)? Speaker 2: I ultimately became keenly aware of it. I, you know, in my older years, older young years, meaning in my teens and into my twenties, you, you can't help it. You begin to recognize this thing called the seat of government. You begin to recognize that we have the President here. I marched in the--I told you I was in the band in high school. I marched in the Inaugural Parade of [President] John F. Kennedy as a band member. You begin to understand that, "What is this thing?" And you, you, you begin to appreciate that. And as I, as I did, as I grew older, in my twenties and I guess into my thirties, my goal was, in fact, to, my, to be a political person. I, my personality again, lent itself to that, and I had an ambition of being a U.S. [United States] Senator. And my, my aunt's brother, Ed [Edward] Brooke, became the Senator from Massachusetts. My father's brother married Eddie Brooke's sister. So Helene Brooke, Helene Brooke Amos, was Ed Brooke's sister. Anyway, so he's Uncle Eddie to me. But I got to know a U.S. Senator, namely-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) he was a big deal-- (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: Oh, very much so. Speaker 1: -- because he was the first black Senator since Reconstruction [period after Civil War, 1867-1877]. Speaker 2: Since Reconstruction, right. Speaker 1: Since Blanche K. Bruce, I guess. Speaker 2: That's right. So out of, out of Massachusetts. So I got, got to know Eddie and got to know his experience. And I could appreciate that. And, and he was a bright man, a lawyer by training and a member of the family. So he became a goal for me. You know, he was an extension of my father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] in that sense. Again, I knew Charlie [Charles] Drew. I knew Thurgood Marshall. I knew all those kinds of people. I knew Charlie [Charles] Houston, who was another brilliant lawyer. A friend--my father was a law partner of Charlie Houston's. The Senator--the Senator--the Congresswoman from the District of Columbia, Eleanor Holmes Norton, her, her father, Coleman Holmes, was in our home virtually every day. He'd stop by our house literally every day. My father was his, his--was Eleanor's sister's Godfather. So our--I, I saw all of that. I had a sense of, of the legal world, which was an extension of the political world. One is an extension of the other because so many political people are lawyers. So I could appreciate it. And it was a goal of mine. And I strived for that (unclear) to manifest itself in other things I've done over the years. Story_ID: 2447 Speaker 1: So when you, when you were in high school, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do for living at that, you know, at that point? Any career aspirations? Speaker 2: Not really. Again, if anything it was this notion of politics was beginning to, to take its, its germination, if you will. However, I didn't really know what I was going to do with myself other than, what your parents do, lawyer, teacher, probably more lawyer than teacher Story_ID: 2448 Speaker 1: So you're a C student. You're the best dancer in [high] school-- Speaker 2: (Laughs) What does that tell you, right. Speaker 1: You were an athlete and you're, you're in the band. You're a popular person. Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: And you, you know you're going to college. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, that was, again, that was one of those non-negotiables. You were going to go to college. And I went on to American University [Washington, D.C.] on a track [and field] scholarship. And that was not a productive environment, outcome rather. I promptly failed out. Speaker 1: Now, American University is, is where? Speaker 2: American University here in Washington, D.C. My, my brother [Benjamin F. Amos, Jr.] had gone there before me on a track scholarship. I got a track scholarship there. And again, my social side took over and I spent more time dancing and, and romancing, and not enough time in the books. And after two semesters, I was on probation and after one more semester, semester, I was sent home. But that became a very seminal point in my life. It was important-- Speaker 1: How'd you feel about that? Speaker 2: Well, I probably didn't feel that much about it at all. I, I was, again, too arrogant. I hadn't appreciated the, the notion of my smallness at that point in time. I still saw myself bigger than life, if you will. And I, you know, I just kind of dismissed it as their loss, not mine. And I actually went on for a few more months faking like I was going to college every day. I'd get up and put my clothes on and take my books out and go out the door. And fake like I'm going to school. And finally, my parents found out. I'll never forget. It was Mother's Day, 1964. And my mother [Gladys Capps Amos] and father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] were sitting in the kitchen. And I had bought my mother some flowers and things. And I walked in on Mother's Day at the end of my so-called school day, even though I was out of school. And I saw my mother crying and my father was standing there being his stern self. "What's wrong?" And they had gotten a letter from the University asking for their money. (Laughter) "Since your son is longer there, we need to get this record business straight." And, of course, it all came to light then. My father asked me--you want to know about my father, this is a good example of my father. He said, what are you going to do now, son? And I gave him this long story about I'm going to get a government job and I'm going to do this. And I figured I (unclear) get my apartment. I was going to buy an Impala Chevrolet [automobile] and all these good things. And he just kind of nodded and said, now, I know why you failed out of school, son. Of course, you know, I'm looking at him as the, what do you mean? He said because you're stupid. And, of course, I'm saying, what do you mean I'm stupid? He says son, you have two options: you can go in the Army or you can go in the Military. (Laughter) That's it. You've got two chances-- Speaker 1: Army or the Military (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Or the Military. Story_ID: 2449 Speaker 1: Well, I ended up in the [United States] Air Force. And subsequently from the Air Force, I ended up in the [United States] Army so I did both. I went in the Army and the military. And I spent nine years on active and inactive duty in the Reserves or Army National Guard. I served in Vietnam. I commanded troops in the District of Columbia during the riots after the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King, which was a tra, traumatic and tragic environment as well. I had a, same steel pot I wore in Vietnam, not literally, but figuratively I had a steel pot on. And I had a flack vest on. I had an automatic weapon. I had a sidearm. I was commanding troops in both instances, in Vietnam and here. I was Military Police in Vietnam. I was Military Police here. And it was a--to go to your high school. I want to say, I went to [Calvin] Coolidge High Schoo [Washington, D.C.], I drove up there after things settled down some. And an armored calvary unit was stationed on the same field that I played football and on the track where I ran, were, were armored vehicles. And to drive up to my parents' home, fully loaded for, for war, which I did and with a machine gun, jeep sitting out in front of my parents' house, was quite an experience to having gone through--I mean again, it was the same thing I used in Vietnam where I actually had to take human life and people tried to take mine. Story_ID: 2450 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about Vietnam? When were you in Vietnam? Speaker 2: I was in Vietnam in the late 1960's, came home in January of '71--'70, January of '70. Speaker 1: Were you there during the Tet Offensive? Speaker 2: No, that was 1968. I was here. And I was there during--I was there during the second Tet. But the big Tet was the first Tet. And, of course, tet was January of each year so I was there. And, and, yeah, there's the stories associated with war, but I guess the one I would describe, not as, as a instance, but as a perspective. What war helped me understand was the real value of human life. Because the war, what war does is really takes you to a level where you don't value life at all, your own or anybody else's. And you almost have to in order to mentally survive, let alone physically survive. When you, you face the prospects of dying literally every day, you realize that, that, that life is ultimately--when it's all over and you're settled back, how precious life is because you could be with people in, in one instance and they were gone the next. Gone literally in the since that they died. And figuratively, in the sense that their bodies disappear or, or are dismembered in various ways under, under certain circumstances. And when you, when you pick up a, a shirt, trying to save somebody and when you, when you do that and you turn them over and there's nothing there, you realize what war really is all about. And it's about probably the most senseless things human beings can do with one another. But it also helps you appreciate what life really should be about and why we ought to strive for the kind of joy that life really represents. So that's what Vietnam really ultimately did for me. I, I have my war stories, if you will, but that's really not what I would spend a lot of time talking about. I'm more, more interested in talking about what it really did for me. It helped me appreciate living life to its fullest and helping others do that. I also have talked about my own faith journey. And one of the things that I am clear about now as I look back over my, my life--there's a poem that talks about footsteps in the sand where this man was looking back over his life as he's walking along the beach with, with his God force. And he says to Jesus, he says, as I look back over my life, I could see parallel footsteps going along. But there were times when there was only one set of footstep, prints, if you will. And I noticed when I do the assessment that those times when there was only one, were my worst times in my life. And, of course, he says to, to Jesus or his God force, why did you forsake me cause I thought you said that if I committed myself to you, you would be there when I needed you. But at my times of greatest peril, there was only one set of footsteps. And, of course, the God force, Jesus, (unclear) says to him, Son, I was carrying you. Well, I understand that now. God carried me through Vietnam. God carried me through failing out of college. God has carried me through so many other places. Then you begin to realize how insignificant you are and how that force has begun to shape your life and prepare you for the mission that you're really, ultimately here for. And for me, that is what I do today in my connection with children and the families and community. Vietnam was a portion of that training to appreciate and understand, again, what I've described, one understanding the joy of life and also to be able to handle the, the sadness that goes with death because you can't work in the streets of the nation's capitol and the communities of the world where so much deprivation is going on and not appreciate that and be able to handle it because if you, if you get bogged down in their pain, not that you don't understand it or that you can't empathize with it, but if you, if you get sidetracked by it, you can't accomplish your goals. And Vietnam teaches you that. If you get stopped because a guy next to you drops and you're in war, and he's gone. His head is off. His body is dismembered and if you stand there worrying about him, you're going to get killed. You got to move on to accomplish your goal. So, so when you go through those experiences, it then allows you to use them. Today, it's like actors, if you will, and you always here about they, they draw on different life's experiences to do their roles. Well, my role in life now is to have touched the lives of, of young people and their families in communities that many people have forgotten or have written off. And many times, you see war zones. Many times you see tragedy. Many times you see death, in fact. But that portion of my life, and I now understand why I did that because I had to be ready, that I had to have my wilderness experience, if you will, preparing me for this, this mission. Story_ID: 2451 Speaker 1: I guess it goes without saying that the [United States] Army provided some discipline for you as a young man that you probably needed? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I, I say that my mother [Gladys Capps Amos] and father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] are both very disciplined, fastidious people. And I think I had that in me already, but the real training for that, the real development of that--(phone ringing) My training and my, for my ultimate use of my fastidious heritage, if you will, was in the military. And I was a very orderly--in, in preparing for our discussion, I found a picture of my bunk. And, of course, it was required to be taut and shoes lined up. When I looked at it, I said, that's me. Still is today. (Laugher) I mean that's the kind of approach--I, I approached everything in my life in a very orderly and disciplined and kind of fastidious approach to life. So it was very, very helpful to me, yes. I, I, by the way, I would encourage anybody to have their children go through some kind of experience like the military. The tragedy of the military, of course, is that there is the possibility, as we have just gone through, of having young people in harm's way. But that's part of the price one must have to be willing to pay. Story_ID: 2452 Speaker 1: What was the racial climate like and social climate like in the [United States] Army as opposed, you know, growing up in the neighborhood? Did you, did you--now you moved--you went in there in, as a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I went in originally as an enlisted person in the, in the [United States] Air Force in the South in the early sixties [1960s], mid-sixties. And there was still some--I was stationed at Lackland Air Force Base [Texas]. And there was still a lot of residue of the segregated time of our, our lives. And so therefore, and as a very fair-skinned black, sometimes people would say things in my presence, not really knowing who or what I was. So I saw it in that sense. We couldn't go off the base as comfortably as, as our counterparts in the, in the military. In those days, part of my preparation for Vietnam had me stationed in Georgia. By this time, I had gone to Officers Candidates School, and I was an officer. But I, again, remember being, living in Georgia in a trailer park. And I had a white roommate. And people made the assumption that both of us were white. Wrongly, but they did. And you could hear the, the negative comments, racial slurs that were going on, and I had to have confrontations around that. And as a matter of fact, I ended up, since I was in the Military Police, I ended up with the Commander of the Base putting that place on notice that if they didn't correct some the, the contact, conduct, military personnel could not live there. And there was a whole lot of them living there. So they corrected it. So I had a chance to impact segregated behavior, even though it was off base. But again, I experienced it on base. I'll never forget--I'll tell you I will absolutely never forget. I was on the bus, on my way from the plane to, in-processing, in Vietnam. And a young man sitting across the aisle from me says to people in general on the bus, "look at all them niggers. What they doing over here?" And talking about black soldiers walking outside. Well, this young man didn't realize that sitting across the aisle from him was an officer who could have him court-martialed, and I did. He landed in Vietnam and his first thing was to get court-martialed and put into the brig that I ended up having command of. So (laughter) he had a very bad first trip. I tell you that. And so, we'll go on. Speaker 1: He's probably got a story tell that one. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he actually had a very bad start, yeah. I remember again, which triggers another thought. Later on in my exp--Vietnam experience, again, from a racial standpoint, I was, at one time, the Motor Pool Officer. And I was underneath a truck. I had my hat off and my, my blouse off--my, my shirt off. They called those blouses in the military. And therefore, all I had on was a t-shirt and, and fatigue pants. So it was--I was, in other words, insignia-less. Nobody knew what, what rank I was. And I was there working with one of my sergeants. And a guy drives up, who was a sergeant from another unit looking for something. And they were talking. And I was just, you know, doing what I was doing and not paying that much attention to him, but I was visible and kind of, you know, working on the truck. So he assumed I'm probably a, you know, enlisted man, grease monkey, if you will. And he makes some, again, negative, racial slur, and which caught my attention. And I climbed out of the, the pit from where I was working. I said, "What did you say?" And he said it again. At which point in time, I put my hat on. And he saw the bars and he said, "Oh, stuff." Ain't exactly what he said. And I said, "That's right, you're in big trouble." And he started to make a appeal. He, it fell on deaf ears. And he too was arrested. He never left those grounds. He ultimately was court-martialed, lost some rank and pay and moved on. So, yeah, I have experienced that in the, in the military. But fortunately, I was in a situation in a couple of those instances where I could have people think differently about their conduct. And whether I made a difference long-term, I don't know. I know I made a difference in that Georgia trailer park. But in the conduct of those two particular individuals, I don't know. Story_ID: 2453 Speaker 1: Okay, so, just the chronology, you--I know you did talk about Vietnam already, but you, you served a tour of duty in Vietnam in the [United States] Air Force? Speaker 2: Right, TDY. What they call temporary duty assignment. Speaker 1: And you were, you were some of kind of a helicopter rescue mission? Speaker 2: Right, we were, I was a door gunner in a, in helicopters. But again, that's another whole experience I tend to forget and leave alone. Well, I didn't mention it earlier. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, and then you came back and finished school, right? Speaker 2: Right. Came back, went to college, finished school. And when my class literally graduated, I was in Cambodia. [U.S. President Richard] Nixon had sent the troops into, what they call the Parrot's Beak, a place called An Loc. And I was a part of that incursion into Vietnam, into Cambodia. We were running convoys, ammunitions, supplies, you know, the whole thing. And I was a, assigned to a detachment in a place called again, An Loc, which is right on the border between Cambodia and Vietnam. Speaker 1: Now, when you finished--now, now, where'd you finish college at (unclear)? Speaker 2: I finished Delaware State. I went back to college in Delaware to the University which is now Delaware State University [Dover]. In those days, it was Delaware State College. After my bad experience in, in the first time at American U [University, Washington, D.C.], I had matured and realized I wanted to--after again, my military experience, I realized I could do more with my life. And my brother [Benjamin F. Amos, Jr.] was living in Delaware at the time. And his wife's aunt was the librarian at Delaware State. And they suggested that this might be a place for me. I went up there with my father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] and brother, hadn't quite realized it yet, but something clicked. But anyway, I went up there. It was a farm. You know, a true farm. I mean it had cows and pigs and chickens running around. And it was an entirely different world than mine. I was still very much the city boy, if you will. And so, anyway--but they said, "Fine. You can come here and go here. You'll start out as a freshmen," 'cause I showed them my transcript from American University. And they just kind of laughed and said, "Nothing we can do with this. Why don't we just put this aside (laughter) and just start all over again?" And we did. And I was president of the freshman class, my first year. President of the Men's Council, my second year. Pres--president of the Panhellenic Council my third year and president of the student body my fourth year. So I got into my politics finally. And I was a excellent student. I graduated in the honor society. I was Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society, I'm an Alpha. And I'm Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, I'm a Que. And so I went through all that experience, the whole college experience. Story_ID: 2454 Speaker 1: And, but I still had this military thing. And I was still thinking about being a military officer for a career. So I re-upped for a tour in Vietnam and went over to Vietnam as a, this time as an officer. And as I described earlier, I went through the experiences I talked about. And--but when I came home, I came home on crutches. And my friend, Barry Rand, a guy I met in the fifth grade, had started to work for Xerox [Corporation]. Speaker 2: But what happened to you? Why, why did you--why were you on crutches? Speaker 1: I got blown up. I was in a Jeep that got, that got hit and ended up--partly why I'm limping around here now. My, my--anyway, between track [and field] and Vietnam, I'm trying not to spend a whole lot of time on my--some of it's not the--it gives me a different emotion which I try to avoid to tell you the truth. But anyway, like I said, so I came home. I got a interview with Xerox. And actually, I came home, we, we came home during the Thanksgiving timeframe with prisoners. We shipped, we brought U.S. [United States] soldiers, personnel who had been convicted of U.S. Military crimes back from Vietnam to the [United] States twice a month for imprisonment or, or release on dishonorable discharges, twice a month. And each time they'd come a Military Police Officer and a contingent of Military Police Officers, soldiers would escort them home. So we had a rotation and I got one of those trips home. So I came home around Thanksgiving and during that time, I got an interview with Xerox. And they said, "If you live, you have a job." So when I came home, when I did come home, and I was on crutches, they looked at me. And the first thing they're thinking, did I lose my leg or something like that. So they were trying to figure out what they're going to do. I, I assured them I was fine of sorts. Story_ID: 2455 Speaker 1: And I went on to work for Xerox [Corporation]. I started out as an entry-level salesman, here in Washington, D.C., selling copiers. And as I say, the rest is history. Or would you like to know that history? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well Xerox is a--yeah, the rest of the history we'd like to know. Speaker 1: Well, I started, again, as an entry-level sales rep. Again, this is now the early seventies [1970s]. This is 1971. Yeah, January, January of 1971. And, of course, Xerox, as well as all of Corporate America was in its early days of desegregation, if you will. Or they'd like to probably call it integration or diversifying themselves. But in those days, it was basically desegregating a world that was predominately all white males. And I started out selling boxes. And my first six months was in training. And, of course, if you're in a sales environment, everything is about how well you sell. And everything is stack ranked. In other words, how you perform. Well, my first job as a sales trainee, I was number one in the country. I was the best sales performer in the country at that time, which got me promoted to a sales rep. And again, after one year of selling, I was tops, not only in my branch, but in my region, but in the country. I was in the top ten, I think I was, in the country. Also, what was going on in those days, my activism, if you will, my, my leadership. My, my polit--politics began to, to exert itself. Those were the 'I'm black and I'm proud' days of big Afros and platform shoes of the early seventies. And I had all of the above. And I was very active in trying to organize the, the few black employees that we had around the notion of self help and personal development and, and group development. So we would host, have meetings in my home, my apartment, if you will, about helping the, the new sales trainees to learn the craft of selling because I, since I was pretty good at it. We would talk to the people in administration about the, the fastidiousness and the discipline necessary to with being a good administrators. We would talk to the service people about how important it was to, to take pride in their craft and make sure that, that when our guys went out to, to service equipment, we were the best we could be. You mentioned earlier about the problems of race. Well, they had what they called 'tan territories.' In other words, they put black people in areas where they felt black people would buy machines. And we couldn't go into some of the areas. I mean we challenged that and they broke that up. And we stopped having those tan territories. And the tan torries--territories were, became desegregated, if you will. And we could do that. But I was active in organizing the black, blacks at Xerox. And that was another interesting part of the thing. But anyway, from, from--I became a salesman, full time. And again, I was on the top. And they said, "Well, let's make you a specialist." So I became a specialist, and I was the number one specialist in the country. I was selling the, the bigger machines, if you will. They call the duplicators in those days, and I was number one again at that, which says, "Now I got to train him to be manager." Story_ID: 2456 Speaker 1: In the meantime, this whole political activism was going on. And we, we created an organization called 'The Corporate Few.' In other words, there were a few black people in, in Corporate America, so we called ourselves the 'Corporate Few.' And that was a regional organization of blacks in Xerox [Corporation]. Other regions had different names, if you will. MAME [Metropolitan Area Minority Employees], up in the Northeast region. BABE and LABE on the West Coast [California]--Bay Area Black Employees, Los Angeles Area Black Employees. Oh, I forget what was it called? CARI [Concerned Association of Rochester, Inc.] in, in Rochester [New York]. Had another name in the Midwest, another in the South. I forget all the names, to tell you the truth. I am getting old. But anyway -- Speaker 2: These are national groups of Xerox employees (unclear)? Speaker 1: Correct. I was one of the earlier formers of that. I was one of the creators of the Mid-- Mid-Atlantic Region. And then we began to band together. And then we created a national organization. Well, again, God would step in, as I believe, let me tell you that story. I guess it has some interest. We were, we had formed our little, we were beginning to form our little group in the, in the Mid-Atlantic region. And I was instrumental in calling a meeting of all the black employees in the Mid-Atlantic states up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the mid-seventies [1970s]. And we had a hundred employees--we had a, no, we had two hundred and ninety-some employees in the Mid-Atlantic region at that time. And we figured if we could get a hundred to come, it'd be a major statement, get a third of the group there. Maybe it was four hundred, or a quarter of the group. I forget the exact number, but it was a--if we could a hundred, that was our goal. Well, all but twelve employees showed up. And of all the black employees in mid-Atlantic region, all but twelve showed up. And it was an incredible outpouring. And, of course, it scared the daylights out of senior management cause now, all these blacks are converging. And they heard about it. They knew about it. And all kinds of things were swirling in the corporate hierarchy about potential unionization and, you know, black power groups going on. It was just a amazing experience. So the next thing I know, I'm being summoned by senior management to try and inquire, to understand what was going on, to explain that. And all we said was, "We're just trying to help the black employees be the best employees they can be. And, therefore, make Xerox the best company it could be." Nobody could argue with that. But there was still a lot of concern, if you will. Story_ID: 2457 Speaker 1: Then I get summoned to Rochester [New York] to say, "Okay, now we're going to make this specialist a manager." And when I get up there, they start--I get a visit by the, the President of [Xerox Corporation's] U.S. Operations, a man by the name of David Kearns. And he asked me to come to his office. And, of course, he's the President of U.S. Operations and I'm a, a lowly trainee. I said, "Okay. Of course, I'm going to go." Training to be Manager. So I go to his office. And he asks me the question. He says, "Kent, I may as well be candid. We don't want this national meeting that you've planned and can you call it off." And I'm sitting there. I didn't know what he was talking about. I said, "What national meeting?" He said, "It's our understanding"--he's there with the President of--the Vice President of Personnel, Doug Reid, the two of them now in his office. Now, I'm on the twenty-ninth floor of the tallest building in Rochester. And again, I'm training to be a manager. I'm on my third year in the company. This man's President of U.S. Operations, so he's the biggest thing that I know in the company. And he says, "We want you to call the meeting off." I said, "Tell why you want me to do that?" First of all, I didn't know what he was talking about. He says, "There's some concerns that senior management has." I said, "Well, I can't do that." He says, "Why not?" I said, "Because I didn't call the meeting," which is true. First of all, I didn't know what it was about. So therefore, I know I didn't call it (laughter). So he says, he says, "Who can?" So I said, "Well, lets assume we call this meeting off. What's in it for us, the black employees?" "Well we'd be wiling to do a number of things to help our, our mutual interest in seeing to it that black employees can, can rise." I said, "Okay, that's fair." I said, "But I still can't call it off." And he says, "Who can?" I said, "The council." Now, you got to realize I'm making this up as we go (laughter) 'cause I don't know what this guy's talking about. I said, "The council." And he says, "Okay, who's on the council?" Well, since there was no council, I couldn't give him any names. I said to him, "Well, I think--I got to talk to"--(phone ringing) So I said, I said "The council," I said, "I'll have to talk to my colleagues on the council before I give out their names because, obviously, it could potentially affect their careers and I wouldn't want to be the one put in that position." Again, there was no council, so therefore, there were no names. So he says, "Okay, that's fair. Would you talk to them, tell them that I want to talk to them and could you arrange a meeting?" I said, that's fair. I'll see what I can do." So I go back to the hotel that night, and I call my friend Barry [Rand] up. And I say, "Barry, I met with David Kearns today." Of course, he's all excited. "What? yeah?" And he said, "What about?" I said, "Because he wants to call off the national meeting in Chicago [Illinois]." Now, again, this is my best friend. He got me the job originally. First question he says, "You didn't tell me you called a meeting in Chicago." I said, "I didn't, man." He said, "What are you talking about?" I said, "I don't know what he's talking about. Yes, but he wants to talk to the council." Of course, his first question is, "What council? Who is the council?" I said, "I'm making this up, man." So that night he knew a guy he had gone to basic sales training school with, and from Chicago. We called him, Bill Sykes. And Bill Sykes said, "Okay, I'll, I'm in to be a part of the council." He's a rep (unclear) Midwest. I knew a guy in, in New York [New York] who I'd been in a meeting with, Art Crawford. And he said, "Okay." I called him, and he said, "I'm in." He knew a guy in L. A. [Los Angeles, California], a guy by the name of Gene Ruffin. He said, "Okay, I'm in." So now we had Barry in Mid- Atlantic and I was in the Mid-Atlantic. And we both wanted to be on the council. So Barry became the representative from the region and I was the President (laughter) since I'm the man in contact, right? So, so now, I'm the President of the now new council. And the Barry's the mid-Atlantic region, even though Barry was a sales manager and I was just training to be one. Gene Ruffin in the West; Art Crawford in the Northeast; Bill Sykes in, in Chicago, and we knew--Bill and Art both knew the guy in Rochester, CARI [Concerned Association of Rochester, Inc.], Bill Hamilton. So we got hold of Bill, but nobody knew anybody in the South. We just called the Affirmative Action Manager up and said, "Hey, man, this is what we're doing. You want to be a part?" He, he, he joined, Kerney Laday. So we banded together, the six of us. There were five regions and Rochester and became this council. Story_ID: 2458 Speaker 1: So we [organized 'council' of Xerox Corporation black employee representatives] had a meeting with senior management, with David Kearns and a whole bunch of vice presidents. And we met in Chicago [Illinois] as a matter of fact. Now, again, we came in the day before cause we had to arrange it that way because we didn't even know who each other looked like (laughter) let alone--so we organized that night for the next meeting. And we had this agreement that in lieu of a national meeting, which wasn't going to happen in the first place, that none of us had called, that the company would sponsor and support black development across the board. So that means we're going to explain this to an entire leadership team. So we go to Toronto, Canada. Now, you got seven black men in the room, the six of us [Kent Amos, Barry Rand, Kerney Laday, Bill Hamilton, Gene Ruffin, Art Crawford, Bill Sykes] and the Affirmative Action Manager for U.S. Operations, John Lewis. So you got six--seven black guys in a room, and forty-five other people, all white males and the lowest one is a vice president. And the highest of us is a sales manager. So that's the dynamic, right? And also, now, it's mid-seventies [1970s]. We all got these big bushes. And jump suits (laughter) green and red and platforms. And they all in black and blue suits. The, this was an incredible view, if you just get pictures of it. I mean it's something. So we start the meeting, and David Kearns begins to explain why we were there and what had happened. And he, he left out the part where the company was going to pay for us to move around the country in something that ultimately became affectionately known as the 'Road Show,' and pay for it. And so I corrected him. I said, "You--everything was right except that part." And he said, "I didn't agree to that." I said, "Yes, you did." He said, "No, I did not agree. I know what I agreed to, and I did not agree to pay for anything." So we got into an exchange. And my buddy, Barry [Rand], chimes in, and he's still a little bit more sophisticated than I am. So he gets in and he starts to, to try and be the mediator. And Kearns dissed him completely. He just backhanded him and just said, you know, and when he did that then--I'm not going to get into what he said, but he, he dissed him and, you know. So when he did, you know, I, I went to my Vietnam thing, right? I went immediately to, you know, Mau Mau guerilla. "You out your mind," you know. I used a few choice words. "I don't know who you think you are talking to, but you ain't gonna talk to me that way." Now, I'm standing up in this room with my finger--black folks have a tendency to do this finger thing. I learned that from my father. So I got my finger in the president's face, telling him, you know, "how a little short MF he is." And again, there're forty-five in this place with them. And I said, "This meeting is over." So, I'm starting to leave. Ain't nobody walking but me, right? So I had my boy, Barry, "Barry, come on." So all of us leave the room, the six black guys. And we go into a stairwell. So we're sitting in a stairwell in a Hyatt Hotel in Toronto, Canada. And the first thing we ask is, "I was right, right?" And all my guys say, "Well, yeah, you were right, man, but we are in a stairwell, man. We gonna get fired. We ain't got no job. We all on plane tickets that are billed by Xerox so we can't even get home." I mean there's all this going on, right? So Art Crawford, the guy up in the Northeast region is six [feet] six [inches tall], darker as coal, and 280 pounds. "Art, man the door. Don't let nobody in here while we're having this meeting," right? So we get this knock on the door. And it's John Lewis. It's the Affirmative Action Manager. We said, "What happened, John?" He says, "Y'all walked out, and believe me, there was complete silence." And he says, "And every dude in the room, looked over at me." He said, "I think I'm a go join the brothers." He says, "I didn't want to be the one to catch this," right? So now, you got these seven dudes sitting in there. And we're trying to figure out what we're going to do. We figured we're going to get--all get fired. They got to do the class action lawsuit. We're doing all this right. Then there comes another knock on the door. And it was Bob [Reiser], oh, Bob. What's Bob's last name? I forget, but anyway, he was Vice President of Field Operations. He was everybody's boss ultimately in the room except the guy from Rochester [David Kearns]. And he's about this tall [indicates a short height], right? He op--you know, Art opens the door. Art's 6' 6", 280 pounds and we got Bob whose 5' 9" or something and a 140 pounds, standing in this doorway. And he says, "Can I come in?" And he's shaking and carrying on. We said, "Yeah, come on in." So he comes in, and he says, "After we left, cause he was in the first meeting. He was in the first meeting, and my Regional Vice President, Bob Pavelka's in the first meeting. So the few that were in there said to, to David, he was wrong. He was flat out wrong. He did agree. And so they all convinced him that he was wrong, and that his conduct was wrong. He said, "You were offensive to him, and if you really want this to work, we got to make this thing work." He says, so he says, David--so I said, now, of course, now, I'm, I'm empowered. And I said, "Oh, he wants to apologize, right?" "Yes." "Then tell him to come in my office and apologize." In other words, come into the stairwell, right? So he said he wanted us to come back to the room. I said, "No, tell him to come in here and apologize." It turns out, Kearns is standing outside the door. And he did come in. And he sat down on the step next to me and apologized to our group. We shook hands and became friends to this day. We're still very good friends. He's been a mentor and a friend and, and from that experience, we went on to shape--I ultimate--that's how I became a vice president so young in my career. Story_ID: 2459 Speaker 1: I became, you know, you're friendly with and mentored by the most powerful man of the company [Xerox Corporation Vice President of U.S. Operations, David Kearns], it does help your career. Make no mistake about that. It does help your career, and particularly when you perform well. So I go on to become a sales manager. And I, like I said, I was number one as a sales trainee. I was in the top ten as a sales rep, number one sales specialist. I went on to become a sales manager, and I was in the top ten with that. And I became a branch manager. I was number one again in the country, again. I became a product specialist for the biggest new product of its day. I was number one at that. So when you perform, it makes it easy for your 'Godfather' to look out for you. At the same time, I'm still running and building the black organization [National Black Employees Association] inside the company that had become bigger and bigger and stronger and stronger. And I was its titular head. So what the company was trying to figure out is, "How do you get this guy out of that job?" So they figured they'd make me a vice president. So, I get the call, and they want to make, make Vice President of Affirmative Action, diversity. Of course, I'm flying high as the number one branch manager in the country. And I'm saying, "I don't want to do that crap. I'm gonna stay where I am. I want to stay in this field. I want to move on." So David says, "No, I want you to come work for me." There's another one of those experiences in life you realize and you remember how things change. And I said, "No, I'm not gonna do it." So I'm sitting in my office up in [New] Jersey, and in walks Doug Reid, Vice President of Personnel for the company [Xerox Corporation]. I said, "What are you doing here?" I said, "David sent you down here, right? In other words, he wants me to come take this job" He said--just handed me a, an envelope. Never said a word, other than, "How you doing?" So I take the envelope. "What's this?" He says, "See you later," and he leaves. (Laughter) He just gives me this envelope, right? I said, "You flew all the way down here to give me an envelope?" "See you later, Kent." And he's gone, right? So I took the envelope home to my wife, still sealed. And I gave it to her. I said, "Look, David wants me to move to Rochester [New York]" and all these kind of things. And she said, "I don't want to live in Rochester." I said, "Neither do I." "I don't want to go to Rochester." "Neither do I." So I'm sitting down there eating and she opens up the letter. And looks over at me and says, "Well, when are you going to Rochester?" (Laughter) I said, "What did you read in that thing?" So I take it. Now, this is 1977. I got a seventy thousand dollar raise salary. This is 1977. I went to Rochester (laughter). Make no mistake about it. My father said I was stupid, but I really am not stupid. I went to Rochester, right? And I went to work for the man. And I ultimately became a vice president, and I was the first African American to start out as an entry-level employee at Xerox to become a vice president. And I went on to help shape--I was the architect, if you will, of the, of the Xerox diversity strategy over the next eight years. And it became the model of diversity for American industry and a lot of people credit me with being the, the architect, if you would, if you will, of the diversity of American industry. And by the time I left Xerox, again eight years later from my first day as a vice president, there were--I was the first to become a vice president. There were seventeen black vice presidents--black and other minority vice presidents. And I was, of course, I started as the highest and when I left I was like fourteenth on the list. Many of them were higher than me. But that didn't matter. The real issue was making sure that we had the kind of richness and diversity in talent being explored. So that, that Xerox experience was very good. It also gave me a lot of opportunity to understand and appreciate money. Again, from the God force and the mission, right, I began to understand how to work at the highest levels of thinking in management for the corporate industrial, military industrial complex, if you will. Story_ID: 2460 Speaker 1: So at this you're, you're, as you said, you're married now. On a, at what point did, did you get married at? Speaker 2: Well, actually that was all--I've been married twice. My first wife, I got married right out of, right out college. And then that was her that I was referring to. And then we got divorced. And then I got remarried some 21 years ago to my current wife [Carmen Amos]. And we actually dated for a number of years prior to that. So we've been together 30 years, my current wife and I have been together for, for 30 years. Actually, 30, yeah, 30 years. We did 9 years of dating and 30, 21 years of marriage. So we've been together--no, 31 years. I thought-- Anyway, we've been 21 years and been together 31 years. Story_ID: 2461 Speaker 1: So anyway, so, anyway, so, I, I--while I was at Xerox [Corporation] and I got tired of--by this time I had gone from Rochester [New York] to Stamford [Connecticut] so I was in Stamford. I really had gotten tired of being away from home. I really--I had all this power as a vice president and I still had this notion of activism and participation in community. And I was doing that from my base at Xerox. I had been fortunate, for example, to have had the opportunity to get a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Image Award for my work as a corporate leader. And that was given by the President of--then, President of the NAACP, Ben Hooks. And we felt good about that, but it was really, you know, I worked for a lot of people and a lot of people really earned it. But I subsequently got another one from Kweisi Mfume, which I'll speak to in a moment. But anyway, and the only thing about that is I'm, I understand I'm the only person to have received the President's Award--they only give out one a year, by two different Presidents of the NAACP. That could be right and it could be wrong. I don't know. Somebody has told me that. But anyway, so I said I really wanted to go home. I wanted to take this power that I now have, the ability to use it differently than I'd been--done up to now. And so I did. I talked my boss into allowing me to go home and move my business, my, my operations of the, of the company to Washington [District of Columbia]. And he said, fine. Just move it down there. Story_ID: 2462 Speaker 1: And that starts the whole next segment of my life, the whole next chapter, if you will. And that's where the children come in. Are you interested in that? Speaker 2: Well, yes, we are (laughter). Speaker 1: Assumed you would be. Speaker 2: Yes (unclear). Speaker 1: So we, we--I moved down here [Washington, D.C.]. This was now the early 1980's, 1982 I think it was, '81 [1981], '82 [1982], somewhere around there. I was a Vice President of Xerox [Corporation]. I was the highest ranking Xerox employee in the Mid-Atlantic states. So now I come home. You know, local boy makes good. And I come now. And my, my father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] and mother [Gladys Capps Amos] can finally say, "Well, I guess you're not as dumb as I thought you were. And you're not as messed up as you were as a kid." And, you know, family made good so to speak. Fa--son made good so to speak. So anyway, I come back here. And my son at the time, actually, it's my wife's [Carmen Amos] child. I, the reason why I didn't want to talk earlier about some of my Vietnam, there's some painful--I had an experience in Vietnam. I can't have children. And so I can't bring children to term. Biologically, whatever happened to me because of, again, the things I was telling you, all my children, all the ones I have conceived have all died prematurely. Anyway, so my wife had two children, my current wife had two children from a previous marriage. My son [Wesley] was going into the, into the eleventh grade at the time and my daughter [Debbie] going into the sixth grade. So we now are here in this house and where you gonna put the kids in school? It wasn't so much where you put Debbie, our daughter, because she could go to a pretty decent school not too far from here. But the real question is where you put a boy whose always been in a suburban environments? How do you drop him into an inner-city high school with infrastructure? Everybody says that's dangerous. So we went over to a high school near where we live here, Wilson High School, which is one of the better high schools in the city, at least it was, it's considered one of the better ones. And it was then. But there'd been a shooting there the weekend before. And so when my wife heard that, she says, "Forget it. The boy going to private school." I said, "Well, let's at least talk to the principal." "No, I don't want to do that. So she left." Never saw the principal. We came home. And, "What's the problem?" She says, "If this is one of the better schools they have. And they had a shooting there, my son is going to private school," right? Okay. So I said to our son, I said, "Wesley, where do you want to go? He said, I want to go to public school with the brothers." You know, he wanted to be out there with the boys. So we went over to the high school where I went to school, [Calvin] Coolidge [Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and found out that the coach of the basketball team--our son is six [feet] two [inches tall], played a little basketball--was a classmate of mine from our Coolidge days. And Frank [Williams] says, "Look, Kent, I will look out for Wesley. Maybe he'll make some friends. Maybe, Carmen, your wife, will say that's okay. And he can go here in the fall." Story_ID: 2463 Speaker 1: I took my son [Wesley] over to the high school [Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] where I went to school. The coach of the basketball team was a classmate of mine, Frank Williams, from my times at Coolidge. He said, "Look, Kent, I'll take care of Wesley and he'll make some friends. And maybe your wife will be okay". So we came home and proposed that our--my wife [Carmen Amos]. And she said, "I don't care what you do during the summer. He can play summer league basketball with the [Harlem] Globetrotters for all I care because in the fall, the boy going to private school." So he comes home after starting to play after school, summer league basketball and with his new friends--talking about his new friends, Darryl, Milton and T-Bone. Speaker 2: They're from private school? Speaker 1: No, they was from Coolidge. Speaker 2: From Coolidge, oh. Speaker 1: And he's, he's still not in school with them. He's playing with them after school in the summer. Darryl, Milton and T-Bone. These were all public school kids at Coolidge. "Son, what is this other child's name? T-Bone?" "Yes." "Whatever you do, boy, do not tell your mother you have a friend named T-Bone, if you have any idea that you think you going to be able to go to Coolidge in the fall. If she knows about T-Bone, forget it. What's his real, by the way?" "I don't know." "Find out, make it up, or do something. We are not going to refer to that kid at T-Bone." But again, there's a child in the house a little younger, daughter [Debbie], who knows about T-Bone and tells mother. So I get upstairs, and my wife says, "Well I understand my son now has a friend that's a steak." (Laughter) "No, dear." "The boy going to private school," right. So. "You don't know anything about him." "Son, bring your friends home." You know, I'm from that era. You bring your friends home so you can get to know them. "Dad, that's not a good idea." "Why not?" "I'm not sure you're ready for that." "Son, bring them home." "Well, okay, but it may blow the whole deal," right? So I go over the [basketball] game that night, the night he's going to bring them home to try to figure out who they are. Fight breaks out and this great big boy on my son's team started beating this kid up on the other team. He's joined by another boy, and these two boys beat up this kid on the third, on the other team. So I come home, go upstairs and sit in my library, pray to God, "Whatever you do, do not let that great big, big old boy be T- Bone." Well, I do support a prayer-answering God. So I'm sitting in the library, in walks four teenaged boys. And the first child I saw was this great, big, old boy I just saw beat somebody up. And, of course, I'm doing my 'Footsteps' [poem] thing, right? I'm saying, "You've [God] forsaken me, you've forsaken me." Here comes T-Bone. No, that was Darryl. My request was that he not be T-Bone. I got what I asked for, right? T-Bone was the second boy in the fight. And he's the second boy I see. And then there's Milton and then there's my son. So I got four, very large, teenaged boys standing in my living room. And I'm saying, okay. So I begin to engage them. I'm a fairly engaging guy, right? All right, so I'm trying to talk to these guys. Sound came back, but no words. I don't know what they was saying, right? I have no idea what these boys were saying. So I called my wife downstairs to meet them, "Come down and meet Wesley's friends." So she stopped at the kitchen, said, "Come here, I want to talk to you." I said, "Come meet Wesley's friends." "No, you come in the kitchen now." So I go in the kitchen. As I walk through the door, "The boy going to private school." I said, "Wait, (laughter) you don't know these kids. We haven't"--"Fine, let's have dinner." So we have dinner and, lo and behold, all the challenges that, that we were projecting onto them and fearing that was there, were, in fact, there. Fathers missing, grades not doing well, poor skill. I mean everything that we were--jail. All those things that we were imagining were, in fact, real in one form or another. So the question then becomes, "What do you do?" Of course, my wife's answer was, (laughter) "The boy going to private school." And then you shut the door and turn your back on it, right? Story_ID: 2464 Speaker 1: My sensibilities, my training, my God force, all those things say, no [not to turn away his son's troubled teenaged friends]. So instead, I hired them. I'm a vice president, in those days, of a Fortune 50 company [Xerox Corporation], if I can't give, you know, a bunch a kids a summer job, who can? Now, admittedly I had nothing I could do with them. So I gave them to the [basketball] coach [at Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Frank Williams]. I said, "I will pay them to be on your basketball team." So they probably violated any chance of being (laughter) for college and whatever, but the truth is that was their job, right? So they went to, to go there to be with the coach. In the meantime, I also paid a teacher at the school, through Xerox, to be their tutor. And I surround them with another set of kids and we had this summer program. And Howard [Brown]--what's Howard's last name? Interestingly enough, from that very early experience, Howard, the, the teacher guy, now runs all extracurricular training for all the high schools in the city [Washington, D.C.], actually all the schools in the city. And he started working under us, twenty some years ago. But anyway, Howard Brown. So anyway, so now these kids are going through training, working for the coach. But at the end of my work day, I'd pick them up and would bring them home. And not surprising, these kids had the same hopes and visions and desires and capacities as my own child. And we said by the end of the summer, "Since you're going to be our friends--our son's friends, you're going to be our sons too. And we will house you, cloth you, feed you, educate you, give you everything that we have to offer to allow you to have the same opportunity for a life's outcome as our own child." And in order to save Wesley [son], we had to save Darryl, Milton and T-Bone. And then we surrounded them with another set of boys. So by the Fall of 1982, we had taken in nine teenaged boys every single day, eating. And we had a regimen, learning and training and--and over the next eleven years, from 1982 to 1993, we took in some eighty-seven children. Speaker 2: Now, when you say take in, do you mean that all these kids lived here-- Speaker 1: No. No. Speaker 2: --or what? Speaker 1: The deal was house, cloth, feed, educate. What we call "affectionate adoption." For those who needed housing because they had a bad living circumstance, they'd either live here or we would pay somebody to house them, and we did that. Those who had a decent place to live went on home. But they just came here every day where the family operated as a unit under the same set of expectations with the same enforcement mechanisms, if you will--namely me. But I had dozens of kids go off to college, dozens have graduated from college. Darryl, that first big boy who has a masters degree today. In fact, day before yesterday, we were together, he and his wife and he has two children. So we're still family. Last night I was on the phone with Milton who was the second of those three boys. He's got his masters degree and he and his wife just had their first child after eight years of marriage. Darryl has three. Milton has one. So those are grandchildren, if you will, of mine--of ours. And T-Bone is in jail. And his last job when he wasn't in jail was for me, he worked for me in the school as a custodian. And his daughter was in the school. And, unfortunately, the drugs and--he has never been able to shake that, but that's another whole story. But we've seen, you know, any number of our kids go on to college and, and be successful and get degrees and go with their lives. But we've also had the tragedies that go with that era and that, that ilk of children, if you will. Five were, were murdered. Five boys murdered--three shot, one stabbed and one hung. Speaker 2: Out of the eighty-seven? Speaker 1: Yeah, and then one committed suicide. He shot himself. And, and that's when the life thing changed again. When, when you start burying children to the tragedies of, of violence at home. And again, we, we know now that I've served in Vietnam. I understand that. But not here with your own children. So I left Xerox on a crusade to save children, and that's where I am today. I'm in that journey. I left Xerox fourteen years--fifteen years ago now, started a non-profit organization called The Urban Family Institute with the idea that, that we as learned, capable adults can create a different paradigm to save children. And that's the journey I'm on. Story_ID: 2465 Speaker 1: What makes this work? Is it just the structured environment or? Speaker 2: Well, I think what makes any, any venture successful, whether it's working with children, a corporation, the military or anything, is good planning, good leadership, well- conceived design--is the plan part well conceived? Capacities and appreciation of your colleagues whether it's the children that you're serving or the people you're working with. And again, a belief, in my estimation, of some greater force and power that you respond to, that, that you are not the end all and be all. But, but that which you're working is, that which is causing the work to happen is. So I believe if those things happen, those elements come together, you can have success. And where they don't come together, you will have failure, whether it's again a nuclear family or a big corporation. If, if you think about the, the tragedies with Enron [Corporation]. The people lost their God force and began to see themselves as the end being. That's why they do things like steal and, and--because then, 'cause self is so important. They're self absorbed, and that's what destroys that. So that element went away. And they then, they began to practice, then, bad management things. When they start making up stories. So you got a failure there whereas companies every day do extremely well. Why? Because you're--people have focus and good management and the same thing with family. So, those are the elements that have to come into play. Story_ID: 2466 Speaker 1: Is there a basic set of values that you (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I look at this whole notion of values. It's like, like, you know, like ozone. The ozone protects us from harmful rays of the sun, but yet it still lets through those rays that gives life, right? It, it does both. It lets through the positive and filters out the negative. And you don't see it. But it's there. And without it, we'd perish because we'd burn up. To me, that's what the value systems that people have--love, trust, honesty, decency, humanity, faith, charity. All those things are like human ozone. And to the extent that you learn them, and they become a part of you. You don't see them. You can't feel them. You can't touch them. But they're the filters. You know, I can hear and see the same kind of things that everybody else does, but if my filters work, I'll still be a decent, law-abiding, active person. If my filters don't work, then I perish or I do things that are destructive. So, yeah, there are a set of values and those values are extremely important to who we are and what we are. And they're the ones I described--faith, hope, charity. They, you know, they come from, of course, biblical text. But beyond that. My, my, again, you asked the question, what was my favorite saying? And unto him whom much is given, much is required [from the Book of Luke 12:48]. That's again for, and one of the things that's given to us, is this value system. Much of that has been given to me, so therefore, much is required. Story_ID: 2467 Speaker 1: So you're very appreciative of the way that you were raised? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't tell you how appreciative I--I mentioned earlier about the, the toughness of my father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.]. We talked him calling me stupid and all that. But I also said that I am the embodiment of my father. I look in the mirror now. I physically look like him. There's a picture of my father or a painting of my father in the lobby of the school [Benjamin and Gladys Amos Elementary Center, Community Academy Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.] because we named the school after my mother [Gladys Capps Amos] and father. My commitment and love, and they were fortunately here when we made that, and on that Declaration Day, February of 99 [1999]. They're both gone now, but they were here on that day. But anyway, I was walking down the hall the--not too long ago, and this guy was sitting there on a Saturday with a dance troupe. And he looked up. He said, "That's your picture up on the wall." And I kind of smiled and said, "No, that's actually my father." And there would have been a time when I'd have been offended by that. I was so proud for that, other than the fact that, you know, I'm old now that I look like my (laughter) father. But the reality of it is I'm very proud to say I'm my father's son, not only in the fact that I look like him, obviously, but I think I did pick up some of his intelligence. I'm a reasonably--I'm not smarter than he--he thought I was. And I probably, (unclear) that was--but I'm not as smart as he is or was or my brother or a lot of people, but I think I have a good mind. I think I use it effectively toward again, service. So I'm fortunate to have had that. I've been trained well by them and the military industrial complex and, and Delaware State [University, Dover]. I'll tell anybody that Delaware State was extremely important. I said I, I saw my son, Darryl, over the weekend. The reason why I saw him, and he drove me up to Delaware State where they were celebrating the, the retirement of the, of the most recent President [Dr. William B. DeLauder] where I'm an active alumnus. And I drove up an hour and a half--well, he drove up a hour and a half up, and a hour and a half back for an hour there just to go the reception saying, "I appreciate what you're doing, not for me, but for the next generation." So you commit yourself to those things that make you possible. So I, I'd tell anybody that Delaware State was important to me in shaping the man that sits here and Dr. McShoe, and Dr. Wander and Dr. Williams and all the people, men and women alike, who were at Delaware State. And Mrs. Marian Pride who was my second grade teacher, is a member of the Shiloh Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.] where I'm a deacon. I see her on a regularity at church. And every time I see her, I tell her how much I appreciate what she did as, as emblematic of all those who, who taught me in my, my primary and secondary schools in the D.C. public schools. I talk--I think about my military experience and the men and women who made a difference to me there. And my Xerox [Corporation] experience and both those I worked with and those I worked for and those who I served as a, in a leadership role. So, yeah, the man that sits here today who is being interviewed for this piece is a composite. I'm a mosaic. I'm a tapestry. I'm not one thing, and I'm not one person. And it's certainly, the least of which, you know, the stitching may be mine or some stitch along the way--I guess the total stitching is God's. But, but, you know, we're all composites. Well put it this way, I know I am a composite. And I am very, very grateful to be the composite that I am. And I am thankful and appreciate, certainly of mother and father, Benjamin and Gladys Amos, but more importantly, to all those who touched my life, for however they did, to see to it that I am who I am. Story_ID: 2468 Speaker 1: I want to backtrack a little to the late eighties [1980s], early nineties [1990s], Washington, D.C. was known as a--the, the highest murder rate in the country and the crack epidemic was going on. And people were being shot, you know, at an unbelievable rate. [Mayor] Marion Barry spoke before the National Press Club [Wasington, D.C.] and was trying to reassure the press, he said, "These aren't, these aren't murders. These are just some killers," he said, in editorial report. The National Guard was--people were calling for the National Guard to be brought in to deal with it. The Admini--the City Administration issued new guns to the police that shot rounds faster than the others, hoping that that would stave this thing off. It was really the worst, one of the worst places in the United States in the early nineties. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And mostly teenagers getting killed. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Young men. So I mean how did, I mean that, that's what, that was--it was big challenge to start doing what you were doing in those days? Speaker 2: It was. And as I said, we lost some to that, that world of violence. A seventeen-year-old boy shot to death. Sixteen-year-old boy hung. Nineteen-year-old boy stabbed to death. Twenty-eight-year-old boy shot to death. A 22-year old boy shot to death. A 25-year old boy killed himself by, by gun fire. Speaker 1: Were they all involved in some sort of--was it gang activity, drug activity or what? Speaker 2: No, it varied. The boy who was stabbed was playing basketball, and got into an argument with a kid. The boy goes home and gets knife and stabs him out of frustration (phone ringing). No, all, all the kids were not involved with drugs or violence or in terms of gang warfare. A couple of them were. One, the first boy, Andre, to die was involved with drug trafficking, but wanted out. And, and his way out required him to testify in matters that he was privileged to. And that got him killed. That was the first one 'cause I had a different set of sensibilities then. I would not put a child in that risk today. The boy that was hung wouldn't sell drugs, and the drug dealers didn't him to take the leadership for taking kids away. So they hung him on his sixteenth birthday, pinned a note to him, 'Happy Birthday.' So that was gang related, not because he did it, but because others who wanted him to do, and he wouldn't do it. A boy who was in college. He was standing in front of a 7-Eleven [convenience store], was gunned down. I don't know this to be factual, but I suspect there was some drug trafficking involving him, his, his demise. But again, he was in his junior year in college and away from here, but we still buried him. The last boy, who was actually, Tyrone, was over his girlfriend's house. And he gets into an argument with a boy over the phone. It's that value issue again. And, and the way the boy decided to, to solve the argument was to shoot him as he was, you know, a block away from his house--ambushed him and assassinated him. That's because a kid had a different value system, and lost another kid's--took another kid's life. He was twenty-eight years old, but that's still very young. Then two lives were destroyed, not only, of course, Tyrone, but the boy who killed him as well. And, and that's really why I launched on this mission of trying to structurally figure out how we're going to save children. I mentioned that, again, we were fortunate to have two NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Image Awards and the second one was for our work with children, by Kweisi Mfume. I'll never forget because two of my children went to accept that award on our behalf. And I only comment because all during this time when we had the kids in the house, Ron Brown, the former Secretary of Commerce, who died tragically in a plane wreck, lived next door. So Ron was, and I were, were good friends. Needless to say as neighbors, but also he was very active with our kids as well. And because of his outreach, many people in the political world and my outreach from the business world, would come through this home. And I likened it to, you know, my home when I was a child when I'd mentioned the, the Thurgood Marhsalls and the Coleman Holmeses and the Charlie [Charles] Drews and the--all those greats who would come through our home. Well, my kids were exposed to the Jesse Jacksons and the Mayor and the Chief of Police and judges and lawyers and they were exposed to a, you know--Rosa Parks and Dorothy Height and the great icons of our today. And I've had our kids meet Oprah [Winfrey] and be--Darryl and I were on Oprah's show. April went to see Oprah's show and met her and I mean all kinds of our kids have been exposed to so many people. We have a wall here in our home of people of note who are on covers of magazines who are friends of ours, who at one time or another have passed through these doors. Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King spending the night here and kids seeing her. I never knew Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], but I certainly know Mrs. King and her family. And my kids were exposed to her and, and the great--legacy that she represents. So, so, so that's what we passed on. And because of that, we were able to, again, to give these their own ozone, to give them their value systems that for the most part saved them. Again, we have had some, some exceptions. T-Bone is one of those. He's not the only one, but he's certainly one of those. Story_ID: 2469 Speaker 1: On that note, [Reverend] Eugene Rivers in-- Speaker 2: New York? Speaker 1: --Boston [Massachusetts], you know, who talked, who has a program called the Ten--he has a group called the Ten Point Coalition, the National Ten Point Coalition-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --based on values, and they do community organizing. It's usually ministers doing this out in the community. He said that he--when he first started he said there was only--there was "no such thing as a bad boy or girl." (unclear) Speaker 2: Well, that, that goes back before him. I mean Father [Edward Joseph] Flanagan I guess made that, that phrase. Speaker 1: Well, he believed that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I agree. Speaker 1: He believed it, but he, he said, he--he thinks he said, "Well,"--he's changed that to about one in ten probably belong in jail. He said after he was threatened and he saw things done in the community. (Unclear) started, he said, "There're about nine out of ten you could actually give a job to or help get out of school and do things with." But there's about, there's a hardcore 10 percent I guess that he doesn't think is--is going to need some intense--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Well, I, I still believe in Father Flanagan's proposition, but at the same time, I agree with him. So, and I'm not, not talking out of both sides of my mouth. I think a child is born in Father Flanagan's truism. But it doesn't take long for them to become Brother Rivers's--Reverend Rivers's truism as well because other forces begin to shape them in the womb. When they have drugs ingested into their system because their parents or, or their mother is, is on drugs. In the womb, when, when violence is going on around them and what happens in the prenatal state begins to affect their lives. And when they come out, very early on, they're in poverty and pain and deprivation. All those things begin to affect them. So it doesn't take them long (throat clear) excuse me. It doesn't take long to get them into that 10 percent margin, if you will or whatever the margin turns out to be. But I still maintain, they were born okay or they have the potential to be born okay. Now, the reason I believe that is also why I do the work I do. And what we're trying to do is to create a paradigm of structures that make that, that birth different so that we reduce the ten to the one, in other words from 10 percent to 1 percent. I suspect you can't do a 100 percent. But if I had my goal, it would be a 100 percent, but this reality says, "We'll take some, some casualties." But I think we can take the ten down if we approach how we affect change in those communities. And that's the kind of work that I do every day. That's why I have a school [Community Academy Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 2470 Speaker 1: Now, you've done some other--well, the values of the youth you worked on through your own activities here in your home, but the school. Talk about the school. Now, how did the school [Community Academy Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.] come about? Speaker 2: Well, what happened was, I kept--when children died. When the boys were starting to die, I realized that this is a bigger structural problem than doing whatever thing we were doing in this house where everybody says it was so wonderful. But if I got to bury a child, let alone six, then what I'm doing ain't that great because I'm dealing with six who died, not the others who didn't. There's something wrong, structurally, in my estimation. It goes back to the Father [Edward Joseph] Flanagan [Reverend Eugene] Rivers analogy I just referred to. So I left Xerox [Corporation] with the notion that we have to create a structural, systemic paradigm that gives those children who could be born into that kind of circumstance, a different way out. I created the Urban Family Institute on the premise that you and I, Matthew [Hickey, videographer] and others, are the product of a 24-7, 365, X-number of year paradigm. I'm older than both of you. So therefore--and I guess Matthew may be the youngest. So between the three of us who are sitting here right now--but all three of us have a certain level of success in our worlds, in our domains. And the same forces that help us create that are the same. Fairly decent adults in our lives, I'm sure, and I don't know either one of you, but I'm sure in both of your experiences, you had some adults in your lives that helped you through the difficult years of your life, regardless of the era and time or the place you grew up. So I know that. I know that you had a reasonable amount training, professionally, and, and non- professionally. In other words, education that, that you got to get you where you are. I know you're reasonably well nourished because you, neither one of you are emaciated. So you, you doing okay. I mean, so I know there are things that happened to you that happened to me to see to it that we had an opportunity to be where we are today. And that's what I think is a structural question that can be put in place--placed for people who don't have that. If you go to some of the public housing communities of our society. And talk about Chicago [Illinois]. You're from Chicago. I'll never forget going to Robert Taylor Homes for the first time and Cabrini Green and Ida B. Wells and Henry Horner [Chicago Housing Authority projects]. Those were training grounds, development grounds for dysfunction. And I told Dr. Henry Cisneros who was then the Secretary of HUD [Housing and Urban Development], when I first went there. Something happen? Speaker 1: (unclear) Speaker 2: Oh, okay. So when I talked to Henry Cisneros who was head--Secretary of HUD at the time, and he would say, "What do you got going on here? You have the federal establishment, food stamps providing food, which was the agriculture. HHS [United States Department of Health and Human Services] providing welfare, part of education and the public education system. The worst high schools in the city, the worst junior high schools in the city, worst elementary schools in the city, all fed these, these kids. That's criminal. That is absolutely criminal. When all our government systems come into play to produce, knowingly produce dysfunction--because if you come out of those systems, you're going to be dysfunctional. And we know that. So I said, and I still say, that we can use existing resources under a different set of rules and produce different kinds of outcomes. I hear people who grew up in public housing say, "I am proud that I grew up in public housing. My children grew up in public housing, my grand"--that's not a proud statement to make. Now, that is to say they are bad people. And I don't say that. But it's a distortion of what they should be believing in. That's why the--public housing was not designed to be a generational thing. It was designed to be transitional. I know that specifically because [uncle and Massachusetts Senator] Ed Brooke was a part of the creation of it. Eddie, when he created public housing as we know it today, it was all about a safety net, not about permanent housing. And unfortunately, it became permanent housing. So I think there's a way of approaching, structurally, how we approach the dysfunctional communities, the poor, if you will. And we'll come up with a different outcome. Story_ID: 2471 Speaker 1: Now, what can, what can I do or another man do, you know, we had the Million Man March in '95 [October 16, 1995] and people went to [Washington] D.C. and pledged that they would do things. And people went back to, to communities and tried different things and all. What can-- would you, aside from, you know, you've got a school [Community Academy Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.] now going and some other things going, what can an individual do? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's the whole notion of each one, reach one that, that comes to mind. I was also at the Million Man March. I happened to know and participated with a number of things with, with Minister [Louis] Farrakhan. He's been here to our home on a number of occasions, been to my school, visited with our kids. He's been here for dinner and other things. And so I can count him as one of my friends. And I'm pleased to say that. We've had a number of discussions about things as friends do where they differ on issues. And I certainly differ with some things that he has done, and I'm sure he's differed with some things I've done. But, you know, it's about where we have common interests. And we both have a common interest in what happens differently. But I think what he was trying to do there, the Million Man March, is the same thing I would answer here is, is to implore people to reach out and touch one. And then collectively. I, I take it to another level. I think, as much as one may think that one can make a difference, as I said earlier, I am a mosaic. And my work is a mosaic. People point to the one. I, I'm the one that holds the statue, that gets the award. But the reality of it is, and I totally recognize, that it's a whole host of people that make it possible for the award to be given. Firstly, my wife [Carmen Amos]. I mean I can't do everything I've done over these years unless my wife has been a partner in that. And she's always unsung. My children, my family, my, my colleagues to the extent that our school now, well, is recognized for having the best test scores in the city [Washington, D.C.]. People look to me. "Kent, you've done a great job." Well, the reality of it is, I did the least job. Yeah, I put people in positions, but they're the ones who did it. And most important, the kids did it. They're the ones who took the test. I didn't take the test. The kids did. But yet, they'll point to me. The point I'm making is that, that we work collectively-- You work with your friends and one or two others and, and you have more assets to be able to apply to the circumstances. Again, Vietnam taught us how to not fight a war. We don't fight wars that any way. We, we fight Desert Storm. We fight this Enduring Freedom or this other thing they just did in Iraq. Entirely different than Vietnam. We have overwhelming force, overwhelming power. So you bring enough assets to the battle to win it. We didn't do that in Vietnam and, of course, we lost. So I think that's the same thing here. You find yourself in a circumstance in your community where you see a problem, you got to gather the resources necessary to attack it. And that may be two people on one child or ten people on a family or twenty on a neighborhood. I don't know. But you have to organize yourselves and your assets to attack the problem, and then collectively, we have a chance of winning. Individually, we can't win to tell you the truth. Speaker 1: I think you're very humble in this regard, but you obviously, have great management skill. And you also have a vision that not everybody--it's not as consistently displayed in everybody apparently or we wouldn't have a crisis, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't disagree with that. I think, and again, that's part of the blessing question. I think we're all blessed with certain skills. So, so you--if, if you see yourself or you appreciate yourself as one who has a certain view of things, that so-called visioning thing, then, then that's what you do. And you do that effectively. But then, then you have to join with people who have a different view or different set of skills. And, again, it's still a collective that makes it happen. And, and if you don't bring the collective to bear, it still won't work. The vision will perish. They say, they say that a people without a vision will perish. Well, people who have a vision, but have no way to deliver it will also perish (laughter). You got to be able to turn the vision into a reality. So it's a combination of things. Moses may have been wonderful, but without Joshua, he'd have been nothing. You, you got to have Joshua. Joshua made Moses who he is. Joshua, Moses' standing up on the mountain with the tablets in his hand, but who was organizing the people? Joshua. You know, no, no, the question, no question that, that--and Jesus had power. But he also had John and Peter and Matthew and, you know, he had a whole bunch of folks carrying that message out, you know. So it's, so that's what I'm talking about. You really got to have a collective, always, you know, always find a collective. And, yes, there may be somebody at the top, but you'll find others around them to make that top work. Story_ID: 2472 Speaker 1: And from of a cultural perspective, does, does your school [Community Academy Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.] and, and does your approach to this--is it necessarily Christian or is it, is it--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, no, we're a public school. So therefore, I was having this conversation last week, as a matter of fact with some friends of mine in the Christian community. People say, "Kent"--say, "What do you--how do you bring faith and spirituality to your children?" And, and the answer is that, that, that structurally, it's illegal. And, therefore, I make no effort to. But when they were in the house, when I had every opportunity, I learned how to be who I am by, again, through this mosaic creation process. And part of that is this faith thing. And if you go back to faith traditions, whether it's, whether it's Muhammad or Jesus or Moses or Buddha, you find all these people who talk about one's relationship with their fellow human beings. And none of them talk about churches, by the way, structural things. They all talk about how you treat your fellow human being. And you always humble yourself that way. You are all, all ser--servant leaders. Muhammad, Buddha, Mahatma Gandhi, anybody, all servant leaders. The most enduring forces in all of antiquity are people who have been servant leaders. And, and they all have faith or represent some faith. And that's what we try to do. We try to example a life--that's the value thing again. We try to example and teach and inculcate into our children their human ozone, so that at the end of the day, when I'm not around or somebody else, all adults not around, and the choice is before them, that ozone, that human ozone I keep referring to, can kick in. And you can do that in a public school setting. And we do do that by, again, trying to teach the things that are important for their, their ultimate survival, both academically and non-academically. Story_ID: 2473 Speaker 1: This, maybe you, you can comment on this is that, when people in community are at, communities today are asking about problems in the community, they mention the violence and drugs and that sort of thing, but they also mention the general incivility of, of the neighborhood. People not speaking to each other-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: -- people ride by and throwing a box of chicken bones out the window on the ground, you know, I mean, youth and adults. Adults calling kids, well, cursing at kids, calling them all the most vile names that you'd hear in a bar in the old days-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: -- you know, and they're talking to a two-year old on a bus, you know. And, and that culture is not only just in the street or in the bar anymore, it's in the--it's on television. It's in music. Speaker 2: Well, well, again, the, the cultural icon transformation systems are the medias that are available to a given generation. And we have a, a wide variety of them on very powerful media. But they're not new to how it's done. I mean books in the past were the medium for doing it. Today, it's television and (unclear) videos. So there's more of them, but they're all man created. And you can control all of them. In this house, for example, when we had the kids, the rule of the house was simple. You could watch as much television as you like, see anything you want to see as long as we all agree to see it. And for every hour of television you watched, you had to do some reading of something that had a counterbalance to it. Now, we all had to agree. So therefore, I had some veto power, but I had no more veto power than everybody else cause somebody else could veto us, what we want to see. But it, you know, so therefore, we had to have a unanimous decision to watch something. Now, I was always going to veto a destructive view unless--and I didn't always veto it--unless I was prepared to provide an alternative to the destructive view. Because the reality of it is, they're going to see--they can go sit someplace else and see it. So therefore, to just duck it would be foolish on my part. I got to help them interpret it and understand it. So therefore, what we would do is say, "Okay, we'll watch, you know, Snoop Doggy Dogg [rap artist]," as much as I deplored it. But then we'd have a discussion around it. I'd give them other kinds of things. I'd show them other kinds of men, other kinds of, of music offerings that would say this is just, you know, one piece. So they could make a rational decision whether that filth and that garbage that they wanted, that they were being exposed to would be something they would interpret in a positive way. Okay, but now, before we go too far, we got to make sure we understand that Enron [Corporation scandal] is anarchistic, disgusting behavior. And it's violent behavior 'cause, because of what those men did and women to a certain, at Enron, some people died. They had a whole--domestic violence that somebody may have died or people got frustrated and committed suicide, that never attribute it to them. But that's violent behavior, and, and that's across the board. When you see our politicians and our, and our government and, and business leaders doing things that affect the broader masses, that's anarchistic behavior. So that's no different than, than, again, those eighty-year old grand mar--parents receiving monies from drug dealers on a corner. We portray them differently, but the reality of them, one may have a greater impact on our culture than the other. So when people are deified, as some corporate leaders are because they make so much money, and at the same time are destructive, what do the kids learn? So they learn bad things from a lot of different places, not just rap music and the dark side. They, they see it from the bright light of public view. Hey, all our politicians aren't squeaky clean in terms of their impact on our humanity. And, and that's what we're dealing with. Story_ID: 2474 Speaker 1: Okay, there was a lot of discussion in the late sixties [1960s] and seventies [1970s] about creating a-- especially, after--well, at the beginning of the Black Power movement, I guess, people started like looking back at Black History and cultures as some kind of a alternative to, you know, some of the destructive things that kids were learning in, in popular culture. And they formed in, independent black schools and there're quite a few of them that still exists today. I know there's some even here in, in Washington, D.C. Is, is there a, there is a cultural component to your school [Community Academy Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.] program or you--? Speaker 2: Well, I think there is diversity component that is important to all of us. The reality of it is, and again I go back to my God force question, if, if the forces that created who we are wanted only giraffes, we'd all be giraffes. But, in fact, we have giraffes, we have elephants, we have lions, we have ants, we have birds, we have fish, we have alligators, we have, we have black, we have brown, we have yellow. We have all kinds of hues. We have Asians; we have Africans; we have Latin Americans; we have people with bald head, people with, you know, one complexion, with ruddy skin, people--there's a reason for that. And that is to, to enjoy the richness of our diversity because they all bring something to the mosaic. So the culture is humanity informed by a particular strand within that humanity, which is good. So we celebrate that which we have. We have Latinos in our building. So therefore, we celebrate Latinos. We have blacks in our building. Therefore, we celebrate the black experience. We don't have a lot of white kids in our building. But we celebrate that which they bring to the table any way to again, build the mosaic appropriately. Now, is there a place for a given culture to, to understand it's history and legacies? Absolutely. Because it fits into the tapestry. It's not good to learn something that is alien to your reality. And the reality of it is a tapestry, not a single color, not a single species, not a single anything. It's all about tapestry. It's all about mosaic. It's all about a, a combination of assets. And that's what we, we, we strive to do. Story_ID: 2475 Speaker 1: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general? Speaker 2: Well, again, it's still the same question that we continue to talk about. Here my biggest home is, and my biggest dream--both, and I work toward accomplishing both of those is, is, is to eliminate the, the forces that are destroying the richness of our traditions by not having the structural system to see to it that they can find their way out of deprivation and violence. And I, I work in those communities too much and I, and I just see it happening every day. And I think structurally, we can do something about that before genocide ends up destroying us as a people. Not because anybody takes, a, attempt to destroy us physically, but to the extent that you have generation and generation of children coming along, getting further and further away from the ability, from an eco--from an economic and intellectual standpoint, be able to be competitive in the world order. Your people will perish because you become less and less necessary, and you become, you know, well, the prisons are a good example of it. That's a form of genocide, not because people have said they're going to put black people in jail, but what they're saying is they're going to take the undesirable and put them in places where they can be controlled. And to define the undesirable as people do certain kinds of behaviors. And if people will do a certain kinds of behaviors for the most part are people who are not properly prepared, that's not only black people or brown people. Like I said, people at Enron [Corporation] that belong in jail too. So, it, they attack anybody whose doing undesirable behavior and put them in a certain place to the extent that one of the undesirable behaviors is violence and, and things that are doing harmful. And we do more of it. We end up more in jail. Now, there are some racial issues inside that I'm not being nave about. But I think it's still--it, it'd be very difficult to get me in jail. Now, it's doable and if it's only race I could be subject to go to jail, and I don't believe that I'll ever be subject to--what would put me in jail is behavior that now I don't think I will perform. I know better. And I will perform in such a way that, that the chance of me going to jail are very, very slim because of how I've been prepared. If it was simply race, then I would have as much chance of going to jail as some dude on a street corner in Chicago [Illinois] or [Washington] D.C. or any place else whose a drug dealer. And that's just not true. He's got a much higher chance of going to jail than I do, but if it's only race, we would both have the same. And that's just not the case. So I'm trying to build a system so that that kid has the same opportunity as I had, to not go to jail, and, in fact, to be as successful as I am to whatever degree I am. Story_ID: 2476 Speaker 1: When you look back on what you've done to this point, and I know you're still, still young enough to be working on future--I mean you, you have a future vision for what you're doing apparently? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, what is that, for first thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Well, again it is to bring together enough systems where we can at least model what I'm talking about. I want to have in place before my work day is over, if you will, which may be twenty years from now when I'm eighty-some years old. I look at Dorothy Height whose 90 and she's still at, if I may have 30 more years. But I want to be like Dorothy, if you will. Some people want to be like Mike [Michael Jordan, basketball player]. I want to be like Dorothy. I want to be working till way in my seniors years, and hopefully I get as far as she has to be able to say that here's a model that's affecting tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands, if not millions of our, our disenfranchised peoples, not only here in America, but around the world. You know, a set of systems where governments and other sources have come together to see to it that nobody is on a pathway to jail, and everybody's on a pathway to success. That's my dream. I, I believe it doable in my lifetime with the kind time frame I described. It is not that difficult to do, if we get the powers that be to change how they do it. And that's what I work at every day. Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, that's real easy. I'd like to be remembered as a, a family man, child of God, and a servant of the people. Story_ID: 2477 Speaker 1: This is my, my father's mother's mother. Okay, this is my father's mother's mother. I'm sorry. This is my father's mother or my grandmother when she was a child in the--born in the early 1800s in Fort Niobrera, Nebraska. Speaker 2: And you said her father was with the Buffalo Soldiers? Speaker 1: Her father was Buffalo Soldier at the time. This was a, a Virginia, oh, gosh, I lost her maiden name, Davis, Virginia Davis. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's paternal great-grandmother Davis, ca. mid-1800s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2478 Speaker 1: That's her [Virginia Davis] now as a grown woman. That's my [paternal] grandmother as a grown woman with her father who was, in fact, a Buffalo solider. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's grandmother Virginia Davis Amos and his great-grandfather, ca. 1930s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2479 Speaker 1: Now, that's my grandfather [Ernest Amos], my father's [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] father on the left, my father's sister, who happened to have been born, by the way, on the same day as my father, five years apart. And my grandmother [Virgina Davis Amos]. That's my grandfather and grandmother on either end, and that's my aunt Alezea (ph) in the middle. And that was taken actually in their house--in, in, my grandparents' house. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's grandfather Ernest Amos, aunt Alezea Amos and grandmother Virginia Davis Amos, ca. 1950s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2480 Speaker 1: I'm trying to figure out where it was taken. I know who it is. I'm trying to see where that was taken. Ah, that's Ron's house. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my neighbor and friend and colleague, Ron Brown, who was the, who went on to become [U.S.] Secretary of Commerce, Chairman of the Democratic Party and, unfortunately, he tragically died in a plane wreck. And that's in his living room, taken next door [Washington, D.C.] in his living room just before Christmas dinner. We have a tradition in our families that we shared Christmas dinner each night, at each other's. And we did, we did Thanksgiving at our home and Christmas in their home. And that was right before Christmas dinner. Speaker 1: [Kent Amos (right) with U.S. Chairman of the Democratic Party, Ron Brown, Washington, D.C., ca. 1990s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2481 Speaker 1: And that's me with the now [Washington, D.C.] Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton, Congresswoman from the District of Columbia, again, a long-time friend. My father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] was her sister's godfather, and we've been friends for much of our lives. And her father was an attorney, and my father were law partners. And Coleman [Holmes], her father, was in my home literally everyday for years in my early days. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with U.S. Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton, Washington, D.C., not dated, from the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2482 Speaker 1: That's a younger version of me, twenty-some years ago when we first moved into this house. I think I was going to pick up some of the kids at that time. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos at his residence in Washington, D.C., ca. 1980s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2483 Speaker 1: That's a younger version of me with my gorgeous wife [Carmen Amos], and we were at some social event, actually, and actually it was not a social event. It was an event for our children down at the [Washington, D.C.] Convention Center. We were there supporting them. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with wife, Carmen Amos, Washington, D.C., not dated, from the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2484 Speaker 1: This is a picture at an event where my wife [Carmen Amos], of course, was on, on the left-hand side with four of our boys. Tim, on the left, with his arm around my wife. Darren, in the middle. Milton on the right with his arm on my mother. In the middle is April, our daughter, who lives, actually, lives in Detroit [Michigan]. And Alvin, who is from Sierra Leone. I, I'm sorry, Liberia. He's from Liberia and came here as a, a student and attached to our family. And my mother [Gladys Capps Amos] and father [Benjamin F. Amos, Sr.] are on the right-hand side. My father, of course, being on the far right, and then my mother next to him. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's wife Carmen Amos, his parents and his adopted children; L. to R.: wife Carmen Amos, sons Tim, Darren and Milton Amos, daughter April, son Alvin Amos and parents Gladys Capps Amos and Benjamin F. Amos, Sr., ca. 1990s From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2485 Speaker 1: I have a tradition that I dress up for every Halloween, and this was my clown outfit that I was dressed up. And I guess I have my Halloween candy in my hand. But I have a clown outfit. I have a, a magician's outfit. I have a, a Dalmatian that I wear. I have about four or five different costumes that I put on, on a rotating basis. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos dressed as a clown at Halloween, Washington, D.C., not dated, from the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2486 Speaker 1: Those are my grandparents. Those are my father's parents, Ernest Amos, who was, again, the teacher, educator and musician, pianist, voice and taught Billy Eckstine and Duke Ellington. And my grandmother, Virginia [Davis Amos] in their backyard over on Fairmont Street [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's grandparents, Ernest Amos and Virginia Davis Amos, Washington, D.C., ca. 1940s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2487 Speaker 1: And that's Eddie Gene and his older brother. 'Eddie Gene' was, was the name that I used to be a cowboy. I was 'Eddie Gene, the cowboy.' And that's me with the gun-slinging belt on my hip and my older brother, who was the taller of the two then, and I am much taller than him now. Speaker 2: About what year was this? Speaker 1: That, I would have been about five or six so that'd been the late forties [1940s], 1948 or 9 [1949] I'd say. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos (right) as a child with his older brother, Benjamin F. Amos, Jr., ca. 1948-1949. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2488 Speaker 1: This was at the Million Man March [October 16, 1995]. I had the, the good fortune to have been a part of the Million Man March and I also had a opportunity to present a--to talk at the March. And that was at the March. And I had a dozen young men with me--actually was a, a local drug gang I took with me from a public housing place that we were, I was working in at the time, trying to help them see a different way. And, and actually that event caused a number of them to change their, their lifestyles. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos at the Million Man March, Washington, D.C., October 16, 1995. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2489 Speaker 1: And that's me as a baby, sitting in front of my brother. I was probably about 4 months old so you're probably talking in the 1944, maybe 19, 5, 45 [1945], timeframe. But given the weather, I'd say that's 1944. Probably one of the youngest pictures I have of myself and with my older brother, who was three at the time. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos as an infant with older brother, Benjamin F. Amos, Jr., ca. 1944-1945. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2490 Speaker 1: Anybody that think that you go in the military and don't do KP [kitchen patrol] and other kinds of things, let me tell you, it's just not true. That's me on sweeping and cleaning the barracks duty as an enlisted man in the [U.S.] Air Force in my early training days. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos in front of his U.S. Air Force barracks, ca. 1964. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2491 Speaker 1: I started my military career actually in high school in, in Junior ROTC [Army Reserve Officer Training Corps] and here I am as a Captain in the ROTC in my high school days. And this picture was taken in the, in the kitchen of our family home on Madison Street [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos at home in his Junior ROTC Captain's uniform, Washington, D.C., ca. 1960s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2492 Speaker 1: That's the kid who was trying to learn how to be a skydiver. So they'd take you in these tests centers to see how you handle the, the, the float, weightlessness. By the way, I never jumped (laughter). I learned there. This was not something I want to do. From a skydiving standpoint. Speaker 2: I thought you were (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, no, let's not kid ourselves. This was a, this was a test to figure out if I can do it. And the answer is, no. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos learning to skydive, not dated, from the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2493 Speaker 1: That's my wife [Carmen Amos] and I, and again, at a midpoint. We were here in the house, probably about eighteen, twenty years ago. A lot, lot lighter in terms of weight, got darker hair there, and a mustache which are all gone now. But that was taken here in the living room. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos and wife, Carmen Amos, Washington, D.C., ca. 1983. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2494 Speaker 1: This was a, actually a party we were having celebrating graduation of our kids in the backyard. And the [Calvin Coolidge Senior] High School [Washington, D.C.] principal's the gentleman standing up in the tie to the right. Right behind me is the coach of the basketball team, just over shoulder, Frank Williams, who is deceased now. The young lady leaning the, the doorway there is our daughter, Debbie. And the other two girl, women there in front of her are parents of our children, mothers of our children. And to my right, of course, my wife [Carmen Amos] sitting down there. And to her right or her left, rather, was some of the kids. Byron is one of the, is the boy sitting in front of the principal and some of the other kids and their families. So we have a party every--we had a party every year celebrating their, their families' success that we had a chance to participate in. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos (center) with his family and others at graduation party, Washington, D.C., not dated; Daughter Debbie Amos standing in doorway and wife, Carmen Amos seated right. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2495 Speaker 1: I mentioned I went to Gage [Elementary] School [later Gage-Eckington Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. That school in the background there, off to the left is actually Gage School. This was on Second Street in northwest Washington [D.C.]. And again, probably in the late forties [1940s], early fifties [1950s]. It might have been 1950, '51 [1951] at the, at the latest. And that's me with a encyclopedia. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos as a child in front of Gage Elementary School, Washington, D.C., ca. 1950-51. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2496 Speaker 1: I had the good fortune, again, to see our kids graduate on a number of occasions and, and on a couple of those occasions, I had a chance to be the commencement speech, speaker. This was the occasion where I was the commencement speaker for one of the classes that our children were in. And this was actually taken on the balcony of the J. F. [John Fitzgerald Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Washington, D.C.]. And I believe that was in 1986 or '87. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos as a speaker for commencement ceremonies at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C., 1986-87. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2497 Speaker 1: I'm beginning to age here. The hair is receding a little bit. And the face is getting a little fuller. But this was at one of our children's, actually Milt's--I mean I'm sorry, Darryl's graduation from his master's degree from college. And we were there for that occasion. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with his wife, Carmen Amos, not dated, from the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2498 Speaker 1: And this is Dad with his girls at the occasion of their prom. They--well, the two girls on the right are--on my right, to the left of the photograph, were two of our chi-, our kids. The two on the left, the other side, were not. And they were their girlfriends, but the-, they were graduating from high school. And they were in their prom dresses and I, in my tuxedo, went to the prom and with our kids. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with his daughters and their friends on prom night, Washington, D.C., not dated, from the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2499 Speaker 1: I learned to wear a tuxedo real early. I was a ring bearer for one of our neighbors. He was a police officer and his wife was a school teacher. And I was a ring bearer at their wedding. And I was their little boy until a number of years after this when they had their first child, first and only child, their daughter, cause unfortunately, she passed during childbirth. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos as a child and dressed as ring bearer for a neighbor's wedding, ca. 1949. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2500 Speaker 1: This is another one of those very young days. This is actually my senior high school class photograph that went into the yearbook [at Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos' class portrait from Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Washington, D.C., 1962. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2501 Speaker 1: My career as an athlete started as a high jumper, and this was one of my earlier jumps in my earlier days. And this was taken at the, at the field behind the [Calvin] Coolidge High School [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos performing the high jump at Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Washington, D.C., 1959. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2502 Speaker 1: I believe that's my aunt Helene [Brooke Amos] in the middle, with two of her girlfriends in a picture in the 19-- late 1920s, I suspect. And it was probably taken in her backyard--looking at the, the property around, it was probably in her backyard out in Brookland [neighborhood], northeast Washington [D.C.]. And her, her brother, Eddie [Edward Brooke] ultimately, became a U.S. Senator from the State of Massachusetts, the first black to become a U.S. Senator after Reconstruction [1867-1877]. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's aunt, Helene Brooke Amos (center) with her friends, Washington, D.C., late 1920s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2503 Speaker 1: We held a birthday party for the kids every year, and for the kids who had a birthday in a given month. And the young man that we're celebrating here, his birthday, he was still in high school. This was probably his eighteenth birthday. It was probably his senior year, and unfortunately--he went on to college and graduated. Unfortunately, he took his life at twenty--at the age of twenty-five. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos and one of his adopted sons, Washington, D.C., not dated, from the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2504 Speaker 1: During the first [U.S. President George] Bush White House [Washington, D.C.], I was, had the occasion to appointed as a part of a U.S. Presidential commission to study the affects of drug laws on communities [President's Commission on Model State Drug Laws]. And this is--I am seated to the right there obviously. And my fellow commissioners from around the country--we had a chief of police--two chiefs of police, one from North Carolina. We had a couple of prosecutors. The gentleman in the middle who was the Chair--who was the mayor from Indianapolis. And he went to--actually, standing in the middle next to--to your, over this way, (unclear) right there. (simultaneous). Yeah, he, he was the mayor of Indianapolis [Indiana] and went on to become the head of the Corporation of National Service. And, well, there again, that's the commission, you know, for, for the President of the United States. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos (seated, second from right) as member of the President's Commission on Model State Drug Laws, Washington, D.C., 1993. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2505 Speaker 1: I don't know who that guy is. All that hair and all that lip hair and the chest hair and the, the colorful--that, that shirt by the way, you can't imagine how many colors are in that shirt. But that's the kid when he was probably in his early twenties, mid-twenties, probably mid- twenties, mid to late twenties Speaker 2: Were you at Xerox [Corporation] at this point? Speaker 1: Actually, I was. I was a Xerox executive looking like that, believe it or not. It was probably actually therefore, probably the early seventies. Oh, it was the seventies because that's the right, right attire for the seventies. Yeah. Speaker 2: You looked you (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, I was at Xerox (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Was that prior to or after the stairway incident? Speaker 1: That was after the--it was during. That was the same era. That's how I looked in the stairwell. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos ca. 1974. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2506 Speaker 1: We had the good fortune to have a number of people visit our school [Community Academy Public Charter School, Washington, D.C.] which is now more contemporary. Photo was taken about four years ago when Ms. Rosa Parks was in town, actually five years ago. She just had her ninetieth birthday. This was during the time of her eighty-fifth birthday because we hosted her eighty-fifth birthday party here at the house [Washington, D.C.]. And that's her talking to our children in our great room at the school. And to her--her right, picture's left, is Elaine Steele, her niece, who is executor of her estate and her, her--she kind of lives with her and takes care of her. And, and the lady to her left, her right rather, to the fur-, furthest left is a member of their staff. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with Rosa Parks (center), her niece, Elaine Steele (second from left), and an unidentified woman at Community Academy Public Charter School, Washington, D.C., 1998. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2507 Speaker 1: My work with children has exposed us to a number of policy people as I've indicated. A number of times I've tried to get to policy people and make a difference and try how we think. One of the earlier individuals of power I had a chance to chat with at a, at a conference on what happened to young people was then [U.S.] President Ronald Reagan. This took place at a, at a school here in the District of Columbia where--and the gentleman to my immediate light, right who was the Deputy Superintendent of Schools at the time and we were debating on, on how we can begin to look at how schools make a difference in the lives of children. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos (right) with U.S. President Ronald Reagan and the Deputy Superintendent of Schools, Washington, D.C., ca. 1981-1989. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2508 Speaker 1: We had a chance--like I said earlier to--we, we were good, we had the good fortune to have Mrs. Rosa Parks visit our school and that's Mrs. Parks seated and, of course, me behind her back about four years ago. And, and to my right, to the photograph's left, the gentleman in the white shirt is the school's [Community Academy Public Charter School, Washington, D.C.] principal, Mr. [Anthony] Tony Epson. And to my left and photo's left, right, is Mr. Wendell Butler who at that time was chair of the school's board. Speaker 2: [L. to R.: Tony Epson, Kent Amos and Wendell Butler with Rosa Parks (seated) at Community Academy Public Charter School, Washington, D.C., 1998. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2509 Speaker 1: I have, again, been asked on a number of occasions to share my views with a variety of audiences, particularly as it comes to the question of children and family. This occasion here was when I spoke before the [U.S.] Congress. This was actually up on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] in one of the [U.S.] Senate meetings rooms where I was speaking to a number of [U.S.] House [of Representatives] members and staffers on what happens to children and what can happen to them if we approach things differently. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos speaking before the U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C., ca. mid-1990s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2510 Speaker 1: Here we are in June of 19--2003, and this is actually the most recent photograph of my wife and I, at this time. This was about three weeks ago on an outing with a social organization that I belong to, the Omega Psi Phi fraternity on a boat ride. And my wife and I were photographed there. She's still gorgeous. I'm getting fatter. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos and wife, Carmen Amos on a cruise with the Omega Psi Phi fraternity, Washington, D.C., June, 2003. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2511 Speaker 1: This was at the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.]. I was asked to interview, and they--the Smithsonian runs a series of, of presentations on various authors and particularly people who write about their life's experience. This is when CeCe Winans [gospel singer] had written a book on her life's experiences at that point in time. This was about three years ago if I remember correctly. So that'd been around the year 2000. And I was asked to, to interview her. And this was at that occasion at the Smithsonian Institute. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos interviewing gospel singer CeCe Winans at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., 2000. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2512 Speaker 1: This was at a, a nationally, a national teleconference conducted at the [Washington, D.C.] National Cathedral over on Nebraska [sic, Massachusetts Avenue] and Wisconsin [Avenue]. The large Episcopal church there, I guess the largest Episcopal church in the world and eighth largest church in the world. They did a teleconference on, again, what's happening with young people in our society. And I'm there flanked by George Stephanopoulos who at the time was at the White House [as Press Secretary to President Bill Clinton], to my left and photograph's right. And I believe the woman to my right was a U.S. Attorney from another jurisdiction. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos (center) with White House Press Secretary George Stephanopoulos and unidentified woman at a conference held in the Washington National Cathedral, Washington, D.C., ca. 1992-1996. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2513 Speaker 1: Because of our work with children and other things we've done--primarily I work with children, we had the good fortune to be featured on a number of television shows. This is on the 'Phil Donahue Show,' in it's earlier rendition. This is the one that was on nationally syndicated, no the one that was, is on now. So this goes back probably about fifteen years at the 'Phil Donohue Show.' Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with talk show host, Phil Donahue, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2514 Speaker 1: And this is another chance we had to be on, this is on the 'Oprah [Winfrey] Show.' I was on the air that time with Darryl, one of our kids. And I was--I've been on 'Oprah Show' twice. This was the first occasion. And this goes back, again, probably about fifteen, sixteen years. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with talk show host, Oprah Winfrey, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988 From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2515 Speaker 1: We've had, again, the good fortune to have been interviewed for a number of different offerings, talking about a variety of things. This is the occasion when we're interviewed by Katie Couric and the NBC [National Broadcasting Company] news team for a nationally syndicated show. And that was the kid talking in his living room [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos at his home in Washington, D.C., ca. 1980s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2516 Speaker 1: I said I was born in 1944. I was really telling the--I was just trying to hide my real age. This is one of my classmates, Frederick Douglass and I at the occasion of our graduation from elementary school. The reality of it is this was at Caring Institute. It's an organization that's housed--the National Caring Hall of Fame [Hall of Fame for Caring Americans] is housed in the Frederick Douglass Home on A Street in Southeast Washington [D.C.]. And this was the occasion of--I was inducted into the Caring Hall of Fame and this was the occasion of my induction into the Caring Hall of Fame. And with Frederick Douglass and a lady from L. A. [Los Angeles, California] who was also inducted a previous time she was there. And we're, we're honored to have Senator, then Senator--the, the late Senator [Wayne] Morse from Oregon be the Chairman of the Board of that organization. And this was his--Wayne Morse--who was giving us, congratulating me on the time of my induction. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos (right) with 'Sweet' Alice Harris and a Frederick Douglass impersonator at the Hall of Fame for Caring Americans, Washington, D.C., 1991. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2517 Speaker 1: I was on a panel with a friend and again, colleague [Douglas] Doug Wilder when he was then-Governor of the State of Virginia, the first elected governor of a--African American elected governor of a state, post-Reconstruction--actually, ever. And we were at a, where we shared a panel convening up on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. And this was a photograph at that time. This goes back to his time as the Governor. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with Virginia Governor Douglas Wilder, Washington, D.C., ca. 1989-1994. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2518 Speaker 1: This was an event in Southwest Washington [D.C.] at a hotel where I had the occasion to introduce the [Nation of Islam] Minister Louis Farrakhan on a tour he was making around, an economic strategy around skin and hair care for African Americans. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with Nation of Islam Minister Louis Farrakhan, Washington, D.C., ca. 1980s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2519 Speaker 1: Vernon Jordan, who no one needs any introduction to, of course, was head of the Urban League and first friend and all kinds of things. But he was also a member of the Xerox [Corporation] Board [of Directors]. And I think he still is for that matter for a number of years. And this was actually at a function at Xerox when he and I were chatting, associated with his role as a board member of Xerox. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with Vernon Jordan at a function at the Xerox Corporation, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2520 Speaker 1: I'm here shaking hands with [John] Johnny Ford who was the mayor of Tuskegee [Alabama] who went on to create the [National] Conference of Black Mayors [Inc.]. He was the first--he was the founder of that organization and subsequently--and that what's this event is. He went on to create the International Association of African, of, of Black and col--Mayors of Color from around the world [World Conference of Mayors, Inc.]. And Johnny was a, is and was a wonderful and incredible leader and a good friend. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos (left) with Johnny Ford, Mayor of Tuskegee, Alabama, at the National Conference of Black Mayors, not dated, from the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2521 Speaker 1: This is my brother, Ben [Benjamin F. Amos, Jr.], and his bride, Brenda on the occasion of their marriage back in 1962, the year I graduated from high school, and he graduated from college. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's brother Benjamin F. Amos, Jr. and his sister-in-law, Brenda on their wedding day, 1962. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2522 Speaker 1: And I did finally graduate from college, and this actually my college photograph from my days at Delaware State, then Delaware State College, now Delaware State University [Dover] Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's graduation portrait from Delaware State College, Dover, Delaware, 1970. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2523 Speaker 1: I had the good fortune, again to try and talk to another President. This one was [U.S.] President Bill Clinton. This was taken in the, in the Oval Office [White House, Washington, D.C.] on the occasion of us talking about how we could make a difference in the lives of children through some strategies that we had. And he was kind enough to take this picture or have it taken. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with U.S. President Bill Clinton in the White House Oval Office, Washington, D.C., ca. 1993-2001. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2524 Speaker 1: Having gotten to know the, the [U.S.] President [Bill Clinton], he asked me to provide a forum for--early in his administration, to talk about how his administration could make a different in the, in the District of Columbia. So he asked me to convene various leaders from around the, the city, and we did that. And this was taken in the Oval--I mean I'm sorry, in the Cabinet Room [White House, Washington, D.C.]. The only meeting that can take place in the Cabinet Room is one called by and convened by the President. I am fortunate that I have been seated to his immediate left. To his immediate right is Alice Rivlin who was then the Secretary of O and B--the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. In the room is Secretary [of Housing and Urban Development] Henry Cisneros. In the room is also Secretary [of Treasury Robert] Rubin. In the room is Secretary, Labor--who ultimately became Secretary of Labor [Alexis Herman]--I'm blanking on her name. She'll kill me. But anyway, we had five Cabinet--then or current or former, soon, soon-to-be Cabinet officers in the room. And it was my duty to help him shape the, the view that the Administration would take, and, in fact, he did a extremely good job, his, his Administration with this city. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos (third from left) with U.S. President Bill Clinton and others in the White House Cabinet Room, Washington, D.C., ca. 1993-2001. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2525 Speaker 1: This is one of the more special photographs I, I think we have. This was taken in our living room [Washington, D.C.] on the occasion of the birthday of Dorothy--of Mrs. Rosa Parks on her eighty-fifth birthday. And it's Mrs. Parks in the middle. My wife is seated to the right or Mrs. Parks's left. And Dorothy Height to Mrs. Parks's or to the left by the balloons. And, of course, myself with my daughter and my son, Milt--Wesley, my son, and my daughter, Debbie. Milt wasn't living here at the time and was not available for the picture. But why it's so special is that those are two women who have made such a difference in our society. And to have the good fortune to have both of them be present in our home at the same time is something that we'll cherish forever. It was again, a very humbling experience to have been in their presence and to have it in your home was even more humbling. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos with Rosa Parks, Dorothy Height, and his family, Washington, D.C., 1998; (Seated L. to R.): Dorothy Height, Rosa Parks and his wife, Carmen Amos; (Standing L. to R.): son Wesley, daughter Debbie, and Kent Amos. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2526 Speaker 1: We were in, in Paris [France], my wife [Carmen Amos] and I, three years--two years ago now, three years ago now in 2000 with some friends for the French Open [tennis tournament]. And we looked on, on television and there was [U.S.] President [Bill] Clinton at the French Open. And he, by coincidence was staying next door at the hotel to, to--next to our hotel. He was at the Four Seasons [Hotel], I believe, and we were at the [Hotel] Prince de Galles. But anyway, I saw the caravan, the motorcade and all that. And I went next door and indicated to the Secret Service that I knew the President and could they pass a note to his staff. And, and we did. We said that we were in town, my wife and I. And if he had a minute, we'd love to stop in and see him. And as fast as I got back to my room, we had a phone call from his staff person and said, "Look, come to dinner tonight with him." And this is at a restaurant in Paris. They say it's the most exclusive restaurant in town. When we told the maitre'd where we were going, he said, "How did you get reservations there?" And we said, "Well, we had a guy we know get us in." (Laughter) And he did and, and it was a wonderful evening. Speaker 2: [Two views of U.S. President Bill Clinton meeting with Kent Amos and his wife Carmen Amos, Paris, France, 2000. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2527 Speaker 1: And one of the restaurant patrons that night was--, Speaker 2: Omar Sharif [actor]? Speaker 1: --yeah, Omar Sharif. And we were fortunate to be able to take a picture with him as well. And I think Mark Wahlberg was in the restaurant that night. And it was a--the restaurant only seated fifty people. And it was quite an event, quite an event. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos, actor Omar Sharif and Carmen Amos, Paris, France, 2000. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2528 Speaker 1: This is my Mom [Glady Capps Amos] and Dad [Benjamin Amos, Sr.] on the occasion of, of where we were honored by a local organization for our work with children. And the, the award that my father has in his hands is actually one that was presented to, to our family for its efforts. And since they're a part of the family, they had to chance to be with it. So that was Mom and Dad. This was about, given the age of the kids at that time, probably about fourteen years ago, as well, in the early eighties [1980s]. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos's parents, Benjamin F. Amos, Sr. and Gladys Capp Amos, ca. early 1980s. From the collection of Kent Amos.] Story_ID: 2529 Speaker 1: This is our family so to speak. This is on the occasion of my mother [Gladys Capps Amos] and father's [Benjamin Amos, Sr.] fiftieth wedding anniversary, October of 1987. And pictured or seated, my mother and father. And one of my children, my daughter, Debbie, and one of my sons--she's my youngest child, child, Debbie and my brother, Ben's youngest daughter, Ter--goodness gracious, Terry is seated here as well. And, of course, my brother, Ben [Amos, Jr.], and his wife, Brenda and imy wife, Carmen and I. And this was taken in our library and--Tory. What'd I say, Tory or Terry? Tory. I knew that was wrong. This is my, get it right. That's Tory, my mother, my father, Debbie and me, Carmen, Brenda and my brother, Ben. Speaker 2: [Kent Amos and his family celebrating his parents' fiftieth wedding anniversary, Washington, D.C., October, 1987; (Seated L. to R.): Daughter Debbie Amos, father Benjamin F. Amos, Sr., mother Gladys Capps Amos, niece Terry Amos; (Standing L. to R.): Kent Amos, wife Carmen Amos, sister-in-law Brenda Amos and brother Benjamin F. Amos, Jr. From the collection of Kent Amos.]..