 Story_ID: 665054 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us including your middle name. Speaker 2: My name is Ronald Lindsay Allen [HistoryMaker Ron Allen], R-O-N-A-L-D, Lindsay, L-I-N-D-S-A-Y, Allen, A-L-L-E-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and can I have your date of birth and today's date? Speaker 2: July 22, 1957, and today is February 18, 2014. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We're in New York [New York], New York City. Speaker 1: Okay and your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist. Story_ID: 665055 Speaker 1: We ask five People magazine-ish questions--just short answers. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Candied yams, sweet potatoes (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's cute. I don't think we hear too many of those, but that's a good one. Favorite color? Speaker 2: Indigo blue, that deep bright blue that ocean is sometimes. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring into summer. Speaker 1: Well, hopefully we'll get there soon. And favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, good question. (Laughter) I often say, "Sounds good," or "What's happening," or, "Anything exciting happening?" Things like that. Story_ID: 665056 Speaker 1: So I wanna ask you about your, your family background. That's where we start the interview, so I'd like to ask you about your father, his name and what you know about his background and growing up, and if--also of the year of his birth if you have it. Speaker 2: My father, Lindsay Allen, Jr.--Lindsay Leonard, Jr.--Lindsay Leonard Allen, Jr. was born only July 4th, 1929, and he passed away on January 1, 1996. He was--that would make him sixty-six, relatively young. My father grew up in Jersey City, New Jersey, across the river [Hudson River] from here. He was one of, I believe it's eight children--and my grandfather, Lindsay Allen, Sr., and his mother was Tempie Allen--Tempie Jackson Allen. And the family grew up in Jersey City. My father went to public school in Jersey City, went to Lincoln High School [Academy of Governance and Social Sciences at Lincoln High School]. And then he graduated from college later in life at Rutgers University [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. Interestingly, he graduated the same year that my sister [Lynette Allen-Perry] graduated. He went back to school many years later to finish his education, which was something that was always inspiring to me because education was always the, the, the root, the main driving force--one of the main drivers in our--in our family. My father worked for a lot of years at United Airlines. He was a cargo sales manager in the days before FedEx and all that, when the--when the airlines like United and American [American Airlines] would ship--excuse me--would ship cargo. One of the greatest benefits of that was as a--as a--as a child, before I turned eighteen, I could fly anywhere I wanted to in the United States for pretty much nothing--standby space available--and I, I did that a lot. And I think in many ways it's one of the greatest gifts my father ever gave me because it really set me on my path to becoming a journalist and traveling the world and where I am now some fifty some odd years later. My father was a very--I always thought of him as a great provider, and I remember at his funeral services that's what I said a lot about who he was. When I was growing up, I always felt that we were rich, that we had everything, because we never--I never really remember wanting something and not having it. But our, our lifestyle was, was fairly modest, I'd say work- working to middle class. My parents never owned a home until I was going to high school--my first year in high school--my sister who's two years older than me, her, her second year of high school. And that was the beginning of the time that my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] started to work as well. But my father was--at times, in, in some ways, he was perhaps a little bit distant. He was not your touchy, feely, huggy man. He was in some ways somewhat reserved, which I guess I can be at times. But I can remember him being jovial and having a great time around his friends--his circle of friends. My, my father was very--later in life his health problems became challenging. The underlying cause of death was diabetes, and he also had a touch of dementia, whether it was Alzheimer's or what, something like that. And I just remember him always being there. He, he emphasized education. He always said to me, "You know, make sure you do your homework." And I guess one of the turning points in my life came when we moved from Jersey City to Hillside, New Jersey, about twenty minutes away, but the suburbs. We were moving on up, as it were. And I, I had the opportunity to go to a Catholic prep school back in Jersey City where I'd won a scholarship, St. Peter's Prep [St. Peter's Preparatory School]. But of course, being young and in high school, I wanted to go to the local high school in Hillside where I had friends. I didn't know anybody in town. And how was I gonna have a, a life if I were going back to St. Peter's Prep and wearing a jacket and tie every day and commuting essentially as a high school freshman? And I remember sitting at the kitchen table with my father and telling him--telling him what I thought I wanted to do--what I did wanna do. And I remember him telling me what I was gonna do. And he insisted that this was going to be one of the best things that would ever happen to me, commuting back, going to the much better academic school, all boys. I didn't wanna go to an all-boy Catholic school. We weren't Catholic. But he knew, as my mother did then, that it would make a big difference and it did. And I went and it was one of the--one of the major turning points in my life, not going to the public high school where we lived, but going to the Catholic prep school back in Jersey City. Nowadays--well, back then even, it's, it's still one of the better academic high schools in the State of New Jersey, and it really put me on my, my course as well. Story_ID: 665057 Speaker 1: I know you said your father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] was distant. Did he share any stories of his growing up in Jersey City [New Jersey]? Speaker 2: You know, I, I really have to think about that. Not that I really can recall at this moment, no. He--and I, I didn't mean he was somewhat distant and, and not just physically emotionally he wasn't the type of-- Speaker 1: He wasn't a touchy, feely. Speaker 2: Exactly, but he was--he was always there. And quite frankly, it's--you know, it's something that I think about a lot in terms of my daughter [Siobhan Allen]. I have a daughter who's five and an only child, and I've only--I've only become a parent in the last five years, which is relatively late in life. So I became a parent at age fifty--fifty-one. And, and that got me thinking a lot of about my parents and my upbringing. And, and becoming a parent, as everybody probably knows, gives you a whole different appreciation of your parents and what they did, the sacrifices that they made. And, and, and, and I think most importantly, we [Allen and his wife, Adaora Udoji] wanted to instill in our daughter a sense of confidence, a sense of confidence, a sense of self-esteem, a sense of importance, and love, and, and give her all the love and support that she, she would ever need. My daughter--we adopted my daughter, which is unusual as well. She was born in Ethiopia, and we brought her home when she was roughly six months old. We met her the first time when she was about three months old. And because she's an adopted child, I think her life is gonna be a little different than most kids' lives. There's gonna be a ta- there's gonna come a day where--now we tell her, "You're, you're adopted, and you were born in Ethiopia." And we have storybooks that tell the story of how the child was adopted, and the family was waiting, and the phone rang, and they went to this wonderful place, and they got her and they brought her home, and everybody was happy, and so on and so forth. So she repeats this, but she doesn't really understand it obviously. She's just five. But there'll come a time at some point where a light bulb will come on, and she'll say, "Oh, that's what you were talking about." And I guess that's--that's something in the back of our minds all the time. Story_ID: 665058 Speaker 1: But to answer your question, (laughter) thinking about my father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.], you know, I'm not--I just remember him talking a lot about, you know, his family. He came from a big, big family. I had a lot--a lot of aunts and uncles. And--but it's hard to recall really specific stories. You know, I can remember stories that--involving him where--you know, my father, one thing he was always late when were going somewhere. He always seemed to disappear with the car somewhere or getting gas, getting whatever. And I remember my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] always being impatient and wondered when he was gonna get back--when he's gonna back, and I'm not quite sure what he was doing, just stuff. I, I can--I can remember one--my traveled a lot too, which is another thing. He--because he did this cargo sales work for United Airlines, he was not home a lot, not like months and months on end, but, but that's another--but that's something I think I noticed as the years went on. My mother didn't work for the most part. She took care of us at home and--until high school--my, my high school days [at St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey]. So I'm sure that was a factor in, in, in my growing up and how I became who I am. But it's hard to think of, you know, stories that he told about, about stuff. You know, he--I know he went to Lincoln High School [Academy of Governance and Social Sciences at Lincoln High School, Jersey City, New Jersey]. I knew he had a lot of--I knew he had a lot of friends because they became our aunts and uncles in, in town. One of my aunts just passed away recently, and I was reminded of how my--how, how close my father was to her and other people in that circle. But I, I--it's interesting that I don't have all these memories of all these stories pouring out of me. Story_ID: 665059 Speaker 1: So what about your mother? What--can you give her name and what you know about her growing up? Was she also from New Jersey? Speaker 2: No, my mother was from the Bronx [New York]--Shirley Mae, M-A-E, Slade originally, S-L-A-D-E, and last name Allen [Shirley Slade Allen]. Now my mother was born January 4, 1932, so she's eighty-two now, very healthy, and you know, obviously in--one of the most important people in my life, if not the most. I mean, my mother and father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] were obviously the most important people in my life. And I, I, I think I only tried to (unclear)--I'm thinking is was more important, in what way, but they, they were equally in their--in their own way and, and continue to be. My mother grew up in the Bronx. She had a brother and a sister. Her sister is my aunt Barbara [Barbara Slade], still with us; my uncle Sonny [Sonny Slade (ph.)] passed away some time ago. I remember my grandmother, my mother's mother. Her name was Eugenia Slade--Hensley Slade [Eugenia Hensley Slade], and we used to call her Ma Gene. She died a number of years ago; I think it was '86 [1986] or so. And she lived in this really tough neighborhood in the Bronx that's not far from Yankee Stadium. And she lived in one of those houses that they called--like a--it was like a long house where each room kind of followed like railroad style or something. Speaker 1: Shotgun. Speaker 2: Shotgun, maybe that's what it was called, you know, with the big fire escape on the back. I remember that the fire escape overlooked this Coca-Cola bottling plant and--or something like that. So as a kid we used to sit on the balcony on the fire--balcony--it's balcony now--fireplace--fire, fire escape then--watching the trucks move around. It was--that, that was theater and excitement for kids at the time. And, and sweet potato--you asked me my favorite food. My grandmother made candied yams--sweet potatoes, and apple pie; and my mother does to this day too. And so that's where that comes from. My mother is and was in many ways a very simple, unpretentious woman. She didn't finish high school. I'm not quite sure how far she got. Interestingly, she told me the other day, and I never knew this, that my grandmother only finished third grade, and my grandfather, who I never knew--he died very young, he also was not very well educated--elementary school. His name was Fletcher--Fletcher Slade--and he died I believe at age forty--in his early forties--of like a kidney stone or some sort of complications that developed in surgery or in the hospital because of this now matter of fact thing that's taken care of, but he, he--I guess the underlying cause was an, an infection of some sort, which, which took his life. I never--I never knew him obviously, and I've only seen a few picture of him here or there. So, interestingly, I--at, at one point it dawned it me, hey, my, my grandmother was a single mother for most of her life. And she was also--she was in many ways a very no nonsense person. I can remember her, you know, fussing at the kids in the neighborhood in the Bronx. You know, she's a tough New Yorker, my grandmother. And I can remember her always saying to me as well, you know, "Do your homework and do well in school," and she was very forceful about that. And, and, and that, that, again, I kept hearing that all my life. My mother, again, she, she didn't finish high school. She didn't start working until I was a teenager, to help get a second income. And she worked at the, the local school in the community that we lived in, Hillside [New Jersey], as a school secretary, school administrator for the principal. And it was the school my brother [Gregory Allen] went to. The other interesting thing about my mother, early only, because she was a stay at home mom, she often came to our--the public school--the grammar school [P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey] that I went to, and she was a lunchroom monitor. So, I remember being a kid, and that was always sort of awkward that my mom was there. I guess for several years, it--as one of the lunchroom monitors and you know, that, that was what it was (laughter). But it showed her involvement, and she wanted to know what was going on the school and wanted to be involved and, and so and so forth. Story_ID: 665060 Speaker 1: You have siblings, so can you give their names and where you fit in the birth order? Speaker 2: My older sister is Lynette Allen-Perry now, P-E-R-R-Y. And my younger brother is Gregory Mark, M-A-R-K, Allen [Gregory Allen]. Gregory's nine years younger than me, so that makes him about forty--I guess he'll be forty-eight, St. Patrick's Day. And my sister is eighteen months older than I am, and she'll be--so she'll be--she's fifty-eight, fifty-nine. Her birthday is December 17th, 1955. My brother's is St. Patrick's Day, 1967, I believe it is. Speaker 1: So you're real--you're in the middle, but you were really the youngest because he came along so--I mean for a period of time you were the younger brother. Speaker 2: Yeah, for a lot of it I was, you know. My brother often joked about he--you know, he came along as an afterthought, and he didn't fit in, and blah, blah, blah. And of course we, as older kids, reinforced all that for him and made him feel as bad as we could when we--for, for a time. He often complained that, you know, he didn't get the best genes, and he, he went bald before I did. He--just a--just, you know, these kinds of things. And it was always--it was very weird having a younger brother like--it--the way there was such a big difference. My sister and I grew up together is essentially. And to some extent, I always grew up in her shadow because she was just a little older than I was so--for example, in school, I would then have all her teachers. And all of her teachers always told me how great Lynette did in school, and, "How are you gonna live up to this?" And so that was the--that was sort of the, the headwind that I grew up with, or actually a tailwind in that--in that she was--you know, she was there and essentially showing me the way. And we fussed and fought and, and you know, as all kids do. I think we became closer once I got to college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and we became--we got--we were older. You know, I don't remember--and similarly with my brother. I think what brought my brother and I closer than ever was when, when, when I became a parent five years ago and, and the years leading up to that when he was a parent. His, his kids are eleven--Brandon [Brandon Allen (ph.)] is eleven going on twelve, and Sidney is seven. Sidney, Sidney's birthday is actually the same date as my daughter's birthday, August 2nd--two years apart. And her name is Sidney Hope Allen [Sidney Allen (ph.)]. And my daughter is Siobhan Bethlehem Udoji Allen [Siobhan Allen], the only one on the planet. Speaker 1: Udoji is your, your wife--that, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's your wife's-- Speaker 2: My, my wife's name is Adaora, A-D-A-O-R-A, Elizabeth Udoji [Adaora Udoji], U-D-O-J-I. My father-in-law, Godfrey Amaechi [Godfrey Udoji], was a--grew up in Nigeria, came to this country as a student--an engineering student, went to Rensselaer Polytechnic [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York] up in northern New York and then to Northeastern [Northeastern University] in Boston [Massachusetts]. And in Boston he met a woman named Mary Callahan [Mary Udoji], who was a student in something and from a very Irish Catholic Boston family. And they met and fell in love, and now they--now they're mother and father-in-law, so my wife is biracial. And, and I have in-laws who are the Callahan clan of Boston, about as Irish as you can get. And they're adore--I mean, I, I adore them. We have a great time, and it makes for an interesting--very interesting family dynamic, you know. And again, my daughter, who essentially was born in Ethiopia, it's--we're not your typical nuclear family, not that any family is, but, but there are, there are unusual things about, about us. Story_ID: 665061 Speaker 1: My sister [Lynette Allen-Perry] and I grew up--well, we, we--as adults we live very different lives. She, she got married early af- right after college to a college boyfriend. The marriage didn't last very long, a couple of years--a few years. She had a daughter first, Danielle Collins, who's now thirty-two or three. And Christopher Collins, who's now twenty-six or seven or so, and--so she was a single mom as well for most of her life because--her adult life because the divorce happened when the kids were three or four so. And I always admired that, you know, how she--you know, she put them through college; she kept a roof over their head. They're, they're great kids, great young people. And you know, I always admired that, that she was able to do that, especially because when she was a parent, I was off running around the world doing all kinds of things and it was all about work for me. And in some ways it was a very selfish life, but I always admired how the sacrifices that she obviously made and what she was doing in her own way to, to, to take care of her kids. She recently--well, we, we, we as a family recently endured a tragedy of my sister remarried-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: So the tragedy you said--recent tragedy. Speaker 2: My sister remarried, Paul Perry [Paul Perry, Sr.]. She--they'd been together for many, many years, fifteen years, and they finally decided to get married. And that happened almost two years ago, May of--that would be 2012--April actually, 2012. Paul wasn't feeling well at the wedding and hadn't been feeling well in the--in the days leading up to the wedding. And he thought he had some kind of a respiratory problem or something like that. To make a long story short--well, I guess I don't have to--(laughter) (unclear)--and I kind of laugh at--well, it's--he had--Paul became very ill at the wedding and within a week he was in the hospital and--with a chest respiratory problem. And within a week of being in the hospital, he was diagnosed with cancer, lung cancer. And within a couple of days of that, he was told it was stage four lung cancer. And within two or three weeks later--actually, maybe a week later, he was in the hospice. And then a couple of days later, we were all having a--having a funeral. So this happens about six weeks or so or less after they were married. And obviously my sister was and still is devastated by all that. And, and I--you know, to this day, she still struggles with that and probably will for the rest of her life. And I, I think about that for a lot of reasons, but one, one thing I--I was just talking to her the other day, and she's in the process of filing a wrongful death suit, medical malpractice against the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs]. And I'm hoping that that'll bring some sense of something, but I know it's a difficult thing to do. Some people don't wanna go back through all this. The government has all kinds of protections and limits. But again, watching her go through that and, and now this, there's a--you know, she's, she's very--she's a very quiet--we're, we're somewhat--my wife [Adaora Udoji] would say very reserved, quiet people, you know, the, the contrast with my--the--my, my wife's family, the--who are yelling and screaming at the table and, you know, the--and like my, my father-in-law, Amaechi [Godfrey Udoji]--Nigerians are--I don't--you know, they're--he's very vocal. He's got an opinion about everything. And he--you know, he watches a college football game and he yells at the screen even when it's like--the score forty nothing (laughter)--and of course politics; and of course religion, ev- and, and so--but--so, I say that--my, my sister and I are--our, our demeanor are somewhat placid, reserved somewhat as well, but with a strong determination to deal with whatever and get through whatever. And, and I've seen and admired her in, in that whole circumstance with her husband, her husband. Story_ID: 665062 Speaker 1: So tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up. Speaker 2: You know, it's hard to, to know what's a memory and what's a memory that you've kind been implanted. And I've thought about this because obviously you told me this is one of the questions you were gonna ask. But I remember something that is, is in one of the pictures that I showed you, and perhaps this is why I remember it. But I remember visiting my [paternal] grandparents' [Tempie Jackson Allen and Lindsay Allen, Sr.] house on Whiton Street in Jersey City [New Jersey], which was the family house in--for gen- generations. And there was a black wrought iron gate--fence--at the base of the stairs that you had to go into. And I can remember swinging on the gate 'cause it was something that was just something you could do; you could swing on the gate. And I remember having a little fire truck that I pulled along. Again, this is something I, I see in the picture, so it's perhaps part of my implanted memory, but I remember--I remember that. I remember going to that house. And I guess I'm a little kid at this point. I guess I'm, you know, preschool, maybe, maybe earlier years of school [P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey]. I remember growing, again, in Jersey City. I remember moving a lot. We moved from house to house because we rented. I can remember--I can remember some, some things about school, but I really don't have vivid memories of, you know--I can remember being at, at an aunt's house. Actually, 'cause it was our house at the time, because we--the family, we moved into other houses that aunts and uncles owned or moved out of. And I can remember this was on Woodward Street in Jersey City, and I can remember there was a big flight of twelve or fifteen stairs to get up to the house. And I can remember one day somehow falling and hitting my nose against a coffee table in the--in the living room and busting my, my nose wide open. And they put something called a butterfly bandage on it. And I don't have any visual--I mean, there's no pictures, but I--and I don't remember how old I was, but I remember that happening. And, and, and again, I think it's something that I remember because over the years we, we always talk about it, and you know, it'll come up when the family got together. And oh, remember yeah, you were here; and remember this happened; and that kind of sort of thing, so it's a lot that. But as far as like a--just a genuine--a genuine mem- and the, the--as I was talking about earlier, visiting my [maternal] grandmother's [Eugenia Hensley Slade] house and sitting on the fire escape, and watching the trucks, and driving past Yankee Stadium [New York, New York] and all that, and driving under the L [elevated train] and hearing the trains and--in New York [New York]. Those were some of the things I remember. Story_ID: 665063 Speaker 1: Sights and sells--sights, sights and smells that I remember growing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sounds. Speaker 1: --up--sounds, sights, yeah. Again, I--the, the sounds in New York City [New York, New York] and the Bronx [New York] of, of going to visit my [maternal] grandmother [Eugenia Hensley Slade]. The, the L train [elevated train], the noise, the taxis, the tropic. When I was in high school, I remember watching the World Trade Center [New York, New York] go up across the river [Hudson River] in my high school [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey]. And we used to ride into New York City every now and again and out, but that's because my high school was right there at the--I guess you call it lower Jersey City [New Jersey], at the end of--right across the river from Man- from Manhattan [New York]. Sights--you did say sights that I remember? Speaker 2: Sights, smells, and sounds. Speaker 1: I guess I remember the, the, the--well, I remember the houses that we lived in, the sights that, that--the neighborhoods that we were in I remember Clinton Avenue was a house we lived on upstairs and downstairs from my cousins. We lived on top; they lived on the bottom. There was a churchyard across the street where we used to play football. I remember playing all kinds of sports in the street, you know, stopping while the cars came up and that sort of thing. I remember those kinds of things. Do, do you mean even younger days of (unclear)-- Speaker 2: It--yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, it's interesting, I, I, I guess I don't remember a lot of things like that. But I'm not sure what specific I, I can recall in terms of smells. I--you know, I, I grew up in urban America. You know, I--Jersey City in the 1970s--and this is when I'm, you know, now a, a teenager--was, was amongst--I remember there was something called the 'Places Rated Almanac' ['Places Rated Almanac: The Classic Guide for Finding Your Best Places to Live in America,' David Savageau] and rated Jersey City as the worst place in America to live. And this is when we're living there, in the early '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s]. And that's not a sight or a smell, but I remember that vividly. And I remember--I just remember family being around a lot. I had--like I said earlier, I had a lot of aunts and uncles and people coming and going. We lived in a busy place. Speaker 2: So were there--were holidays very active and lots-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --of people around? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, lots of--lots of--our family has always come together on holidays. Again, trips to--and traffic--I remember endless traffic trying to get to my grandmother's house in the Bronx and my aunt Barbara's [Barbara Slade] house. The--they lived out--further out in Rockaway, New York [Rockaway, Queens, New York], and we lived in New Jersey. So I can all--I remember getting in the car and you know, getting stuck in the Lincoln [Lincoln Tunnel] and Holland Tunnel (unclear)--had a--been doing that all my life. I did that this morning (laughter)--most mornings and I come in still. But we have not--we've not had a, a big family reunion, per se. And that's one of the questions you asked and I--on the--on the questionnaire, and I--and I, I, I wanted to--I think it's a great idea. There was something of a family reunion of about thirty people last summer, but I couldn't make it (laughter). I had planned to be there, but I ended up--I was in South Africa of all places waiting on Nelson Mandela. Speaker 2: Right, I remember 'cause we were supposed to interview you around that time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly. Speaker 2: --that's right. Speaker 1: --that wa- exactly, that-- Story_ID: 665064 Speaker 1: So was religion--did it play a role in your family? Speaker 2: Yes, we grew up in Zion Baptist Church in Jersey City [New Jersey]. Reverend Charles T. Epps [Charles T. Epps, Sr.] is the pastor--fire and brimstone and, and all that. I became a Christian as a young child. I, I don't remember what age I was baptized and accepted Christ as my savior. But that was--that was--yeah, in my teens--earl- early, early teens maybe--you know, late great--late elementary school [P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey], once I could understand what I was doing. I could remember sitting in church, though, with my cousins and we kind of snickering at what was going on when people were feeling the spirit or something and standing up and shouting. And I can remember kind of always remember my, my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] and fa- my mother and father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] kind of, you know, quiet, quiet. I can remember looking back--there was a clock in the back of the church there. I can remember looking at it to see how close we were getting to one o'clock when the football games were gonna start and when we were gonna get out here 'cause the service was something like eleven to one [o'clock]. I, I can remember--you know, the church was a--it was very important to my family. Hanging above the altar there was a big cross and a big, big white gold trim, I guess it was, a cross with a background that my family dedicated to the church when my--I guess it was when my, my grandmother [Tempie Jackson Allen] passed away. There were a couple of stained glass windows in the church that one was from my uncle, Charles Allen [Charles K. Allen, Sr.], who died relatively young. He was--I guess my uncle Charlie was--he was my father's older brother. And we were--I was--growing up I was very close to his kids, the C.K. Allens we used to call them, Chuck [Charles K. Allen, Jr.], Craig [Craig Allen], Corky [Carlton Allen], Clifford [Clifford Allen], Chris [Christopher Allen], Gayle [Gayle Allen Brown]. I was kind of like the, the same age as the second one, Craig. We were all very close, and he died. My uncle Charles died. Oh god, I wanna say--(unclear)--I don't think he was sixty. I think he was in his fifties, and it was shocking because he was always a very healthy, robust individual. And I don't remember what happened, but--but no, but to answer your question, though, church has always been something of a, a foundation. I--you know, I can tell you honestly, though, that as I've traveled, I--I've--you know, I, I think I've come to respect and understand and appreciate people of all kinds, all faiths, and I don't--I don't--even though I'm a Christian, I, I, I don't like aspects of it that are exclusive, in that they excl- excludes other non-believers and that this is the way and the only way and literally--lit- the literal way. So, I mean--this didn't happen growing up. This, this is kind of happening now-- Speaker 1: Right because-- Speaker 2: --since I've been older. Speaker 1: --when you were raised, that--I mean, Baptists tend to be traditional Baptists, very dogmatic, and this is the only way. I wanna ask you--so your family--this church was your family's church? Speaker 2: In many ways it was, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother--my mother used to sing in the choir--chapel choir. My, my uncles and aunts were deacons and deaconesses and ushers. You know, we, we, we, we went to Sunday school, it was next door to the church in the basement. The church was a walk from our home, under the avenue [Clinton Avenue], up the street. We had to walk past a fairly rough little stretch of neighborhood to get there, and we always used to walk quickly (laughter). Story_ID: 665065 Speaker 1: Is there a song that you--you know, I, I assume you sing spirituals, but is there a song that reminds you of growing up if you hear it today? Speaker 2: I can't think of it. I remember there was a song that my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] used to sing as a soloist in the choir, and I'd, I'd, I'd have to ask her what it was, but I sometimes think of it. But I'm not sure that there's any particular song-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that--you mean growing up just generally growing up? Speaker 1: Yeah, in, in--I mean in church [Zion Baptist Church, Jersey City, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Oh in church. Speaker 1: I would (unclear) in church, yeah, that just sort of takes you back to that. But was the minister [Charles T. Epps, Sr.]--was he was a fire and brimstone--you know, did he--was he of the Baptist tradition, you know, following the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a typical--well, not typical, but he was--he was a big man, and he used to storm across the, the, the, the pulpit, stomping and banging on the altar, and he, you know, he, he was a thunderous, you know--yes you will--you will--you know. Speaker 1: And, and then-- Speaker 2: All-- Speaker 1: --the choir would sing. Speaker 2: Or the organ would play-- Speaker 1: Would play--the organ would play. Speaker 2: --and then you know, the, the--then the choir would come in when he was sort of winding it down. And I was saying come on choir, come on choir. Speaker 1: But you're a little, and you wanna like-- Speaker 2: I wanted to get out of there, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I wanna get out. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At least it didn't go to two or three [o'clock]. Speaker 2: Well, interestingly now, the church is, is not what it used to be. I think the church is--I, I drove by there a few years ago, and it's a shadow of what it used to be. I was there for a funeral maybe five or seven years ago. And I remember looking around and the things I was describing earlier, the stained glass and all that, they're still there, but it just felt like a--well, when you're older and you go back to the places that wa- that you visited when you were young, everything's smaller. Everything seems so much smaller now. But it was--but it's, it's a church that--there are several churches nearby, and I think they--they're all struggling to some extent, and competing, if you will, against each other. I went to one of the other churches a couple of weeks ago for a funeral of a--of a dear aunt, and I noticed the same thing about that church. But this is--you know, this is urban America; this is Jersey City [New Jersey]; this is--you know, this is what life is. It's, it's--there's poverty, there's people struggling, and the community reflects that in every way like--including the churches. Story_ID: 665066 Speaker 1: Now what are you like as a young boy? What are your interests? You mentioned, you know, sports, but what are your interests as a young boy? And I'm-- Speaker 2: I was raised in sports. I, I was gonna be a professional athlete. I was gonna be a professional football player or a professional basketball player. And obviously, I didn't quite make that 'cause I'm sitting here. But, but no, that was my--you know, I used to just love games and sports out in the street and any kind of game, but primarily football and basketball. And as I grew older, like in seventh or eighth grade [at P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey], I played on a recreation football league team--community team. Speaker 1: What position? Speaker 2: I was the quarterback-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of course. I was the quarterback, and one year we were undefeated barely scored upon. We were that good. And I can remember that taking place in, in Arlington Park, right across the street from the church that we used to go to [Zion Baptist Church, Jersey City, New Jersey], that were members of. And that was--that was big, big thing in my life as a--as a young, young kid because we were--you know, we were--we were champions. And, and I played for a couple of years. And the team was called the Bergen Colts. And I remember one of the coaches--we used to call him--his name was Six Finger Bernie [ph.] because he had some sort of little growth appendage on his pinky. And, and so when he would point, you'd see him and this little appendage would be shaking (laughter). It was just very weird. I'm, I'm not quite--know what it was. But, but he was a great coach and we won a lot of games. And then when I went to high school [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey], I, I tried out for the football team. And I was gonna be the second string quarterback so I quit and started playing basketball, and I played a lot of basketball. And I made the all-county teams, and-- Speaker 1: What posit- now what, what-- Speaker 2: I was a shooting guard, I guess you'd call it. I--you know, I played guard. I was one of the smaller guys on the team, and I--and I, I, I like to shoot the ball (laughter) and--who doesn't, I guess? And I played basketball in high school for, for four years. And then when I got to college, I, I was a walk on. I wasn't recruited by the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but I walked onto the team and played freshmen year. Freshmen year we were seventeen and one. It was the best, best year of basketball that the--that the University of Pennsylvania had in many, many years. And as seniors--this is one of my claims to fame--as seniors that team went to the Final Four of the NCAA tournament [NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament], where out in Utah they lost to a team, Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], led by a guy named Magic Johnson. I remember the score was forty-five to fourteen at the half (laughter). And I went because again, here, here I could travel free. I could fly anywhere so I, I got on the plane in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and flew out to Utah, Salt Lake City; probably crashed on the floor of some- someplace and there we were. Speaker 1: That's a pretty impressive history there. Speaker 2: That's one of my best memories of college. And you know, yeah, I mean it was--it was--we, we followed the team through the tournament. We drove down to North Carolina when they were playing there and, and then out to, to Utah and all that-- Story_ID: 665067 Speaker 1: So I wanna take you back to elementary school. So you go to Mur- I mean Murray School, which is--it's a neighborhood school. And are you--you're going--you say you fair- moved around fair- fairly frequently as a family. But is, is it all in the same area, because you're going to the same elementary-- Speaker 2: It's, it's James F. Murray School P.S. No. 38 [P.S. 38, James F. Murray School], and I believe it's still there on Stegman Parkway in Jersey City [New Jersey]. Now this is another huge thing my parents [Shirley Slade Allen and Lindsay Allen, Jr.] did for me. We moved a lot--to a lot of places, but the school sys- the way the school system worked, it was--there was something called open enrollment (background noise)--do you wanna pause? Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: But your parents--you know that even though you, you moved around, your, your parents-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah, we went to--Shirley [sic. Allen's sister, Lynette Allen-Perry], Shirley and I both went to P.S. 38. It was a public grammar school. And Jersey City had something called open enrollment, which is sort of like a magnet system, but, but there were better schools and worse schools. And our school that we went to was on the other side of town, frankly, and it was in the white Jewish community, and we--where we didn't live. And--but somehow my parents were able to get us into that school and so that made a huge difference as well because the, the neighborhood school that I could have walked to--the neighborhood school I could have walked to wasn't nearly as academically good as the--as the place we went to. But as, as a result, I started taking a bus--well, it--my parents would take us to school when we're young and pick us up, and my mother could do that because she wasn't working. And then as I got older I had--I got a public city bus from our house across town, then I--then I'd walk to school and do the same thing I reverse. So--I mean, from, from fifth or sixth grade on I'd been commuting to, to school, to elementary school and to high school. It would seem that, that's a recurrent theme in my life is that I was able to get to the better schools, and they often weren't in my neighborhood; and literally from P.S. 38, James Murray School to St. Peter's Prep [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey], where I commuted from the suburbs back into the city, to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where I went to college, which was--you know, the college--I went to the better schools and that's, that's really what's made the difference. Speaker 2: So were you always a good student? Speaker 1: I had to be a good student because my sister before me was a good student. Speaker 2: So you--as you said, you were always keeping up with her? Speaker 1: I was always--yeah, I always had to keep up with my sister, and she, she, she got great grades, and so I was coming along next. And my mother was working in the, the lunchroom for the--at the school, so there's more--you know, it's like (laughter) there's no--there's--there was no way out essentially, yeah. Story_ID: 665068 Speaker 1: What grades did she work in the lunchroom [at P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey]? Were you--was this before fifth grade or was it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I kind of remember it later, when I was fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth grades. I remember that. I remember--I remember being an older student at the time is when--when it--when it was happening for the most part. And the, the other thing, my, my, ma- I have a number of teachers in my family. There, there--my family is a family of educators. My father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] served in the [U.S.] Army during the Korean War, and he was a teacher--a trainer of some--I don't know remember exactly what he was doing in, in the Army. I have two, two of his sisters, my aunt Edna St. Paul [Edna Allen St. Paul] and my aunt Jeannette Williams [Jeannette Allen Williams], who have both since passed, were both high school principals. And they were among the first African American high school principals in the State of New Jersey in 1960s. My aunt Jean was the first African American principal at a high school [West Side High School] in Newark, New Jersey. And my aunt Edna was at Lincoln High School [Academy of Governance and Social Sciences at Lincoln High School, Jersey City, New Jersey] and went on to become the assistant superintendent of schools. So with that sort of stuff happening in your family, education, education, education, and, and that--that's, that's what it was. Speaker 1: And they probably were helpful in guiding your parents in a lot of respects too, you know, with--you know, letting them know maybe what schools or you know, this is--this-- Speaker 2: I think--I think in some ways yes, and you know, we very conscious of it because, again, we were a fairly close knit family in terms of we all lived in Jersey City [New Jersey], and we'd all see each other often. And you know, again, my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] never graduated from high school, and my father graduated from high school, but then went into the work world and, and then--and then went back to college. He graduated in '77 [1977], so I think he was--let's see, '77 [1979]--'29 [1929], so he was almost fifty. Is that correct? Is that that the right? Yeah, yeah, he was in his late forties-- Speaker 1: That's a-- Speaker 2: --or fifties when he--when he finally graduated from college. So watching that, it was inspiring and it was also instructive about how you--how you make yourself better. You know, my father was always about, you know--I remember when I was in college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--getting out of college, he always wanted me to get a--get, get into a management trainee program--a kind of management trainee program at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] or some big company, because this was the kind of thing that he was never able to, to do. And he--you know, study accounting, study something--and I, of course, did none of that (laughter). Speaker 1: Be- because he wanted you to have a path, and he wanted you to have security too. Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, and this--and this was what he envisioned as the, the way. But I, I saw other things and took other routes. But, but the--but the point was that he--you know, my parents--they always pushed us. They always tried to expose us to a lot of things. Speaker 1: Like, like what? 'Cause I wanna go to St. Peter's Prep [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey], but what did they--what are the things that you remember them exposing you to? Speaker 2: Museums in New York [New York], skiing, things like that. I had a--had an Aunt Jean, the--one of the principals who, along with my parents, she used to take us out to, to, to events, my sister [Lynette Allen-Perry] and my two older cousins. So we would come right to New York and, and go to museums, and theater, and plays, not no high end Broadway stuff, but the small--smaller thing. My cousins had a summer vacation place, a spot that they went to where they rented a cabin for a couple of weeks up at Lake Sebago it was. And so we got out and you know, recreation. We--you know, water sports, swimming. I learned how to swim early. You know, a lot of black kids don't--never learn how to swim. But I went to day camp; I went bible study camp; I went to a--again, as--you know, as a--as a kid, high school and earlier. So in that way my parents always were trying to show us things beyond our, our world. And I, I do the same thing with my daughter [Siobhan Allen] now because--I mean, I think if you--if you see an experience something then it becomes a real possibility for you. But if you have no idea that people can actually do that and make money, or do that and live in a place like that--if you can't conceive of it, how are you going to aspire to it? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So that, that was what they were trying to do. Story_ID: 665069 Speaker 1: So tell me about St. Peter's Prep [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey] and how that even came, came into--you know how, how that was even discussed as this, as a possibility, 'cause this is all--it's all boys, right? It's all boys-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and it's-- Speaker 2: So, I'm seventh--seventh grade, grammar school [P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey]. I'm sitting in class and the teacher is talking about some program called the Higher Achievement Program. And it's, it's a program where young kids of promise, of color, spend six weeks at St. Peter's Prep in the summer taking courses to prepare you for eighth grade and prepare you for the entrance exam to take to go into private school, as opposed to public school. And I, of course, wanted nothing to do with this--spend my summer in school? You gotta be kidding me. And so I'm quite sure how it happened, but for some reason my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] happened to come by the classroom (laughter), my mother who's--the, the, the lunchroom monitor happens to come by the classroom or meet the teacher or something hap- I don't quite remember what, what happened. But, make a long story short, I was in--I was suddenly in this Higher Achievement Program for the summer at St. Peter's Prep. And that was seventh grade--summer of seventh grade. And then during eighth grade I took the entrance exam and got a scholarship, and so that's how I got into St. Peter's Prep, again, because here was some--here was an opportunity; here was a door; here was something different, something unique. And, and you know, my mother and father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.]--anytime something like that came up, "Yeah, that's what you're gonna do. You're not gonna go this way, where everybody's going, you're gonna go this way," which is the more unique way, which is the op--which, which is the opportunity that you--which is the opportunity that in many ways they never had. So that's how I got into St. Peter's Prep. And it was an all-boy Catholic school run by Jesuits. We, we were exempt from religion because we weren't Catholic. You know, it's a place where--I took three years of Latin; I took Latin honors; you know, we took--it was--it was--it was good--a good solid education. Story_ID: 665070 Speaker 1: One of the things that we did as well, the, the--there was a group of us who started something we called the Ebony Club, which was a--I guess my, my first--my first steps of student activism. Basically, it was a--it was a club. We threw parties, and we raised money to create a scholarship fund to get other kids into the school because the tuition was--I think the tuition was about eight hundred dollars a year. This is 1970s. And of course, for my parents [Shirley Slade Allen and Lindsay Allen, Jr.] this was--you know, to scrape this together, and, and they did, and they took out loans. I, I, I learned later in life how, how, how they had to borrow and to, to make--you know, eight hundred dollars doesn't sound like a ma- a lot now, but (unclear)--but it--back then and for them it, it was a big stretch. And so that's how I got to St. Peter's Prep [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey]. And we, we formed this Ebony Club, and I think to this day there's still a, a, a small endowment that the scholarships funds that brings some other kids to school. Speaker 2: So the Ebony Club were the black students? Speaker 1: Yeah, essentially. Speaker 2: And how man--how large was the black student population? Speaker 1: We were a very, very small group. We were, you know, 5, 5 percent, if that. You know, there was--there were several dozen of us I guess at--the, the school was probably close to four or five hundred I wanna say. And there--you know, I don't think we were 10 percent. Speaker 2: Do--are you still in touch with some of the people that you went to school with there? Speaker 1: One in particular, yes. One of my best friends is a guy named Tony Powell [Anthony Powell], who now lives down in Delaware. And he, he and I met that summer of seventh grade. And, and--yeah, I'm in touch with him as much as I am with anybody. And, and he's probably the only one who I really still keep in touch with. Although I ran into--at, at a funeral a couple of weeks ago in Jersey City [New Jersey] for, for an aunt who passed away--I ran into some, some guys I went to high school with. But I didn't really--I'm not--you know, nowadays I, I--in social media you, you see all kinds of things and people find you and--but is that a real relationship. I don't-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) it's not-- Speaker 1: --you know-- Speaker 2: It's not. Speaker 1: --it's, it's not. And because I'm--you know, I'm in the-- Speaker 2: The public eye. Speaker 1: --public eye, I, I--over the years I've gotten emails, phone calls, whatever from people out there who I went to high school with or--I once got a, a letter or something from a young woman I went to grammar school [P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey] with. Her name was Janet Schultz [ph.]. I remember--again, I was going to the--this is a Jewish part of town. But I remember--I remember her from school and then now thirty years later--forty years later out the--so we had a conversation; we exchanged a couple of emails or something and--but, but for the most part, my co- the friends who I am closest to and who I--are people who I met in college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 665071 Speaker 1: Okay, so I do wanna ask about Jesuit education. How do you think it changed you or what was it like there? You know, I know you talk about three years of Latin and then also honors Latin, which is pretty good. But (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I don't remember a word of it. Speaker 1: I know. But I just wanna know how that--how you feel that, that educational system--yeah, 'cause people--I've heard a lot of people rave about Jesuit education. Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure what distinguishes Jesuit from friar education or from any other Catholic or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or Cat- I mean the Catholic school education. Speaker 2: Well, this, this was--you know, it was no nonsense, you know. It was, you know, do your homework. It was all boys, no distractions, no girls running around. It was rigorous. You know, there was homework every night. And, and I--and I think in the, the wearing a jacket and tie every day was just a part of the--instilling discipline and--in, in, in all of us. And, and it was a college prep--St. Peter's Prep [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey]. It was all about preparing you for college, whereas nowadays most high schools are--you know, they're not about--some of the kids are about that, but this place, the expectation was that everybody's gonna go to college, everybody's was gonna go to good colleges too, the best colleges; and, and that's what happened; that's--it prepared me for the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I also got into Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], which you know are amongst the best colleges in the sch- in the country. Story_ID: 665072 Speaker 1: So why did you choose Penn over Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] used to do a very clever thing. There's a--you ever heard of the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival]? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: The Penn Relays track--it's a track in--Penn Relays are a big track and field event in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], that East Coast thing and all that. So some of my, my, my, my buddies [at St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey] were on the track team. They ran in the Penn Relays and I'd go down and hang out with them. And so Penny recruited all the black students and bought--from all over. "Come on down," the recruitment becomes the Penn Relay. "It's like this all the time. Come on down." And so that's one reason I--and it was close. It was Philadelphia. It's a big city. It was--I remember Amtrak [National Railroad Passenger Corporation], it used to cost six dollars and twenty-five cents to get on the Amtrak train to go down there. And it was urban, it was big, and it wasn't as pretentious as I thought some of the other Ivy League schools were. I visited a couple. I visited Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I visited Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], which was nearby, and I just felt that Penn was more down to earth. It was a big place; a lot going on in Philadelphia; had a big city nearby, right around it actually. And, and for those reasons I, I, I picked that place. Story_ID: 665073 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when you arrive. 'Cause you arrive in the--let's see, do you arrive in the fall of-- Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975], okay. And so tell me what, what this--you know, you--this is--really your first time--I mean first time away--I mean, well, you've been going to--but this is your first time away as anyone going into school. So what are the--what is your experience there and both from a social standpoint, as well as a class (unclear) education standpoint? Speaker 2: Well, I moved into a place called the W.E.B. Du Bois residential house [W.E.B. Du Bois College House] on Penn's campus, which was two floors of a dorm that was mostly black students, and there as a--there are cultural resources. There was a library at the end of the hall, and there were various activities throughout the year so, so I moved into that community, which, which helped the transition. To some st- to some extent it was self-segregating, but, but at this point in my life I felt this was--this was great, this and my--a good friend from high school [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey], Tony Powell [Anthony Powell], who I had met in seventh grade [at P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey], he also went to Penn so we were roommates that first year. Actually, we became roommates the second year. No, you're right, we--no, I'm right. We were roommates the first two years, so, so that helped. And it also helped that, again, this place is only an hour and a half from home so I was able to get home fairly easily for holidays and, and you know, time off, and so on and so forth. In terms of my personal life, I, I remember I had a--I had a high school sweetheart, a woman named Rita Johnson [ph.], who I was madly in love with in high school. And I remember telling her, "Oh, this will just be four years and I'll be back." And of course, it didn't work out that way. But, but I guess that, as much as anything, speaks to how before I got to his environment I--my--I had one worldview, and how this place just opened my eyes to a whole new range of possibilities because they were students from literally all over the, the country, or all over the world--not big in the national (unclear), but all over the country from Washington [D.C.], New York [New York], Phil- Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I was the kid from Jersey. You know, I used to say New York but nobody ever bought that 'cause they knew--they knew it was New Jersey. So there as that. And, and as I was saying earlier, because I had this travel benefit from my father's [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] work at United Airlines, I went to--I went with friends to spring break in New Orleans [Louisiana] and out to California. And I would never take a, a non-stop flight. I'd often just take stops that--you know, I'd get off in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], get on a bus, ride around town, see what was going on, take a later fight that night or take an overnight flight so I didn't have to worry about a hotel room here or there. I was really a bit of a vagabond at times doing that. But I think the other thing--the main thing I, I met at Penn was this class or group of people who were like me, who were really high achievers, who were really successful, who came from--I, I noticed too some of them came from much wealthier backgrounds than, than I did. And, and it, it opened my eyes to this whole world of, of, of, of the next step and what was possible. And you know, I, I took a number of African American literature and history courses to sort of--you know, the, the, the black students that--on the campus, we were sort of--now we weren't like marching and protesting and all that, but we were--you know, socially we came together for a lot of things and all that. I joined a fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, back in--but that was not until my junior year. I played basketball in my freshman year. So being on the basketball team was sort of a big deal. Story_ID: 665074 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And walk on, how, how does--how do walk ons work? 'Cause you said I was a walk on, so I wasn't recruited but I--so you were--you, you-- Speaker 2: Basically, when basketball season's about to start you approach the athletic director or coach and there's a--there's a tryout. They have open tryouts for people to come. And so you just go through that process and--you know, actually I'd--you know, I'd been playing informally with, with, with guys in the gym because this--I guess the season starts in like October, November. So as soon as I got there in September, I'd, I'd met some of the guys, and that--and that's how it happened. The coach was a guy named Chuck Daly, who became a--an NBA [National Basketball Association] hall of fame coach, the--with the Detroit Pistons. He's the man who made me a student full time (laughter) in many ways, because I got cut (laughter) as a--as a sophomore [at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I wasn't--I wasn't big enough. I wasn't fast enough. We had a guy on our team named James Brown, who was like the fastest high school track athlete in the State of Florida. He was--he ran like a 9-200 [meters] or something. He was a just--and we had the player of the year at a high school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and the player of the year from New York City [New York, New York]. And it was just a phenomenal--but--and, and to be honest with you, basketball wasn't that--I mean, I, I--you know, I, I did my thing that year and then when I didn't make it, I, I moved on. And to some extent I, I had to find things to move on to, because at that--until that point in my life, my identity was so wrapped up in being a, a--an athlete, a jock. You know, I was a basketball star in high school [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey]--not a star, but I was--you know. And here I was--you know--which is one reason I joined the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]. Story_ID: 665075 Speaker 1: The other thing that I did at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was I--one of the guys I met there was a bit of an intellectual, a bit of a--he was kind, kind of strange actually (laughter), but he was very smart, a guy named Roscoe Glover. And he was in the political science department and he also was in our dorm [W.E.B. Du Bois College House]. And to make a long story short, he was--he was taking a--he had figured out a way to, to essentially sub matriculate into graduate school while being an undergraduate. And he was in the process of doing two degrees, a bachelor's and a master's, in four years, as opposed to five years, 'cause it was a one year master's--or six years. And so that was the program that I enrolled in as a sophomore. So--and it appealed to me for a lot of reasons. I, I enjoyed the substance of it, but it all--this also seemed like a, a cost effective way to go to graduate school. If you could do it all in four years, why not? And so--and it, it was demanding in terms of, you, you, you essentially took, you know, extra courses, and they were graduate level course. You did a lot more writing, a lot more researching, and, and so on and so forth. And, and so it really got intense junior year, and senior I, I had to write a thesis. I wrote a master's level thesis that was--you know, some eighty, ninety pages. It was called 'Political Partichipa--Political Participation from Protest to Politics: Black Elected Officers of the 1970s' [ph.], and it was all about how the, the African American community, led by this post Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], led by all these newly elected mayors and county commissions and so forth at the local level and a few at the state level. This became the dynamic--the, the, the cutting edge dynamic for black political participation in, in the voting the system. Whereas the '60s [1960s] had been marching in the streets, now there are many more elected officials. And this is something that Roscoe also sort of put me on to. He, he dubbed a, a work that was sort of like that. Strange thing about him is that I, I--once I left college I've not seen this guy since; it's like thirty, forty years. And I've heard all kinds of stories about how he's just dropped off and had, had all kinds of issues or problems, whatever. But it's-- Speaker 2: And he was--he was the motivation for that program then. Speaker 1: Yeah, he introduced me to it and then--and he was doing it. He was, I guess, two or three ahead of me, so in many ways he was a mentor. Speaker 2: So how did you do your research? Were you--what were your primary sources? Did you do any interviews at all? Speaker 1: A lot of it was the library and books, just reading. One reason I went to New Orleans [Louisiana] was a good friend of mine is Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], who's the head of the National Urban League; and his father at the time was mayor of New Orleans, Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial]. And so Marc, his family, his father, were really into politics and that was--you know, I remember going to their--talking to him, but it wasn't formal research, "Let me sit you down; I'm a college student; I wanna do this," but that was--he, he was living this whole experience of black elected officials. And, and that's one, one reason that Marc and I became pretty close and still are to this day, and, and that was one bit of hands on research I did. But most of it was just at the library, and-- Speaker 2: So Marc was, was he in your class? Speaker 1: A year behind me. Speaker 2: Year be- okay, year behind you, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 665076 Speaker 1: Well so what are you doing during the summer then? Summers--are you working just-- Speaker 2: Summers I, I was doing a number of things. I think the first couple of summers--well, I'm not--I can't remember the exact years, but one thing I was doing was going back to my old high school, St. Peter's Prep [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey], to that summer program, seventh grade, the Higher Achievement Program, and I was teaching. I would spend six or eight weeks teaching English, current events, whatever; and, and tutoring and mentoring kids to come along to go--who are doing something I did. I probably did that for a couple of summers. And I did that also summers when I was in high school. And the other thing I did summers was I'd gone to a camp. Something call the Pol- the Police Anchor Camp. It was a New York City [New York, New York], Fresh Air Fund camp for disadvantaged kids. And I'd gone to the camp as a camper once. I'm not quite sure how I did that because I wasn't from New York, but I got there. And then I went back there a couple of times as a counselor in my later high school years where you basically spend the whole summer, two months, away at a sleep away camp, and, and do all those kinds of things, swimming, hunting--not hunting--swimming and athletics and so--and so forth. And, and that was--that was something else I did. And I remember that place I met a lot of young kids who were--who were from really bad backgrounds. They--the kids who went to the camp were orphans, juvenile delinquents--not violent records or they wouldn't (unclear)--broken homes. You know, they were kids who, who really were facing a lot of tough odds. And I hadn't thought about that in a while. But it, it really was just something I felt like I wanted to do. And, and I, I think it as I'm saying that, you know, these are kids that are kind of like my daughter [Siobhan Allen]. You know, 'cause I know this is--you know, it's--it--to some extent, my (unclear)--here my daughter, the orph- orphan from Ethiopia-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who--whose mother died in childbirth and whose father died a few months before she was born from tuberculosis or something. She was the--she is the youngest of five kids. She has four brothers and sisters, and the family--her, her maternal grandmother made her available for adoption because she just couldn't take care of her anymore and--or she couldn't take care of one more--one more child. But anyway, but that's what I was doing during the summers of, of high school and college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And then, then one summer in college I, I, I, I stayed in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. My father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] got me a job at Philadelphia International Airport [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. You know, those guys who load bags on the planes? Well, that was me, driving around in one of the little carts for the summer. It was a great job. It was a union job, but I had an inside track. Speaker 1: You made a lot of mon- the--those jobs make a lot of money (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, exactly, I made a lot of money. Because again, I mean, this ca- college--this was expensive. This was a--you know, again, my parents took out all kinds of loans. I had loans, but they, you know, they probably mortgaged the house a couple of times. And you know, they had two kids in college. My sister [Lynette Allen-Perry] went to Rutgers University [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. Story_ID: 665077 Speaker 1: I mean it's really a great period too, though, 'cause kids are coming into these schools, and there's a lot of socializing going on in that way and there're opportunities too, you know, for, for graduation. So you're thinking you'd take up poli sci [political science] because of what? What are you thinking you wanna do at that point? Speaker 2: I guess I'm thinking that I wanna be one of the smart guys who's there standing behind the, the president or somebody, or the senator or somebody, or, or I'm the analyst who's gonna solve poverty or--I also--I also took a lot of courses about the political development of Africa and international relations, and this--these were the--this was the beginnings of my interest in the world travel. And one of the other things that was going on at the time on campus. I'm just reminded about it because it was the, the South Africa divestment campaigns were going on to, to, to dissuade American companies from doing business with South Africa. Mandela [Nelson Mandela] is in prison, and the whole anti-apartheid movement is gaining strength. And there was a--there were a couple of sit-ins on the campus. I didn't really participate much, but, but--but intellect- intellectually I was becoming interested in these kinds of places and the obvious parallels to the 1960s in, in our country. And I remember hearing--the first time I heard about South African apartheid, I said, "So tell me again what's happening there. There's 50 million black people and there's 5 million white people, and the white people are in charge of the--tell me how--now who does that--how's that work exactly?" And, and so that's, that's what I was--that's intellectually where I was sort of moving. And, and I was--at some point, I, I thought that I was going to just continue on--I, I love doing academic work. I was--you know, I was a bit of a nerd. And I, I applied for Ph.D. fellowships; I won a couple, and I, I could have continued on after graduation--graduation got a little complicated because to do the bachelor's [degree] and master's in four years, you had certain requirements you had to make. And to make a long story short, I didn't quite have the grade point average that I needed to get the master's degree. And the reason I didn't have it is because one professor gave me a C for a course instead of a B. I had a straight B average, but this one professor gave me a C, which made my average 2.87 whatever, as opposed to 3.0. And, and he also--and there was a departmental exam that you had to take that was some substance and some theory, and I didn't pass the theory part of it, which was the same course that this guy was giving me a C in. It was called the nature of political science, which I'm still trying to figure out what is the nature of political science, all this theoretical stuff. So graduation comes and I don't have my master's degree, and I'm devastated, and I'm angry, and I'm--what am I gonna do? And I--you know, it was paralyzing to the point where you couldn't even--well how do I--what do I say in my resume? How do I--you know, I wanna tell people I have this, but I don't. And I was just sort of really--and I was angry at this guy. So things moved--I, I left school [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; I went back home; I went to--spent the summer teaching at a community college, living at my sister's [Lynette Allen-Perry] house in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. I came back home and then was working at the [U.S.] Census Bureau. This is 1979, '80 [1980]. They're preparing for the decennial census count, and I got a job through some local connection as a like a PR [public relations], an office manager during the Census Bureau, meanwhile working on this academic stuff. And so I, I resubmitted the paper, retook that departmental exam, and I, I--and the guy still wouldn't give me a higher grade. He still gave me this C for this course, you know, this is after several more months of work, resubmitting the paper, trying to work this out. And he knew that this is what was at stake, that, that this was holding me from my master's degree. And so at some point I just had to walk away from it. Story_ID: 665078 Speaker 1: And around that time, I went to a job fair because I was--you know, I, I, I was just--I guess I was feeling very insecure, 'cause here I am this supposed whatever, and I'm not there. And that's how I got a job at CBS News, and that's how I--it was a--here's another one--another my, my father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] story: the first job that CBS offered me was midnight to eight [o'clock], weekends only, part-time job in their newsroom as--what's called a desk assistant. Essentially, you're a clerk for the--in the newsroom. You deliver people's mail; you make copies; you hand out logs; you go for coffee, although they kind of cut that out, you know. But you're just--you're, you're just there, and you answer the phone, and you--and--but it's--but you're in this, this--I'm in CBS News for god sakes, you know. It's just I'm in this wonderful environment and Walter Cronkite is over there; and you know, Charlie Osgood [Charles Osgood] is over there, and these greats in the business. And I'd never taken a communications course; I'd never taken a journalism course. I'd never thought about even being in this world, but the reason I approached them was because an election was coming up, and I'd heard that these are the kinds of organizations that, that hire additional people for elections. So that was my pitch to them: "Hey, I'm a political science guy. Can I help out during the election coverage?" And, and they gave me this, this job. And I remember when I--when I was offered the job, I said, "Oh, I'm not gonna do this--midnight to eight, weekends only, $100 a, a week. I'm, I'm an Ivy League--here I am a graduate student [at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--ah, ah, ah." And I remember my father looking at me like I was crazy and saying, "You're gonna take that job. You're gonna do your best at that job, and it's gonna grow into something really good for you." I said, "Dad, come on. (Unclear) my friends and (unclear) friends they're all on Wall Street," da, da, da, "big car." And my father, again, you know, just you know, he knew like--I mean, now it seems like a no brainer of course, but, but then it didn't to me. So I took the job. And I would take the bus at night to port authority [Port Authority Bus Terminal, New York, New York], and walk from the port authority up to the 57th Street, and you know--midnight, midnight to eight, weekends only quickly became midnight to eight, five days a week. And then midnight to eight, five days a week became six to two, five days a week or something like that. Speaker 2: And over what period of time is that? Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: Is that within the first year? Speaker 1: It was only a year. I, I, I know it sounds like it was forever, but it was only a year. And what--when I was there, I, I heard about something called a, a, a reporter training program that CBS News ran and--for minorities and women. And the idea--I mean, all the media companies whenever they were under pressure, they would have these, essentially, affirmative action programs. And so I applied and I got a job in this reporter training program in--at one of the--they--in Charlotte, North Carolina, at a CBS affiliate [WBTV-TV]. The idea was they would take you, send you off to one of their affiliated stations and, and you could learn how to become a reporter or a producer. And that's, that's how I got my first job. And I walked into the TV station and then, you know, within a week or two, suddenly you're, I'm--there's a fire. "Ron [HistoryMaker Ron Allen], you're the only one here; go out and do it," (laughter). So, there I was. Story_ID: 665079 Speaker 1: You know, Ron [HistoryMaker Ron Allen], what I find interesting and I wanna ask you about is--I mean, 'cause we're talking about nine--1980, right--1980, '81 [1981], between those two, two situations. How many in this--in the training program--I mean, first of all, how many minorities--blacks, black males, black females are in the newsroom--in the main newsroom in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Very, very few. Speaker 1: Okay, do--can you give any of their names or do you remember? Speaker 2: Well, I, I know the other person who, who I went in the training program with, it was, was [HistoryMaker] Bill Whitaker, who's a CBS correspondent. And we went--we went together to Charlotte [WBTV-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina] together, and we both arrived there. But that training program was on and off. It was haphazard. It wasn't really very well structured. And there was only a handful of people who ever got into it. And ov- as the years would come, they--you know, when budgets got tight or-- Speaker 1: They would let it go-- Speaker 2: --the pressure was off. You know, that was something that, that wouldn't happen. Speaker 1: Okay, so now was, was--his background the same--similar to yours or did he have a journalism-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --background? Speaker 2: Bill is a bit older than I am. I think he's four or five years older than me, and I, I think--and at the time. He was working at, at the public TV station in San Francisco [California], KQED [KQED-TV], so he had something of a journalism background--TV background. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But in the newsroom itself, there are very few people of color. I mean, this is--I mean, one or two here or there, you know, people in, in--to some extent, in the margins. You know, it wasn't them--Ed Bradley was there too, of course, at CBS. And, and not long after I got in the building, I found his office and setup a meeting, and said, "So, how, how'd you do it and how do I do it?" And he was very--he was very cool, as Ed probably was. And you know, we didn't become very close, but he--I, I talked to him a number of times along the way, and he, he, he was one of the people who--I think he may have pointed me to this training program, or once I found out about it I, I asked him to help push me towards it, because all these things are, you know, whispered in somebody's ear. So he was very inspiring in getting, getting me started at that point as a reporter. Story_ID: 665080 Speaker 1: So you were in Charlotte [North Carolina] how long? Speaker 2: I was in Charlotte for fourteen months and fourteen days (laughter), and yes I counted. I hated it. My first time living in the South and I felt like, boy, this is like different (laughter). Not to sound like an obnoxious northerner, but I just felt like, wow, this is--this is different. And then I moved from there to Hartford [Connecticut] to a bigger station, a better job. I spent two years in Hartford, and then I spent--moved to Boston [Massachusetts] and spent four years there, kind of a bigger job [at WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts]. And then I moved to be a network correspondent in Washington [D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in 1989 I guess it was. Speaker 1: So, so why do you make that seem so easy, so--I mean because: one, you're having to learn. I mean, it's not like you're trained in journalism. And was there--what I'm trying to understand was there any--did that ever happen or any--was your background--you know, not having a journalism background, was that ever questioned? Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: No. So was there--what are you learning at each assignment? You know, who--what is the management? What are you learning about being on air--each place--you're on air then. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, journalism is, on its best days, history on the fly or raining political science on the fly. I mean, quickly, the first draft of history it's been called. And so, essentially, I took the skills that I used in college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to research and write papers to research and write stories. I was--I was producing something that was different, but in some ways the intellectual process was the same, was taking information, getting to the essence of it, and, and distributing it or showing it to somebody, you know, whether it's a professor and a thirty page paper or (unclear) paper, or in this case it was a, you know, TV. It was--that's what it was in one, one very general sense. But I had to learn everything about television, and that's what I did in Charlotte at the training program [at WBTV-TV]. I had never been on television. I'd--you know, I had to--I, I remember--I remember famously there was a guy there who was I think an assistant news director who told me--his name as Greenwald [Steve Greenwald] I believe; I can't remember his first name--who told me famously that I would never, ever amount to anything in this business as a TV reporter because my voice was just too shallow and too thin, and I didn't have the, the, the ability of the voice to, to be a on air person and I should become a producer, or work behind the scenes. And I often think of him (laughter). I often think--I often thought of him over the years when I was in a--in a tough situation or when some--you know, nothing--there's nothing like somebody telling you you can't do something to inspire you to do it. And, and so I just learned. I, I learned by copying. When I was at CBS, I would re-read scripts that others had written. I would--you know, one of the--and I tell young people this all the time. One of the best things about this business is that there's no secrets. You see people doing it, you know. You can--you can copy them; you can listen to them; you can see what there--how, how they--you don't necessarily know how they do it, but you can see what they're doing. And, and that's how--that's one way to learn. But I--and I had a lot of coaches and others along the way who were very helpful. Speaker 1: Did you have a coach there in Charlotte (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not a coach per se, but because it was a training program, I would send material back to a vice president in New York [New York] every--I, I was only there for a year so I did it maybe two or three times. And, and the--and the boss there would critique our work because the, the, the intent was that we were going to learn and that we would get back to the network at some point. That was the intent of the whole program, and so there was a conscious effort to, to train and guide, to some extent. Story_ID: 665081 Speaker 1: So you go to Hartford [Connecticut]. What did--what would you say is Con- is significant about the Hartford station? And is there--and I wanna know in, in each of the places, who is with you? Like, are you--you're co-anchoring there and you're doing weekend news? Speaker 2: No, I'm, I'm just a reporter. I've never been an anchor. Speaker 1: Oh you--oh, okay, reporter--never. Speaker 2: Never, never been an anchor. I've--I mean, I've done some film, but I-- Speaker 1: Right, right, right, okay. Speaker 2: --but I've never--not never, but I've--yeah, I've, I've always been a reporter-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --first, and I--there have been times I wanted to be an anchor, not so much in local news, but once I got to the national stage, and I've not really been able to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think the guy [Steve Greenwald] back in Charlotte [WBTV-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina], who talked about my voice and everything, I think he was right in that regard. But, but yeah, I've always been--you know, I've--I was all I'm--somebody said the other day I'm a reporter's type of reporter. I'm not a great performer. I'm not a great--I'm not just a pretty face. I--you know, when I go out and do a story, I do a lot of research. I--which goes back to this poli sci [political science] stuff. And you know, I'm too serious and too thoughtful, but I'll, I'll take that as opposed to being glib and just being--having the personality. I, I guess I'm a little bit resentful about it, but that's just the way the business is. And so, you know, the thing about Hartford was that it was a--it was a bigger market, probably twenty--top twenty market. And because Hartford is between Boston [Massachusetts] and New York [New York], there are a lot of people who went from Hartford to Boston or to New York. It was kind of a feeder, feeder market, as you go from triple A to double A to whatever. And, and again, because I was part of this program, I had something stamped on me that sort of gave me a, a little bit of a, let's watch out for this kid. And that--and then that's kind of how I got to Hartford, and then I wasn't really in this program anymore, but then--and then I got to Boston. And you know--you know, the times, I mean, there, there are very few African Americans in the business as a--as a--there, there--one thing about TV is that there are often anchors because, because stations have licenses, and there are public challenges to them. And if you can see that something's not diverse enough, there's more--so that's why I think historically you'll find that there have always been black people of color, anchor people, often on the weeks, but they've been there in a very visible role. And I think that's one reason for it. Behind the scenes it's harder--not harder, but it's different. And you know, I, I, I think, you know, the, the whole time I've been in the business, I've, I've sort of been one of the few, one of the only. And, and one of the things that I--that I think really--does distinguish my career and who I am in this business is that there are--there are very few African Americans who have ever been foreign correspondents based abroad working for one of the major TV networks, and there's a handful of us. And you know, I think--I mean, well, I say there are less than five or six or seven of us ever, and I spent eleven years in London [England] and there are not a lot of people with my background who, who have that sort of life experience, work experience, whatever. And that's kind of--once I--once I got into the business and kind of got established, that's what I wanted to be when I grew up, a foreign correspondent. And that goes back to my father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.], airline passes, and traveling, and crashing on the floor and here and there. That goes back to college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and South Africa and the divestment and courses about the political development of Africa. And, and it goes back to that CBS newsroom, where I was working midnight to eight [o'clock]. One thing about working midnight to eight in America, while you're trying to get in touch with the foreign correspondents who are waking up in Europe or who were busy in Asia, and so I got to know some of them by phone at least because I had to call them to kind of switch them through to an editor. And at some point I guess it's--wow, this is pretty cool (laughter), you know, this guy's in Beirut [Lebanon]. This guy's in Tokyo [Japan] or London. And, and, and that's sort of how my fascination with foreign travel and, and, and, and working abroad sort of festered by, by those, by those several things. Story_ID: 665082 Speaker 1: So Boston [Massachusetts]--you said you were there [WCVB-TV] three-- Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: Four years, okay. And then during those years, what are some of the subjects you're covering? Are there--are you covering--this is nineteen eighty--let's see-- Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986]--eight-- Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986]. Speaker 2: Michael Dukakis is running for president at the end of it. In 1988, the governor, that's one thing that's happening. And there were all kinds of local issues like Boston Harbor getting--being cleaned up and that sort of thing. It's not a period of intense busing and those kinds of things that Boston's known for. Or historically, it's a--the ci- the city has kind of moved past some of that stuff. But Boston was still, and I think still is to this day, a not very diverse big city. That sound hard but it--I'm sure at some lev- at some level it is when you have all these colleges, and these kids from all over the world (unclear). But, but you go to the downtown restaurant, the waterfront area, that's where you--you know, and, and living there I always felt like, you know, where are the--where are the people like me? Speaker 1: It's a small black professional class there-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I always felt. Speaker 1: --outside of school. Speaker 2: But the thing that Boston introduced me to was, was Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], because the--there are a lot of people from Boston and New York [New York] who summer in Martha's Vineyard. And I had--I met some friends in Boston who, who had family who had places down there, and that's--so I, I went a couple of times. And I've have been going every--ever since, and it is my absolute favorite place anywhere in the world. So, and it's unique in that it's--(unclear) it is the only place in the country where you'll find a community of African Americans who have vacation homes or second homes or--and all that sounds very bourgeois and all that, but it's--and maybe it is in some ways, but it's--but it's also--it's a--it's a great community of people who are--who for generations have, have brought kids along and brought other kids--people's kids along, there's a real community of, of people who are looking out for each other there. And you know, we've, we've been part of it for some time now, and it's, it's the kind of place where I--my, my daughter [Siobhan Allen] now--you know, she's three, four years old. Are we going to the Martha's Vineyard--are we go--sounds like--you know. In some corners it sounds like an elitist kind of thing, but you know, it's a-- Speaker 1: Well, I-- Speaker 2: --it's, it's, it's, it's just a very special place and, and-- Speaker 1: Well, it's relaxing; it's relaxing, and there's an intellectual community there, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a lot of very successful people, the doctors, lawyers, Indian [Native American] chiefs, and, again, it's the kind of place where I want my daughter to, to grow up. And, and it's a place where I've met people who have exposed me to a whole 'nother world. Wow, you can have this; you can do that; this sort of thing--and I've--I've always--that's been my place to go now since like '80s [1980s]. So we're talking about, you know, thirty, thirty years or so. Speaker 1: So who was the station manager in Boston--the general manager--when you were there? Do-- Speaker 2: The news director was a guy named Phil Balboni [Philip S. Balboni]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I only remember that because--well, I remember a bunch of them, but he--nowadays he runs something called GlobalPost, which is a foreign, foreign affairs website. And I happened to see him a couple of years ago, but I, I don't have any relationship with him anymore or whatever. Story_ID: 665083 Speaker 1: So you wanted to really--I mean, Boston [Massachusetts] was fine, but you were eager to get in the heart of things. You, you left there [WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] and went--you--did you go to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] after that? Speaker 2: From there I, I-- Speaker 1: Or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --got a job at CBS News as a network correspondent. So I was out of local news, and this is what I always wanted to do to get back and do national, national news. Speaker 1: So how did you do that? Speaker 2: That's a good question. Speaker 1: Is that a reel? Is that it your agent? Is it meeting the right people? Speaker 2: I think it's all those things. I think it's many of those things. It's one, one organization that has been very helpful is the NABJ, National Association of Black Journalists. They have a convention every year, and I would go to the conventions. There's a job fair, and show your wares, and you, you meet people, and it's, it's, it's a time when people are looking for people of color. And, and that's one way I think I made the connections to it. The other--the other thing that happened that was of great, great significance for me in Boston was--again, Michael Dukakis was running for president, but I was with an investigative team that uncovered--it's a story called 'Inside Bridgewater,' and it's about this hospital--mental heal- mental hospital for the criminally insane [Bridgewater State Hospital, Bridgewater, Massachusetts]. And it's a place where there had been these mysterious deaths that have happened and amongst the patient population. And, and essentially we challenge the, the department of health [Massachusetts Department of Public Health] or whatever it was, to let us in, see what's going on here, and they, they wouldn't let anybody; they wouldn't let anybody in. But for some unknown reason--I don't know why to this day--they decided to let us bring a television camera into this place because they thought they had nothing to hide, and they thought that they could show how horrible the cir- the circumstances were. And how they were doing the best they can, and how, how they--how, how this was okay. Well, it wasn't okay, and we did this big five part series about 'Inside Bridgewater.' We were the first TV camera to be in there in like twenty years. And what you saw basically was like--frankly, like a horror house. You know, you saw these criminally insane and men, all men, with mental issues acting out. And you know, and, and, and, and we broadcast this on TV, and the governor is running for president, and it changed. They, they didn't shut the place down, but they, they made it much better quickly. It's one of the most satisfying things I've done. You know, this was like back in the--long time ago, in the '80s [1980s] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you-- Story_ID: 665084 Speaker 1: Can you talk to me about the investigative team? You, we hear about them all the time, you know, in the news, but how do they actually work? And how, usually--you know, how large or small is a team? And how, how much lead time for the stories? And-- Speaker 2: Well, it varies. I--I've never been a--an investigative reporter per se. I mean, you know, at one end of the spectrum, you have these--you know, these people comb through all kinds of documents and, they, they request through the Freedom of Information Act [Freedom of Information Act of 1967] stuff that people are trying to hide. And they pra- you know, that's one kind of investigative journalism. And then there's also, you know, hidden cameras and things like that. This story ['Inside Bridgewater'] was just--it was investigative because we had some documents and we had--but we had pictures. We're in, in this place that no one's seen. It's, it's sort of like a story I just did recently at a--at a place called Trenton Central High School [Trenton, New Jersey]. There's a high school in New Jersey that's in the capital of New Jersey that is two miles from the state house [New Jersey State House, Trenton, New Jersey], and it's one of the worst places you'll ever see. It's infested with mold, and asbestos, and rodents, and falling ceilings, and leaking plaster, and teachers have left because they claim they're ill. And, and all this is like two miles from the state capitol where Chris Christie is governor, who has a bunch of problems, and he's running for president, too. And we were able to get a camera into the school to show what was going on. Well, how did we do that? Well, let's just say we had an in with the principal, and the superintendent let us in. And we did the story a few months ago--a couple of months ago--about the horrible conditions here. And the students have been begging and pleading for the governor to come visit. Why won't he visit? And so we aired their story, and then they--the response from the state was, okay, we're gonna build a new school. So they're building them a new school after all these years of back and forth. I mean, it was--it was in part--I, I mean, I'm, I'm not--I always say I'm not so self-absorbed to think that, you know, we did it. I think we contributed to something that was already happening. You know, we helped push a ball down a hill or over a mountain or something around the corner or something. But, but that was very saris- satisfying too, and that's the kind of investigates--some kind of investigative work, you know. Speaker 1: So usually is it you and another person or you and--you know, I mean, how--that's what I'm trying to wonder, like in the Boston [Massachusetts] case, you know, with the-- Speaker 2: There's usually a small team of people, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a producer's who's kind of a manager of the project, and then maybe there're some-- Speaker 1: The reporter. Speaker 2: --researchers who were helping to do this and do that and of course, always you have a, you know, camera crew and--or two and an editor who videotape edits the whole process. And you know, there's, there's, there's--it's never alone. Speaker 1: Okay. But so this right here, so you're saying the, the, the, the story of (unclear) hospital-- Speaker 2: Bridgewater [Bridgewater State Hospital, Bridgewater, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: --Bridgewater--that, that really made people pay--you know, it was something that was significant that allowed you to be noticed for-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for the network correspondents. Speaker 2: Right, and that, that helped me get to the next level. Story_ID: 665085 Speaker 1: The next level is in D.C. or is in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I have you in D.C. and that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in Washington [D.C.] . Speaker 1: Okay. And so you're in 1988-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is that--okay. So in 1988, what are--what is your assignment and who are you working with? Speaker 2: Well, my first assignment in the CBS News bureau in Washington was to follow Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] around the country as he was campaigning for George Bush [George Herbert Walker Bush] to become president. So, I mean, it wasn't--it was not a lead role. I mean, I think Lesley Stahl was the main White House correspondent, so I was sort of backup and you know, playing a support role as a correspondent. And actually, I think you're only a reporter. You have to become a correspondent (unclear) back in those days. So I did that sort of work where I traveled around and, and so on and so forth. I also spent some time at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and, and other pla- again, there are layers and layers, and I was kind of like a deputy reporter in that regard. And actually, I got--I was kind of frustrated because I wasn't--didn't feel like a grownup reporter. They wanted to bring you along slowly. And when you're in local news, in local news you do a story every day, two or three stories a day; you're on the air every day; at the network level, well, once or twice, or a couple of weeks or so, blah, blah, blah. One thing that happened though, there was a--they introduced a new magazine program called '48 Hours.' Now it's all about crime and--but then it was about things happening in forty-eight hours, like a hurricane's coming. Let's go do stories about that--like a high school. Let's go spend forty hours in a high school. And because I was younger and not was wedded to the traditional way of doing things, I--they let me do some of those, and that was--that was helpful; that was great. That--it's actually with--in many ways, it's one of the best programs ever, all these many years later. And then-- Speaker 1: And that's--that was the start of the news magazine. Are those called news magazines (unclear)? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, essentially, yeah, yeah. It was kind of the start of it, yeah. And there--it's gone back and forth in many ways and--but yeah, but that was--that was a good time for those--for those kinds of programs. I think 'Dateline' started around that time too-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --or, or--or sometime around then and so there was that. And then--but I wanted to get out of Washington because I wanted to do other things. And then a correspondent, a guy named Drinkwater [Terry Drinkwater], who was a veteran CBS correspondent, passed away. He, he, he--I don't know what, what happened, but he was suddenly not there, sadly. And so they had an opening in Los Angeles [California] where he was based. And I--, "Hey, me, me, me; let me--let me go to Los Angeles." What the heck? You know, 'cause out there you do a wide range of everything. You've got the whole western part of this nation. Story_ID: 665086 Speaker 1: And so they [CBS News] sent me out to Los Angeles [California], and I spent several years out there. And that started with the--the first--one of the first things I covered was the San Francisco [California] earthquake, which was, whoa, okay. And the last things I covered wa-, wa- were I covered the Rodney King beating trial, and--the one where the cops got off essentially, and the riots that followed. And then I left Los Angeles. Speaker 2: Well, those were--I mean, both of those were big stories. Speaker 1: Yeah, they were huge stories. I mean, the Rodney King--the Rodney King story is still one of those unbelievable things I think I've ever seen. And, and to watch this happen before your eyes on a videotape, and see this man pummeled and beaten, yet, you know, the defense attorneys for the officers were saying things like that they--, "Okay, pause the tape. Now you see there, he's reaching up. He's gonna grab the baton from the officer, and he's--the officer feels threatened now. And he's gonna take it from him and beat him up, and that's why they kept beating him." (Laughter) Really? Seriously, really? Come on. The guy's bleeding. "He's, he's, he's, he's rolling over. He's, he's rolling ov- he's rolling over. Stop the tape. He's trying to get away. See he's almost--he almost escapes in that scene. He's almost able to get--to, to get away from the officers, that's why they continued using moderate force--," or whatever the word was they came up with. And it wasn't surprising that, you know, people didn't quite--a lot of folks didn't quite see it that way and got upset. And although, you know, rioting in your own neighborhood is kind of--it's very self-destructive. It's--and while they--there were some attempts to do things in other communities, it--the brunt of the damage happened in South Central, L.A. [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in poor communities. You know, I, I can remember being a kid and--in the late '60s [1960s], driving through--our parents [Shirley Slade Allen and Lindsay Allen, Jr.] drove us through Newark [New Jersey], where there had been riots, and--just to see 'cause we weren't that far from that. But I can remember tho- those--some of those sights and sounds of, of burnt out buildings and all that sort of stuff in, in Newark. Story_ID: 665087 Speaker 1: In L.A. [Los Angeles, California], are you feeling like you--do you have any feeling like you felt in--in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Are you happy with your track? Are you--do you feel like you're moving up at the level that you wanna move up? Speaker 2: In the beginning I thought I was. And--but it--but I'm, I'm also, at this point, becoming more and more interested in foreign work and traveling overseas. And--because I just thought that was just a great thing to do, and I wanted to do it while I was single and, and young and before I had a family and all that. And, and so I, I started taking assignments [for CBS News] because--I, I tried to do things down in Mexico in the border, immigration stories. During that time of ti- during that--those years, there, there was a story in Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega and the Iran-Contra thing [Iran-Contra Affair]. There was Manuel Noriega in Panama, the famous invasion of Panama to arrest him happened. Speaker 1: That was Operation Just Cause. Speaker 2: I can't think exactly what it was. Speaker 1: I think it was called--okay. Speaker 2: There was that. The war in El Salvador, a civil war was flaring and--and so most of that was covered by guys based in Miami [Florida]. But when they wanted holidays off or vacation off, or they needed somebody to just go there and when it was a hot time, but somebody had to be here. I, I volunteered for that kind of stuff. And so I, I, I could get a taste of it and, and be on the--on the list for when, you know, things got heavy. And the first time I--the first time I was actually in a war zone, I was in El Salvador. And I can remember--I can remember sleeping on the floor of my hotel, putting the mattress up against the wall and the windows for protection, and just cowering in my room while outside there's all this--not right outside, but in the distance you're hearing all this gunfire and all this--it was the first time I'd ever heard anything like this in my life. And in some ways it was really terrifying, frightening, but I'm with an experienced team of people, and they're--you know, you're learning all kinds of things about how to manage being in these kind of situations. And that's the way I've always described this to my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] for example. See, these, situations are always manageable, and there all--it's always worse on TV than it actually is. And if the situation isn't manageable, you get out of it and until you can operate and do what you have to do in a way that's safe. At least the risk is, is lessened. Speaker 1: So what were you learning about how to manage them, how to impa- and how to sort of operate? The, state department [U.S. Department of State] is important I would take it. Speaker 2: Oh no, this is just--this is the veterans and from the news business who were-- Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: --used to doing this sort of thing, who, who you're learning with by, by example; you're, you're-- Speaker 1: No, I'm asking what are you learning? Speaker 2: I guess you're, you're learning things like always be behind the side that you think is gonna win (laughter). It's--you know, it's learning to listen to the sound of gunfire and kind of know where it's coming from and where it's going to some extent, although I'm not an expert on that. It's, it's learning what kind of demeanor or swagger to have or not have when you're at a checkpoint and you're trying to get through, and you're trying to talk to some eighteen year old kid with a gun, who's probably under a lot of stress. It's about dealing with authorities who don't want journalists there when--or seeing something that you're trying to get to so you're not arrested and thrown in jail, as has been the case a few times for whatever reason; it's just how to talk to people; how to--how to--how to avoid these situations; how to--you know we--I've taken training that--about how to extract yourself from a minefield. I've never had to do it, but, but I've, I've taken basic first aid courses, so if, if god forbid someone in my team is shot or, or steps on a something or a serious car accident, which happens, I have some basic first aid training. Although, thank god, I've never had to--you know, without my medical bag and, and, and--you know, bandage somebody or anything. I've never had to do that. You know, learn about you know, eating well, and eating--looking at food and making sure you don't eat things that are gonna make you sick--simple, don't drink the water, don't eat salads, you know, make sure the chicken is well cooked, you know, things like that, which again seems simple. You know, eat fruit that's peeled, like a banana, as opposed to maybe an apple where the skin is potentially some sort of pesticide or something local that could upset you. It's, it's any--I think the bottom line is, you know, keep your wits about you and, and pay a lot of attention to wha- to, to, to the environment that you're in and the hostile things that are happening. Story_ID: 665088 Speaker 1: And you have to also know when to--when to leave. You know, you have to learn how to do your work quickly, you know w- if you go--if--when we've gone into a--you know, I've always--I've always said to people that covering wars, it sounds like you're covering something on a battlefield somewhere out in somewhere, but wars happen in neighborhoods; wars happen in schools, homes, churches, on, on the streets of communities where people live and work and go to school. That's where wars happen. And when you're in those environments, there's a way to conduct yourself, and there's a way to, to work quickly so that you can do what you need to do and get out because you don't to--you can't become a casualty. And so those are the kinds of things, some of the profound, some of them not profound that, that you learn along the way from, from veterans. And, and, and that's the sort of thing that I--that I'm getting more and more interested in when I'm in Los Angeles [California], going to El Salvador, Nicaragua. A summer came up where there the Jap- the Japan bureau [of CBS News], the correspondent was [HistoryMaker] Bill Whitaker actually. He was taking the summer off because his wife [Teresita Conley Whitaker] was having their second baby [Lesley Whitaker]. And they were in the states for an extended period of time. Oh, I'll go to Japan for the summer and do bureau duty, you know, hang out there. Sure, why not? So I did that, which (unclear)--about Asia. And when the trip was--when the assignment was over, you know, I took a couple weeks and I went to--you know, I went to Thailand and I went home. And while we were there, we went to the Philippines for a story a couple of times and different places in Japan. And that's how I did it. I was young, single, free, and just--you know. And I never--after an assignment, I rarely ever went directly home. I'd usually try and get to whatever the, the attraction, the local excursion was that was, you know, a plane ride, or a bus ride, or a drive from wherever we were. And, and that's how I--that's how I started doing that. Story_ID: 665089 Speaker 1: How do you get to ABC News? Speaker 2: I, I wanted to go overseas. I had just--and I was--I had just covered the Rodney King trial and the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] riots, so I was very--I was a hot commodity. I was ver- very visible on the air. That year of the--of the riots with Rodney King, I was probably on the network evening news more than any other year I've ever been on, of--of my twenty some odd years. And actually, as I recall, myself and a woman named Jackie Adams [Jacqueline Adams], who was a former CBS correspondent, we, we established a record for the number of times an African American appeared on an evening newscast; it's all counted. But that year, '92 [1992] I believe it was ninety--yeah, would've been '92 [1992]--'91 [1991], '92 [1992]--I think it was like close to a hundred times or something. But I remember seeing that in a USA Today article, of all things. And so that's, in part, how I got to ABC. I, I wanted to work overseas. I asked CBS. They couldn't accommodate me, and, and at that point, I did have an agent who was working for me. When I was in Boston [WCBV-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] I had a, a local agent, a guy who actually did a lot of sports figures, his name is Wolf, Tom Wolf--Bob Wolf [ph.]--Bob Wolf. And then I--when I moved for the network, I, I had an agent working for me at some--maybe him for a little while longer, but most of the jobs I got myself. And, and, and you--I've, I've always felt like why should I pay this guy 10 percent if I can get the job myself and what's more, I'm fighting my own battles down the hall with the front office and others about, you know, all the things you fight about for better assignments and for promotions and all that internally. I always--I've always mostly done that myself, maybe to my detriment, but it's all turned out pretty well. And so, so I approached somebody from ABC or, or an agent--did I--I'm not quite sure how it happened--and they said, "Yeah, we have an opening in London [England]. Are you interested?" I said, "Of course I'm interested." And at the time Peter Jennings was the managing editor and the anchor of 'World News Tonight' ['ABC World News Tonight'] so this was--this was a chance to work in Peter Jennings' London bureau. Who could ask for anything more? You know, here's this kid from Jersey City, New Jersey, who's suddenly gonna be working in that kind of environment. And it was in many ways--you know, I, I--it was one of the most satisfying moments along the way. And I just loved the idea of living in England and living abroad and traveling. I, I, I lived there for eleven years. And I, I--the last time I counted I've been to seventy-five or eighty countries. A couple of them were just vacation spots, but, but most of them were, were work. And it's, it's appeared at a time in my life that, that it's just irreplaceable. It's just irreplaceable, the, the kinds of things you learn, and the kinds of things you see, and, and how you grow as an individual. Story_ID: 665090 Speaker 1: First of all, you're living in London [England], and London has become a cosmopolitan place in many ways, so there's a lot of people going in and out of there. What is--what is it like to be in a fuor- foreign new--news bureau? How large is it? Where's it located? I mean, those are sort of--how is staffed? Speaker 2: Well, London has always been--well, well, London is usually the biggest foreign bureau. It's sort of a hub, and, and there are maybe--you know, they've gotten smaller over the years. There are at, at most maybe five or six correspondents and an equal number of producers, a little management team, a few people who run a, a news desk, you know, ten or twelve that are technical staff; there are camera people, so they were talking about fifty, sixty people I guess, or more, in a big bureau. Most of them are, are--many of them are foreigners--well, there're, there're local people, Brits or, or Europeans who work there in that environment, and a few Americans. And as the years have gone by, there're, there're fewer and fewer Americans who are taken overseas to work for an American company. I, I think that's true in just about every industry. You know, when I went to London, there were expat [expatriate] benefits. You know, they paid a significant part--they paid a significant portion of my housing costs; they paid tax equalization costs because you have various tax issues, income tax issues. I flew business class most places. I could come home once a year. Some guys and, and women who have families, their kids were put through school, you know--private school overseas. I, I--that was never an issue for me. You know, you join some of the local clubs in town, the American club, this club, that club. It was a great life. You know, I--you know, I remember living in a penthouse apartment that had an elevator that opened up into my apartment, and there were several balconies; it was like four bedrooms. And I was there like six months out of the year. The rest of the time I was gone. So who could not (laughter)--you know, it was--it was great--it was great living. The other side of it was that you spent a lot of time in places like Somalia or Bosnia, and it was hard, stressful, grueling, but, but deeply rewarding work. And people always ask, "So why did you go to all of these terrible places and these war torn places?" And I always--the, the motivation for me has always been that to go and tell stories about people who can't get their story out. You know, I don't like doing stories about the secretary of state doing this, and the secretary of--the foreign minister doing that in Geneva [Switzerland]. I'd rather go to the place where, as I was saying earlier, the battlefield is, the conflict is, the famine is, the flood is, the disaster is, to meet ordinary people and talk to ordinary people about what's--what, what they think, and what they're experiencing, and what's going on with them. And you know, those, those moments are, are the most satis- that's, that's for me what, what journalism is about. You know, it's, it's--you know, nowadays, and through it all, do a lot of silly things (laughter), but, you know, but that's what it's been about. Story_ID: 665091 Speaker 1: Ron [HistoryMaker Ron Allen], so what did you find--you've done significant coverage out of--out of, you know, Africa, the--you know, the continent of Africa. What did you find--what did you learn first of all because it's what--you know, politically politics are extremely--politics and international affairs are extremely important when you're covering issues related to a foreign country. So what, what things are you learning that are different than what you knew looking states--you know, from the states? Speaker 2: Obviously, you learn about the history of a place and the customs of a place when you're there. We tend to--over the years, I've tended to go to a place for a number of months and then not go there anymore. When we first--when I first moved to London [England], we went to Somalia a lot, and then the Somalia conflict sort of died down; and then we were going to Rwanda a lot, and then that sort of died down; and then were going to Israel and the Palestine territories a lot; and then Bosnia a lot; and then--and then South Africa or wherever. So and I--you know, I never--one of--one of my biggest regrets, should I say, is that I've, I've never learned another language. I only speak English, and part of that is because I've never been in a place long enough to, to need to learn the language. I've been to the ends of the earth, and I could always find somebody who could speak English. It's often an English teacher or a--or a young kid, you know. Nowadays, all over the world young kids learn English in many, many places that you might be surprised to, to find, find that. But the, the enduring thing that I've learned from my travels is something--it's very simple, is that most people in the world are pretty much the same. They wanna work; they wanna send their kids to school; they wanna take care of their family; they wanna live in a safe, clean, healthy neighborhood and environment. That's it. You know, that's why most, most--98 percent of the people in the world, that's all they want, you know. And, and all the other stuff, you know, politics, and all that, most people really don't care. They, they care 'cause it affects their lives, but, but that's--there's this sameness about life in, in so many communities that you go to. And, and that's how I think I, I was so--I've, I've been able to relate to people on a level where, where I--you know, the earthquake in Haiti, you know, the people you meet there, the, the war victims in Sarajevo [Bosnia and Herzegovina], they're all kind of trying to do the same thing. They're just trying to get through the day; they're trying to get a better job; they're trying to get a--get to a better school; they trying to--they, they want peace; you know, they want-they want security. You know, the Israelis and Palestinians, they all want the same thing too. They don't--you know, most of them, you know, they're not battling over some ancient land that--(makes sound) whatever--the, you know, they, they just wanted--they just wanna live in peace and be like everybody else in, in the world who has a good life. Story_ID: 665092 Speaker 1: But you've talked about Rwanda when we were off camera, about that being a significant assignment for you. And I think we were looking at your photos I think. Am I right--wrong about that? I think (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, ra, ra--Rwanda was the genocide. There were close to a million people massacred in a very short period of time and-- Speaker 1: And tell why. Speaker 2: This was a conflict between ethnic groups, the Hutu, majority, and the Tutsi, minority. And in so many African countries, post-colonial--on a post-colonial situation, what, what the colonizers often did was they would take a minority group and essentially conspire with them to run the show to keep the majority group or majority groups in check. And this happened in many places in Africa, and it happened in Rwanda. And then the lid blew off that when the president's [Juvenal Habyarimana] plane crashed, and over years and years of, of the Hutu, majority, feeling like they were being taken advantage of by the minority, Tutsi. So this war broke out, and, and all these people were massacred. And we were--when, when all this started we are in South Africa, it was 1994, and South Africa wa- was just having their first democratic elections. Nelson Mandela was becoming president, and I believe this is April of '94 [1994]. And that is one of the most memorable things I'll--I've, I've ever experienced as well, just seeing the South Africans voting for the first time. I'd been to South Africa a, a number of times up to that point, and when I moved to London [England] one of the first things I wanted to do was get to South Africa because apartheid hadn't ended. And I wanted to see, and experience, and understand what this place was. And I'd studied a bit about it in school [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and for the obvious reasons. And the morning of the election, the enduring images of long lines of people standing in this misty morning waiting forever, if they had to, to go vote. Some (unclear) really didn't understand what they were doing. I was in a place, KwaZulu-Natal [South Africa], which was you know, a fairly rural area. Most people are illiterate, you know, they had no real concept of democracy and all that. But this is what they were doing, and they were told it was gonna make life better, and so here, here it was. And, and that was one of the most profound things I've ever seen as well. So after the election, there are these rumblings about this refugee problem, these people fleeing this country north of South Africa--in the middle of Africa--to Rwanda. Who knew--who--what's Rwanda? Nobody really--I mean, people knew, but I didn't really know about it. And so when it really started, the numbers started getting bad, and people started appearing in camps across the--across the border in Tanzania and in Burundi in the other direction. And so we hopped on a plane and flew first to a, a little remote part of Tanzania, and that's where the first camps were of refugees forming. And people are telling this horrible, awful stories about what was going on inside this country. And you couldn't get in from there. You didn't wanna go in from there because it wasn't safe. The borders were sealed off, and people were just living in, in this, this misery and awful conditions in these camps, because all of a sudden it's--you know, there's like hundreds and thousands of people living in the field where there's nothing to sustain them. You know, there's no--you know, they're just there because that's the safe place the way you could walk to across the border. And then we--at, at one point, after doing that for a while, we flew--we flew to Uganda to the north, and we embedded or hooked up with the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the RPF, which was the, the rebel group--Tutsi led rebel group that was gonna try and liberate the country and, and fight the majority Hutu. And so we came--we came down into, into the capital with this military unit, and we were amongst the first to actually see what was going on inside the country, and it was horrific. I mean, it was just everywhere you looked there were--there were people who--dead bodies. Story_ID: 665093 Speaker 1: Remember these enduring scenes of churches. So many people fled to the churches because they thought that this was a place where they could be safe, but the churches became these just scenes of awful massacres in so many places. There were bodies that were floating down the rivers; there were bodies lining the streets. I mean, you're talking about a relatively small place, and I think the number--I think it approached a million. It--it's--it--it's either eight hundred thousand to a million people were killed in like a short--a hundred days or so. And a lot of it--was it a hundred days? It was--it was a very short period of time. And, and the other striking thing about the, the, the carnage was that most of the people who died, died at the hands of neighbors, people who they knew with--were armed with farm tools, machetes, axes, hammers. You know, this was not a war with, you know, fighter jets dropping bombs, or long range missiles, or--this was very personal and very intimate. And, and for that reason, it was also just very disturbing, very, very disturbing. And I've always thought that--and I, I--if all these Western journalists had not been in South Africa covering Nelson Mandela's moment, election, I don't--you know, I don't think that we would--we would sitting in New York [New York] look- or London [England] looking at this situation and racing there to go there. It would have been another African disaster that maybe we would have gotten to at some point, but not nearly as quickly because we were there in South Africa and it was like a four or five hour flight, as opposed to a much, much longer--much longer distance to come to. And so of all the things I've seen, that, that, that one and those two moments, the joy and celebration and historic positive thing happening in South Africa, and then this awful negative thing happening, terrible thing happening, I mean, that, that was just a moment, that whole year--and we went back to Rwanda several times as, as, as people left. And then two years later they came back. There were these huge massive movements of people. That, that was--that was really riveting. And one thing--just one more thing I'll--the--at one point we--when we were with the RPF [Rwandan Patriotic Front], the group that's coming to liberate the city--the capital [Kigali, Rwanda]--we get to this UN [United Nations] base. That's (unclear) still there. And the UN soldiers--there's a small group of journalists, and they, they wanna take some of us in to go see what's happening, and there's limited seating capacity in this military vehicle. And so we're all deciding who should go, who should go. And the, the military guy said, "You're the American so you should go because if you put this on TV, it'll really get a lot of attention, as opposed to the French journalists, or the British journalists, or the Canadian or, or whatever." Sounds right--I mean, so, so we went in and, and we, you know, did our filming. And interestingly, at one point we're, we're in a big armored military vehicle, and they open the door so we can get a better look and take some pictures or whatever, and there's a big crowd of Hutu machete wielding, you know, young thugs who were doing some of the killing, and they, they spot me in the--in the vehicle. And because I'm relatively tall, fair skin, and angular, I look very Tutsi, as opposed to darker, shorter, rounder Hutu. And they come at the vehicle and they're yelling they want my passport; they wanna see who I am; there's all this--you know, this craziness going on. And so the soldiers slam the door, and we got out of there, but it's one of those moments where you're, you're glad you're with the right side and not left for the--so there's that. That's actually happened a couple of times where in Rwanda people thought I was a Tutsi, and there was a problem and--but nothing ever--nothing ever terrible ever happened. So there--so there's that. Story_ID: 665094 Speaker 1: How did you grow in those eleven years, both professionally and personally? Speaker 2: Well, I, I guess, you know, I, I think I just developed a much broader view of the world and what's going on in the whole world, as opposed to the United States. I (pause)--I you know, I met people from all over the world socially and, and as well as professionally. I saw some of the greatest things that were happening in the world. You know, I, I visited great museums; I skied the Swiss and French and German Alps--Austrian Alps [Central Eastern Alps]; I--no, I went all over Africa, to South Africa, to Cairo [Egypt], to Kenya, safaris. I, you know, I saw--traveled to Paris [France] and Rome [Italy] like it was easy--well, it was easy. It was a short flight. And you know, I, I saw all the great monuments and museums that I could, and I think it just gave me a sense that you know, the world's a big, big place. There's a lot going on, and there's a lot of ways to do this thing, this thing of life. And that--and it's, it's really interesting that the French do things this way, and the Belgians do things that way, and the, the British, you know, living there, it's--I, I just think there's a--there's whole--there's a whole trove of information and, and sensory input that I got that I would never have gotten had I lived here. And I think, as a result, I think--I think I can be more critical of America than most people are. And, and I think I can be more critical of America than most journalists are, because I, I understand that it's not all this way, you know, which is which I, I hate when, when big media companies like my own, in I--in my mind, squander resources doing trivial things, like celebrity interviews or, or whatever. And I, I know we do that. It makes money, but, but I--but I, I know from my experiences that, that we could be doing very powerful things that cause very positive change in places. And I think that opportunity is not taken where it really could be and, and fully, fully developed. It's just not--it's just not done. So, so there's that. I think I've become more--I think I've become more accepting of, of difference and respectful of differences. You know, I've, I've spent a lot of time in Muslim countries and communities, like Iraq, for example, during the run up to the war [Iraq War], and, and Egypt--recently in Egypt during the Tahrir Square [Cairo, Egypt], the revolution. And you know, I--when I see these caricatures of Muslims and America and by Americans, it, it just--it seems so senseless to me because I can think of so many people who I met or who I know, or families who I came in contact with, who as I was saying earlier are just like everybody else in the world. They just want a job, and schools for their kids, and food and security in their neighborhoods and you know, whether they're Muslim, or whether they're Christian. And so I think seeing that has helped me become much more tolerant and, and accepting, not that I wasn't, but a respectful and again it just, it says to me there're so many ways to do--to look at situations. Story_ID: 665095 Speaker 1: But you're saying you gain- got--gained a, a broader--a deeper understanding of the world and world issues. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I do--yeah-- Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in terms of--as a substantive thing, yes, I do--I, I do. And I also--just one, one last thought. I mean, personally, in terms of--I mean, I'm--I am convinced that this is why I am an adoptive parent with a daughter [Siobhan Allen] from Ethiopia, because over the years I saw so many kids in so many places that, that were just in really desperate circumstances. And it's not like I think I can save the world, but, but that's why this whole notion of a--people often ask, "Why did you adopt a foreign child? Why not kids in America?" I say, "Well, you know, if you traveled where I've traveled the last ten, fifteen years, you wouldn't ask that question because you'd, you'd, you'd see and understand that I just see the world very differently." And the circumstances that, that kids like my daughter find themselves in are, are, are unthinkable compared to what--you know, the, the worst of circumstances. And it's terrible, kids in America, so, so there's that. I mean, that, that happened, in part, because when I was in Somalia I had a colleague, a guy named Don Kladstrup, who was an ABC correspondent, and he and his wife were in the process of adopting a little girl in, in Somalia. And it--the process takes a long time, so when we would go to Somalia, he often asked groups of us to take her gifts, pictures, drop by. And this is a little twelve year old--ten, twelve year old girl who's living in an orphanage in the middle of like this place that's suffering from famine, and flood, and disaster, and war, and all that. And I remember, I think I think I only went, went by once or twice, but I just remember how this, this place was such an oasis in the middle of all this. And I remember how happy and--this girl was when foreigners would come and how--and she was in many ways the center of attention for that moment, and she was getting gifts and clothing and stuff. And there were these people, these foreigners, who, who she had this attachment to. And I always thought this was just a wonderful thing to do, for her and for, for him. And so when my wife [Adaora Udoji] and I got married, and when, when the time was right. Speaker 1: Now when did you--you got married in--you got married in nineteen ninety-- Speaker 2: Nope. Two thousand two [2002]. Speaker 1: Two [2002]? Oh, 2002. Story_ID: 665096 Speaker 1: When did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I met my wife at the O.J. Simpson trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995], of course (laugher). Just never- doesn't everybody meet their wife there? I was sent to--sent to, to cover the--first O.J. Simpson trial. And my wife was graduating from--had just graduated from law school at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California]. And ABC hired her and a number of other people to do legal work around the trial, and that's, that's when we met. And the, the longer version of the story is that I--that was the last place I, I wanted to be, because at the time I was living in London [England]. I'd, I'd already moved to London, and I'd been out in London for about a year and a half or so. So I was really getting into the whole foreign experience and trying to you know, break in there, so and do more things. And the last thing I wanted to do was go back to Los Angeles [California] where I had just come from and cover this--what I thought was a pretty stupid story (laughter). I mean, it wasn't--it wasn't--I mean, it, it was what it was. It was--it was crazy. Speaker 1: So that's an interesting perspective. I--you know, 'cause O.J. Simpson had--you know, in many ways that, that sort of changed news reporting in some respects. Speaker 2: It, it--well, it, it did. It made a--I mean, it, it, it in some ways created the, (air quotes) the court reporter and-- Speaker 1: The pundit. Speaker 2: --the pundit, and in some ways cameras in the court perhaps became much more of a thing or certainly from a news perspective it, it did. I, I, I think in terms of actual hard ratings, I think it's the time when NBC moved ahead of ABC in the fight for the lead in the evening news race, because, because NBC did more O.J. than the other's did, in part--that's parts of it. But I just thought, you know, this is ridiculous. You know, day in and day out, you know, it was on--it was on live on three or four channels in Los Angeles; it was on the radio station about this guy and the murder--god awful thing happened, but you know, are we paying that much attention to all this because of that. We're glorifying these Kato Kaelin and Judge Ito [Lance Ito] and they're--there's all these, these characters who are developing around this, this circus. And, and I--when I got a call to go do that, I was sitting in Sarajevo, Bosnia [Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina]. And you know, I'm in the middle of a war zone, and they're telling me they wanted me to come back and cover O.J. Why? Well, because I had just covered a major trial in Los Angeles, the Rodney King trial, because I'd done a lot of stories about police issues in Los Angles, and frankly because they wanted somebody black there. And they never were going to say that, but I bet you a zillion dollars that's--that was a big bearing upon their thinking. And it was--you know, it was a high profile perch. I was on 'Good Morning America' every day for the better part of six or seven months, just about, which was good. But--so that's, that's when I met--that's when I met my wife. But every day I was there, I was ready to go. I was hoping that this was the day when the trial would explode into a mistrial or, or this was the day that Simpson would stand up and say, "I'm guilty," or something would end it. But it went on and on and on and on. And so I met Adaora [Adaora Udoji] then, but we really didn't connect then because I was like, I'm out of here. And then we met again years later. We kept in touch sort of over the years, and, and, and we met again later at an NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] conference in Seattle [Washington]. And that's where we really kind of hit it off more so. I was living in London at the time, and then she, she came to visit. And eventually she moved to, to London in 2000, and we lived together for a couple of years, and then we got married. And she was a correspondent for ABC and--well, ABC over there primarily. And, and that's how--that's how that all happened. And-- Speaker 1: So she was co- so you were both correspondents for-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but you were on the foreign--was she on the foreign desk then too at that point? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she was one as well. Speaker 1: Are you working out of the same office? Speaker 2: No, at this--by this point, I'd moved to NBC. Story_ID: 665097 Speaker 1: Oh, you work- moved to NBC. Wh- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the reason I moved to NBC was because after the O.J. Simpson trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] at ABC, maybe a year or so later, my contract was winding down with ABC. It was ending actually, and, and so it's one of those times when ask, "So where, where, where are we going?" And they said that they wanted me to move back to the states, to Atlanta [Georgia] or Chicago [Illinois]. They saw me as a domestic bureau reporter, you know. They didn't--while I liked the international thing, they thought I--it was better for me for whatever reason--for their reasons, whatever--to be based in the United States. And I just of course didn't wanna do this. Like I'm--(unclear)--I just got over here. It's only been three years. A huge chunk of that was in Los Angeles [California] anyway for the trial. You know, "No, I don't wanna do this. I don't wanna go back." And so that's when I got a different agent, and Ed Bradley, to his credit, put me in touch with a guy named Ron Carnegie [ph.], who had been his agent on and off over the years. Ron was--Ron was more of a loi- he, he was a lawyer, and I don't think Ed had like a knock down the door agent type, 'cause Ed Bradley, he did his own stuff as I understand it. But Ron was able to help me maneuver from ABC down the road to NBC. It was cheap for them. They didn't have to move me over there. I was already there. I was an American, and, and again, because I was very visible because I'd been in 'GMA' ['Good Morning America'] every day for all this time in, in, in L.A. And so, so there I was, so that was out 1996, yeah. Yeah, yeah, March of '96 [1996]. Story_ID: 665098 Speaker 1: And the other thing, the other thing that (background noise) happened then is that was when my father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] died. Speaker 2: Yeah, he died in '96 [1996] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, I was--I--I'd come home November, I think it was, of '95 [1995] over the holiday, Thanksgiving I think it was. And I saw him, and he wasn't--he was doing okay. You know, he wasn't--no--we--'cause then we were--one thing we were trying to do is figure out--you know, long term care, adult daycare. You know, we were trying to--my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] was--my father's health was deteriorating. He was very sedentary; he'd fall and couldn't get up, and she couldn't lift him up. And, and so, so we were trying to figure out, okay, how do we get somebody in the house, get him out of the house (unclear). And then around, around Christmas, actually, I was--I was back in Sarajevo [Bosnia and Herzegovina] when I get a phone call telling me that he's, he's passed away kind of suddenly. And again, the underlying cause was diabetes, but I don't think my father really took very good care of himself. I don't think he went to a doctor frequently and did all those things that you're supposed to do. I mean, I, I--he was insulin dependent, and I think he took his insulin fairly regularly, but he, he didn't eat well I don't think. He was a little obese. He didn't exercise. He didn't do all those thing now that the 21st century we, we--you know--certainly, my lifestyle I tried to keep a lot different. I also think there was a bit of alcoholism, something I probably didn't ever really wanna accept or know about. And he died on New Year's Day '96 [1996]. So I came home and I remember it was--the day of the funeral there was this huge snowstorm--the day after there's this huge, huge snowstorm that sort of marked the end--or the beginning, to some extent. But, but obviously, it was a very, very difficult time--(cough) excuse me. At that--at this point, I--my father and I, we weren't--we weren't very, very close. It wasn't like we were estranged; we just weren't very--you know, I'd call up and we'd have kind of basic conversations and--but, you know, he and my mother had a number of issues. You know, they--one thing as a kid and, and throughout my life, that used to always bother me was they would go these periods where they didn't speak to each other for whatever reason. You know, and I never knew what it was about. It was about marriage stuff. But I can remember being a kid and the worst of the situations was when I had something great that I wanted to share with them and mom was here, dad was here, and I had to go and do it two times, or where do I go first to tell them I got an A on my paper or a great--had a great basketball game or something. And I remem- and I remember that all being very difficult to work through. And I think as the years went by I developed some resentment towards my father because my mother, on the other hand, was very open--more open about when she was not feeling well when I--you know, I--many conversations where she's in tears on the other end of the phone. And again, I didn't know what it was about precisely, but, but, but that's, that's, you know, unfortunate. Story_ID: 665099 Speaker 1: My mother [Shirley Slade Allen] and father [Lindsay Allen, Jr.] have always been very proud of what I have been able to accomplish and I'm forever grateful, and, and I love them dearly. And I know--I know the sacrifices that they made and, and so it's, it's very gratifying that I'm able to give it--give it back to them in some ways. I, I just did a story in Trenton [New Jersey] about the high school. I think I told you about this earlier. And my mother was telling me that--she lives near that--near that community, and she lives in the fifty-five and older community, which is funny because I could now live in that community. But anyway, but she was telling me how a lot of her--some of her friends in the community either went to Trenton High School [Trenton Central High School, Trenton, New Jersey] or knew people who went--'cause the school's been there for eighty years--and how great it was that I had done the story about that school and paid attention to it. My mother clipped out the newspaper articles and sent them to me. I mean, I could look at them on the web [World Wide Web], but (laughter), she still did old fashioned thing, and she was obviously very happy about it. And so there have been a lot of moments like that. Story_ID: 665100 Speaker 1: When you're living abroad, you, you've become a different kind of person, though, in a lot of ways. 'Cause you're seeing a world that your--you know, your sister [Lynette Allen-Perry] and brother [Gregory Allen] and your parents [Shirley Slade Allen and Lindsay Allen, Jr.] really have not seen. So sometimes it depends on how much they have a worldview. You know, sometimes that makes communication more, more difficult. I wanna ask you--that's a statement that can be responded to. Speaker 2: Well, I think--I think the bottom line is, you know, family. My parents, you know, we--our life and our--the things we talked about were--transcended all that--it didn't, didn't matter. We weren't having debates about world issues. We were just talking about family and life and health and, and stuff. And, and they came to visit a couple of times, so they saw this world and had some sense of it. And I, I was home--you know, I'd get home oh, two or three times a year or so, and I, I at times felt a little guilty living so far away, especially after my father died, and my mother had some health moments here or there. My brother lives--has always lived like a mile from her, and my sister lives close by. And I always felt that, you know, they were--was, was I shouldering my responsibility. And I tried to help out as many ways as I can by, by being sure that I came home often, and finally, and other ways. But that was one of the down sides of--and that's one of the reasons that we moved back, because it just--you know, family was just very important. And, and my wife [Adaora Udoji] was also working as a correspondent [for ABC News], so the travel, we were like, you know, just never, never there at home. And one of the most ironic moments or whatever the moment, however you describe it, was, was at the--at the start of the Iraq War, I was in Baghdad, in, in Iraq. I'd spent a--probably--I probably spent close to a year or more of my life in Iraq, a lot of it in the run up to the war. So I'm reporting from the war, war when, when the war's about to begin. My wife is at--in Qatar, where the U.S. central command for the war was. So we often joked how she was reporting about what was going out, and I was reporting about what's gonna come in. And, and she, she kept, you know, "Why are you still there? Get out, get out, get out." And I was trying to stay to the bitter end. And also I, I didn't think there was gonna be a war until it became obvious that there was, because I--you know, weapons of mass destruction; there's no (unclear)--I mean, it was obvious to anybody who was there that none of this was there. And there was also--it just seemed unbelievable that the United States would attack this place. And maybe that's, you know, the downside of living in the world. It's just the arguments that they were making in favor of this war, this invasion, just didn't seem to make sense, and then we left. And when, when, when, when we left too--this is one of the--another big moment. And another reason that I decided to come home, in part, was because right as the Iraq War was about to start, we were leaving the country and we got arrested, and we got stopped at the border. There was a group of four or five of us--four of us--five of us actually. One person was released and let go. And we were accused of smuggling money out of the country that had not been accounted for when we came into the country--a shakedown basically. You know, the ga- the guards wanted to get paid off and so on and so forth. And--but there we were on the eve of the war, because we'd stayed to the bitter end, at the border for five or six hours, and then we were put in a car and we were driven back to--back to Baghdad. And I can remember listening to the--we were listening to a radio broadcast of President Bush [President George Walker Bush] saying that Saddam [Saddam Hussein] had twenty-four hours or something. And at this point, we're going back into Baghdad in custody, no less. I mean, it wasn't--we weren't getting beaten; we weren't in shackles, but we--clearly we were under, under arrest and being detained. And we spent the night somewhere, and I think it was Fallujah [Iraq]. Story_ID: 665101 Speaker 1: And then the, the next morning, we were presented--we had to appear before a judge, a court--(air quotes) was a financial court of some, some kind. And in, in my case what they found, in my baggage was--there was a--I was getting all my mail shipped to me because I was in Baghdad [Iraq] so long from the London [England] office. And as part of my 401(k) plan with the company, there's a disbursement of savings bonds that you get, and that, that you--they literally send you a chunk of bonds, and, and that was in my mail, and it came to me in Baghdad. And so when they went through our stuff, the border guards saw these things that had [President] George Washington and Ben Franklin's [Benjamin Franklin] picture and said 100--you know, savings bonds that looked like currency. So that was illegal currency that I had brought in. My colleagues, meanwhile, had, you know--well, greenbacks. They had--you know. Because we were leaving, we shut down the office and everything was done in cash, so they had--they took, you know sixty--we had lots of money. And we had these satellite telephones that they--were illegal there too as well. So, make a long story short, when I appeared before the judge, these are financial people, and they knew what this was, and they knew this was my money. And they said, "Oh, okay, you're fine; that's--you're, you're not guilty. We understand that's your money and we're not gonna penalize, but your colleagues however, they're guilty. They're guilty of smuggling--," or whatever and bat- and so we ordered to pay this huge fine. And we scraped the money together from our colleagues who were still in, in, in, in Baghdad, and NBC sent some money here or there or something and, and, and we got out. The whole thing probably took about thirty-six hours or so. And then the war started like the next day. But that--that's one reason. There have been a couple of close calls along the way and a couple of very tense moments. And I guess, not to over--not to be overly dramatic, but I've always believed that there are--you only get a few of those, and I don't know whether it's three or four or nine lives, but I know there's only a limited number of them. And I kind of felt like, okay, this happened. There are--there were other incidents. There was a, a moment in Rwanda when we were pinned down at--near a border, and there was gunfire going in different directions over us, and there was--there was another moment in Zaire, I think where we were. I think there was a, a soldier didn't like something and took us into detention and--I think it's one of the few times I've actually had a gun to my head, where they were--they were sort of pointing it at me. And so and there have been just bad times (laughter). So the combination of the traveling, and getting married [to Adaora Udoji], and being away from family, and these bad experiences--all of the wonderful experiences as well--we decided we needed to move back to the states. And I also wanted to know, okay, so what do you--what do you cash all this in for? You know, what do you in a--in a job professional sense--what is all this worth, all this stuff? And I--and I wanted a different life than I--than I had. Sometimes we--to honest with you, I've been back not ten years and I wonder why I came back (laughter). I know why I came because the travel just became--after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], we were expected to go places and spend six weeks in Kandahar [Afghanistan] or six weeks in wherever, and it just became too much. So, so that's why we moved back. Story_ID: 665102 Speaker 1: You're saying why you moved back. Is it because you are as not challenged sometimes by the news here stateside and, and, you know, the, the cov- the kind of coverage or your--you miss the international exposure. I'm just trying to--'cause the news business changed a lot also has-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it has and (unclear)--I'm, I'm--at this moment, yes, I'm a little restless. I am--I've, I've never enjoyed the frivolity of stuff. You know, for the last month or two we've been covering the weather a lot. And I--when I write the book, there's a chapter that's called, when the weather became the news. And you know, I've had assignments where I've had to go out and basically stand in the cold and tell people how cold it is, and drive around in the car and tell people to stay off the roads--how snowy it is. And I know this is a big talking story, and it affects everybody, but I just feel like, you know, come on folks, you know, there's got to be more to it than this. And, and generally speaking, over the last ten years, yeah, it's not--it's not as exciting as it used to be and, and it doesn't seem as meaningful as it used to. And I think that's to be expected when you do anything for a long period of time. But, you know, I, I have--I--I'm interested in things Washington [D.C.]. You know, I covered the--I covered Barack Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] election night. I covered the campaign leading up to that. And that was--I covered Mitt Romney at the be- start of the campaign, then I went to Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. I didn't cover Obama, although I went to a number of Obama events and--but I was assigned to Hillary Clinton. Ad this was, in many ways, one of the most exciting years you'll ever have as a reporter. It was like covering a heavyweight fight, where every week there was a different primary and a different outcome and a--and he said this; she said that and--you know, and then there's history to be made whichever one of these people makes it. And, and you know, I'm a big admirer of, of both of them. I'd--I've never--I've only met the president briefly--not really to (unclear)--you know. But I got to know Hillary Clinton much better because I was on her plane and on her bus day in and day out for several--many months. But that was, you know, in many ways one of the highlights of--since I've been back was do--doing that. So I'm, I'm interested in politics and campaigns. When 2016 comes around I'll try and get a role in that. We had a magazine program here for a time called 'Rock Center' ['Rock Center with Brian Williams'] at NBC that I contributed to, which allows you to do longer stories. But yeah, to be honest with you, some of the daily grind stuff I--you know, I'm--I've--okay, I'm really not into it. Unfortunately, I guess they realize that at times 'cause it may show on my face. And there's also generational things that happened. You know, there's a generational shift, and I'm on the wrong side of thirty-five. I'm on the wrong side of forty-five, fifty-five even. And, and that, that comes down to who they wanna so on the air. And also it's your sensibilities are different. You know, with the, the, the, the thirty-five year old, wow, wow, wow, wow, that's a big story. Whereas the older person, oh, well, okay, well, we did that before and it's kind of like this, and maybe we should that. And it's just a different--whole different level of perhaps enthusiasm, energy, or--you know, experience is valued in some places, but in some places it's not as valuable as youth and vigor and energy and all that good stuff, and-- Speaker 1: Well, you're still very young. Story_ID: 665103 Speaker 1: The thing that I find interesting is that, who, who else--I mean, you've been in at all three networks, and what are your--you're, you're part of a small club of people that--you know, of African Americans I mean--that have been in--you know, the on--in the network news. How many of you are there now? There's--you've got-- Speaker 2: It's har- I mean, you have to count CNN and cable as well. You have to count MSNBC to some extent. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true. Speaker 2: You have to count FOX. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: And, and the, the number--the numbers are, are bigger and--but as a--as a percentage of the whole industry, I mean, I, I think it's--what's, what's true in this business, what's true in the--in the world is that the higher you get up the food chain, the, the, the less diversity there is. And of course now in 2014, there are other minority groups that are also vying for that piece of the pie. The--you know, the Hispanic population is burgeoning, the Asian population, the American population. And so it's not--you know, where thirty years ago that wasn't the case, and so now there's almost like competition, you know, which would--which would seem to reduce the, the majority presence. But I don't think it has reduced the major--minor--majority presence as much, and the minorities are fighting over the, the, the, the place for minorities, to some extent. I'm being very cynical about it, but, but--yeah, I think it's--you know it's--there have been a lot of time, you know, we--diversity has always been a big concern and you know, I, I was very involved in what I call the Imus moment, the Don Imus moment at NBC, when he, he called these Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] women basketball players nappy headed hoes. And this was happening--he was on MSNBC at the time and (unclear)--whoa, that was--you know, that was just--the worst thing about it I think was that it suggested that there was a culture in the organization that made him feel like he could say something like that and it would be okay. You know, what he said was vulgar and vile enough, but the bigger issues is that he, he didn't think that this was gonna be a problem (laughter) and--or, or if it was a problem, it wasn't a big deal for him. And, and so, since then things have changed. And it became a big issues when I, I was somewhat outspoken about it. I wrote about it, and I, I, I then sat on the diversity council that was formed at NBC after that for about a year or so, which I think was in many ways a big mistake. Because basically it was us worker bees against management, and you know, these are very sensitive issues. And when you--you're basically telling management you're not doing your job; you're failing; you're, you're letting people down. And when you talk about issues of race, you know, it's, it's--you're almost--it's like you're morally insulting somebody if they feel like, you know, I'm not a bad person. I, I, believe I'm, I'm you know--and so it's really. Story_ID: 665104 Speaker 1: I don't know if I've benefited from that or not, but, but I think the company [NBCUniversal] has changed a lot in many ways, although there's still a problem, you know, at the top. You know, again, as I was saying earlier, you know, you see the anchors, you see the, the visible people, and you see to a lesser extent the reporters. But if you looked at the--where the reporters are, we're more on the margins than on the main big beats, the White House, and the--and, and so on and so forth. And if you look in the front offices, the, the real place where there's a dearth of minorities is at the executive producer level and the senior producer level. And these are the people who really decide what gets on TV and who goes where and who does what, to some extent--to a large extent. And that's always been one of the toughest areas of--to, to bring diversity. Speaker 2: Because they're making a lot of decisions. Speaker 1: Because they're making a lot of decisions and because it's--you know, it's, it's sort of--many of those people rise through the ranks to some extent. And that, I think, is still something of a problem, for minority journalists who are producers and managers to rise through the ranks. And those jobs, you know--I mean, it's, it's a lot about relationships; it's a lot about people feeling comfortable with you in, in many ways. You know it's--and I think that's where it's not, you know, conscious--conscious aggressive racism or discrimination, it's just more subtle--this is the way it always turns out. And, and I think it turns out that way for things that are more informal than formal, you know. I, I think it's--you know, at some level many of these top tier jobs go to people who the people making the decision feel comfortable with for whatever reason. And I think there are an infinite number of studies that show people are more comfortable with people who look like them. And, and the people making those decisions more often than not--are white majority, especially in this business. And the other thing is that when, when people of color do rise into this particular club, I know that--I sense that many of them don't want to always be the only one and always trying to bring somebody else in. And they don't wanna always be the person who has to deal with these issues of race and diversity. (Unclear) they just wanna do their job like everybody else is doing. And I think in some cases, some people are reluctant to, to be outspoken on these issues because they're jeopardizing their own position or because--for whatever reason. Story_ID: 665105 Speaker 1: Where are you in your life right now? I mean, what do you wanna do that you haven't done? Speaker 2: That's a good question. Speaker 1: And you've, you've, you've (audio disturbance)--you had alluded to academia; you had alluded--but there's, there's another chapter to be written it appears. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, to be honest with you, I'm thinking a lot about that now and what I wanna be when I grow up, as it were. One, one thing is, you know, being a father late in life, I don't wanna miss a lot of it. You know, I, I don't wanna miss--I wanna go to all the plays, and skating lessons, and ballet classes, and--as much of that as I can. And that's a real problem in the business where you're essentially a fireman and you--you're paid to, to run and go and stay and go again. It's very disruptive of family and having balance. I, I, I sense now--it would be interesting to listen to this interview five, ten years from now and see where things stand. But I, I sense now that I am--well, I'm not as much the flavor of the month as I once was, as these people say it, and I'm trying to find my place in the organization [NBCUniversal]. You know, I'm, I'm trying to carve out a niche. You know, I've been talking to people in the investigative area; I've been talking to people in Washington [D.C.] about trying to find a role that's more substantial than the role I have now. And you know, I'll know where that stands in the coming months. In a big sense, you know, I wanna see my little girl [Siobhan Allen] grow up and do great things. I'm, I'm--I have every confidence that she will. You know, she's a really smart, brilliant child, and she's a survivor. I think of her as a survivor, because you know--consciously yours. I mean, she, she was born in a place [Ethiopia] where, I think, one out of five kids don't reach age five or something like that, some incredible statistic like that. And while she wasn't consciously doing anything to get out of her circumstance, she, she did--she subconsciously did and some--and in some ways, you know, it's the, the kids who are adopted internationally, it's a bit of a Darwinian process--you know, the, the healthiest kids, the kids with the brightest sparkle in their eyes; they're the--you know, they're the kids whose parents and guardians have means--some means or some access to get them from the hinterland. I mean, she grew up in--she was living in basically a concrete shack with a tin roof and no electricity, running water. So she inspires me in that in that, and I wanna see her do great things. My wife [Adaora Udoji]--my wife is a breast cancer survivor. And you know, we got through all of that for the most part about a year or two ago--a year and a half ago or so. But there are other things happening, so I, I think of her as a survivor as well. I've have a lot of--I've got some pretty strong women in my--in my life. And it inspires me, and--but I'm not sure what I--I mean, I wanna do--I wanna do big things. I've often thought about trying--I'd like to do a documentary about something. I wanna do--I wanna do stories that, that aren't so--ephemeral is what we do on daily news. I wanna do something I can put on a shelf and look at it a couple of years later and it still stands, you know. I wanna do--I've always enjoyed teaching and mentoring and working with younger people. Unfortunately, academia doesn't pay very well (laughter). I wanna write more. I've told myself write the book; write the book, a memoir. And maybe I'll just transcribe this (laughter), and put--and put it on paper, get it--get--and that's here you are--here's a--so this is probably about fifty, sixty pages, isn't it? Speaker 1: A hundred and something. Speaker 2: Is it really? Wow. Speaker 1: When it's trans- I mean in double space, but yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: So, so there's that, you know. I wanna--I wanna spend more time in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. It's such a peaceful, wonderful place, you know. My wife and I were talking the other day after this funeral of a--of a--an aunt, and we were saying that when, when it's over, we wanna be cremated and have our ashes sprinkled up there. We have a property that I hope we'll still have, and there's a beach that we love to go to. And that's-- Speaker 1: Are you in Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts]? Oak Bluffs? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 665106 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I--(laughter) what a thought, you know. You know, I guess in carrying forth the tradition of people who came before me from parents [Shirley Slade Allen and Lindsay Allen, Jr.], to professionals, to others, I, I hope that there are people who, who think, and see, and know that I did something to make it a little easier for them to get where they want to go, be it in the media business or whatever business. You know, I hope that there are people who, who think that I took enough time and devoted enough energy, maybe not directly, to, to make things a little bit better for the next generation, you know, be it the Ebony Club back in St. Peter's Prep [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey] or the kids that I worked with at the Fresh Air Fund, Anchor Camp [Police Anchor Camp], or, or the, the, the diversity things I've tried to help push at NBC and young people to whatever else happens. I think--I think the, the later years, there's even more opportunity to do that. And I'd like to get off the treadmill a little bit. I'm on a treadmill, and I work hard, I earn a lot of money, thank god, and I'd like to dial it back a little bit and just enjoy life a little bit more and not run so quickly and, and doggedly through it all the time. But that's sort of what--I guess that's, that's--and the legacy as well will be, you know, my daughter [Siobhan Allen]. You know, she'll--you know, we, we try to give her the best of everything, and try and instill in her good values so that she'll make good judgments and decisions as she gets older when we're gone, my wife [Adaora Udoji] and I. And I'm, I'm confident that she'll do great things, yeah. Story_ID: 665107 Speaker 1: What about the legacy of your generation? And I'm, I think, a few years older than you. But what, what about that legacy? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: The kids of the--you know, the-- Speaker 2: We're, we're, we're in many ways--my genera- I don't know what you call us. We have a name. But, you know, I, I started--I started grammar school [P.S. 38, James F. Murray School, Jersey City, New Jersey] in the 1960s; I started college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in the nineteen seven--high school [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey] and college in the 1970s, so in many ways my generation is a direct beneficiary of the civil rights movements of the '60s [1960s]. You know, I'm an--I--affirmative action, whether you like it or not, yep, I'm, I'm sure that that was a factor in many of the choices that I--many of the opportunities that I got and the choices that people made. And you know, I have no doubt that at times during my career, I got what I did because they needed a minority, a black person, to do whatever. And that may be why I--it's not to say I wasn't qualified to do it, but I'm very conscious of the fact that, that we are the beneficiaries of that directly. And you know, kids nowadays are, are not going to be--I mean, the world has changed; the country has changed and so I think our legacy, again, should be--as I was saying, I hope my individual legacy is that we--that we reached back, that we didn't take it all for granted, that we realized where, where we were in a historic sense, you know. That's why in my work I try to--the best stories I do are stories that give people a voice who don't have a voice, you know. One of the best stories I will ever do is that story at Trenton High School [Trenton Central High School, Trenton, New Jersey] where, you know, in some way we, we may have helped these kids and their kids get a new high school. That's much more important to me than most of the other stuff I do on a--you know, the meat and potato stuff on what the news is; I mean, that I was able to go to places like Rwanda and essentially help sound the alarm, you know. That's, that's what I--that's what makes me feel good about a day's work. And, and that's--and I think, you know, I have a lot of friends who are, like me, are you know, have had a lot of opportunities and are very successful. And I think they feel that way too. I think they--you know, I--but yeah, we are--when you think about, we are in a unique position because we are in many ways the direct beneficiaries of, of the '60s [1960s]. And, and I don't think that's something to, to be taken lightly; with it comes responsibility. Story_ID: 665108 Speaker 1: One last question. The legacy of African Americans in this country? Speaker 2: The legacy of African Americans in this country? Well, we're not going anywhere (laughter). I don't know. You know, this country's history is so complicated and so emotional in many ways. You know, I, I, I, I think like so many others have said, that I hope that our community's presence here makes America better, makes America what it says it is, but isn't entirely, you know, all men created equal op- equal opportunity for everybody. I hope our community continues to hold America's feet to the fire and, and demands that, because I, I for one--it's that old saying: we've come a long way, but we've still got a long way to go in, in many respects. And I say that because by--just about any objective socioeconomic measure, there are differences: life expectancy, access to healthcare, education. There are differences between the majority and the minority populations. And I don't think--I don't think those will even out in my lifetime. But over the long haul, you certainly hope that it continues to narrow, that the achievement gap, the education gap, the, the wealth gap, all those gaps, you hope they narrow. And so I hope that--and I think that that's, that's in some ways the role of this community, to keep reminding America of what America says it is and says it wants to be--and, and keeps the pressure on and keeps some--I guess to some extent, being the conscience of the country and, and keeping, keeping us--keeping the country going in the direction that it--that it--that it aspires to. Story_ID: 665109 Speaker 1: That is my father, Lindsay Allen, in the middle holding my sister's hand and my hand on the left. That's Easter, 1959. Speaker 2: Okay, your father's name? Speaker 1: Lindsay L. Allen, Jr. [Lindsay Allen, Jr.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Perfect. Speaker 1: That is-- Speaker 2: First day of school. Speaker 1: Yeah, my sister's first day of school. That's my sister, Lynette, Lynette Allen-Perry on the left, and me climbing the fence of my [paternal] grandparents' [Tempie Jackson Allen and Lindsay Allen, Sr.] house, 332 Whiton Street, Jersey City, New Jersey. So that's early 1960, 1960. Speaker 2: That's 1960. Speaker 1: That also looks like our home in--that's me on the left, my sister--probably about (unclear)--age three or four. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: That looks like Christmas. It says 1959? Okay so I would be two. Speaker 2: All right, that's me standing at a checkpoint in Rwanda along the border. All that stuff is--so that's probably 1994 or '5 [1995]. All those things are weapons. I think those are weapons that had been taken from people who are leaving the country. So there's all kinds of machetes, and knives, and axes and stuff. Speaker 1: That's, that's somewhere in Asia. I'm not sure where. It's just me on assignment, probably the summer of early '90s [1990s], before I moved overseas--early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: That is my college graduation [from University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. On the far left is Earl Powell [ph.], his son, Anthony--Tony--Tony Powell [Anthony Powell], one of my dearest friends. And that's my father on the far right, Lindsay L. Allen, Jr. Speaker 2: My favorite picture of all time. That is me and my daughter, Siobhan Bethlehem Udoji Allen [Siobhan Allen]. That's when I first met her in 2002 at an orphanage in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. She's roughly three months old. Speaker 1: That is me on the Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] campaign plane. I believe it is during the 2008 election. Speaker 2: That is me at--outside the, the union buildings in South Africa, the Pretoria [South Africa], the government--see the--seat of power, of government. That was this past year twenty--it used to be 2013. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: That is my wife, Adaora Udoji and my daughter Siobhan and me in New York City [New York, New York]. This is the day that we formally adopted her. And I don't know the exact date, but we're standing outside of a New York courthouse where that actually happened. She looks pretty comfy. Speaker 1: So it took how long then--so the formal adoption took how long? Speaker 2: That's me in South Africa outside the Mandela hospital [Mediclinic Heart Hospital] in Pretoria this past summer, summer of 2013. The whole process took about twenty-eight months. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: But then there was--then there's three or four more months when we came back to formally. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: That is me this past fall in Nairobi [Kenya] outside the mall that had been attacked by militants doing a live report for 'The Today Show' ['Today'] or something. Speaker 1: That is me, on the far left is producer Pa- Patrice Fletcher, next to me on my left, on the right going across is Kelly O'Donnell, an NBC correspondent, Carl Quintanilla, a correspondent, and John Boxley, a producer. This is--outside on the campaign trail during the 2008 campaign. Speaker 2: That is me with [HistoryMaker] Bill Whitaker, CBS News correspondent, in Pretoria, South Africa, this past year, in 2013. Speaker 1: You know, I don't think we've done him, and I don't know how to reach him (unclear). Speaker 2: That's me in the newsroom in Boston [Massachusetts]. I believe it is sometime in the late '80s [1980s] when I had a mustache. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: It's another--it's--I'm--I worked for WCVB-TV [Boston, Massachusetts] there. It's just a typ- just a day in the office. Speaker 1: That is me outside Nelson Mandela's prison cell in--on Robben Island, South Africa, this past fall, fall of 2013. Speaker 2: That is me with a group of children in Sierra Leone, after a story we did about a guy named Madieu Williams, who's an American football player--or was at the time--and is a school that he started there, just a nice picture with some kids. Speaker 1: That is my wife and Siobhan and I--my daughter--first day of--her first day of school, September of 2013. The school is the Watchung elementary school [Watchung School, Montclair, New Jersey]-- Speaker 2: How do you spell Watchung? Speaker 1: W-A-T-C-H-U-N-G, Watchung. Speaker 2: That's me and Siobhan, my daughter, in Montclair, New Jersey, near our home. Speaker 1: That's Siobhan and I again. That's in Montclair, New Jersey, this past winter, winter of 2013. Speaker 2: That's wedding day, my wife and I. That's in Ann Arbor, Michigan, October 5th, 2002. Speaker 1: Look at her hair, she's got hair (unclear). Speaker 2: That's my wife and Siobhan again, so. Speaker 1: Another family portrait. Speaker 2: That is my mother [Shirley Slade Allen] and father and I at an awards event in New York [New York]. I'm not quite sure when or where that is, but I think it's sometime during the 1990s. Looks like an Overseas Press Club [Overseas Press Club of America] award that, that I won. I won a number of them back in the '90s [1990s], so. Speaker 1: What about your mustache in (unclear) (laughter)? Speaker 2: That's my father, Lindsay Allen, and I up in, in England. He came to visit me when I was living in London [England]. Speaker 1: Another wedding picture. Speaker 2: That's me and my mom, probably in the 1970s when I'm--have hair and I'm in high school [St. Peter's Preparatory School, Jersey City, New Jersey]. You can tell by the wall that's in our house in Hillside, New Jersey. Speaker 1: That's kind of a washed out picture of my wife and I. Speaker 2: That's my sister and I. I think the back says 1963--Christmas obviously, so I would have been about six years old. Speaker 1: That's my mother and my sister and I in Jersey City. It looks like I'm about three or four. Yep, that says first day of school for my sister, September 1960 so I'm three. Speaker 2: Okay (unclear). Speaker 1: That's me on my fire truck (laughter). I guess I'm about four--three or four years old there...