 Story_ID: 418066 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is [HistoryMaker] Mr. Paul Brock. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Sure. My full name is [HistoryMaker] Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong, commonly known as Aki Aleong. It is spelled A-K-I, and the last name is A-L-E-O-N-G, Aleong. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Twelve, nineteen, thirty-four [December 19, 1934]. I was born in Port of Spain, Trinidad [and Tobago] at that time known as the British West Indies. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April the 26, 19--I mean 2005. Speaker 1: I'm sorry what is your occupation? I should ask that first. Speaker 2: My occupation. Well at present, I am an actor, an activist, a writer, a song writer and film writer and documentary writer. I'm also a song writer, I have--I'm a film documentary producer, record producer and presently about to embark in producing my first motion picture. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At the present time, I'm still an actor; I still pay my dues (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh I meant--I meant what location are we right now-- Speaker 2: Oh, we are in a wonderful location here in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: See Garden Inn I think right now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You wanna say the-- Speaker 1: Yes, yeah. Speaker 2: We are at the [Hilton] Garden Inn hotel here in El Segundo, California. Story_ID: 418067 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --and they just require a short answer, they're sort of a warm up. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? I like peas and rice. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know peas and rice, chicken, fried chicken. I haven't had for a while, but I like greens and ham hocks (laughter) you know. You know things like that, cornbread yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color would be I would say black. Speaker 1: Okay. You have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: As long as I'm alive and it's--and it's sunny. Well, I would say spring. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, I think my whole life is like a vacation, the good Lord has allowed me to be here and it's a vacation just being here. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you, and everything else does not matter. Story_ID: 418068 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Henry Aleong] side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --and we'll start with your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Agnes Vera Gonsalves, G-O-N-S-A-L-V-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July the 24th, 1917. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in St. Vincent, British West Indies [St. Vincent, St. Vincent and the Grenadines]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: The only thing I know is that her parents on one side were Portuguese that came from Portugal. They married of course, the Carib Indians that were there and the Africans that were there and they were all mixed up. The--I remember my aunts, they were--they came in all different shades and colors and when my mother was twelve because St. Vincent is a very poor island, her other sisters had immigrated to Trinidad [and Tobago]. Trinidad at that point was an American base. Trinidad had oil; Trinidad was a very strategic point for America because they could prevent any German ships from going around the horn so they were well established in Trinidad. So there--there was a lot--a lot of opportunities for people to come to that island. As a matter of fact, there was a song that--that was written went something like (singing) small islander go back where you really come from, small islander go back where you really come from. You come from Port of Spain [Trinidad and Tobago] in a tinfoil boat and you try to make whatever it is, so go back home, like a go. Whatever, you know, so that was--it was so that was everybody was--is like coming to America, they were coming to Trinidad (laughter) to make a living. So my mother was twelve years old when she came to the island of Trinidad. And of course the capital was Port of Spain, so she came to Port of Spain, yeah. Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandparents at all? Speaker 2: No, because I grew up in Trinidad and my grandparents and everybody lived in St. Vincent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I never really saw them. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you your mother talk about an--tell of any stories about growing up in St. Vincent? Speaker 2: Now I did visit St. Vincent once when I was very ill and you know, it's a dense island, you know I mean it wasn't very populated where we went to. I mean I remember going on this--on this bus man it was going up this hill and I was scared to death. I was twelve, thought I was gonna die, I was gonna fall off, I never been on a cliff before. And these people hanging on the buses you know, we went all the way up and then we finally got down to the other side and there was a little house near the beach. But I never saw any--anyone in the island, it was kind of strange, it was just--I kind of miss that I really wish and I've never been back and I really want to go back one day and see if there're any of my relatives on my mother's side that's alive. Story_ID: 418069 Speaker 1: Now, I read somewhere that you said your mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] was half African and half (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, well (laughter) as far as I'm concerned, in Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago] you have to understand that--I don't know when I was growing up we didn't differentiate between you know I never knew any white people 'cause they weren't in my thing. As far as my mother's side all the kids were growing up you know, we all were considered Trinidadians there's no racial thing, like ones black, ones yellow, ones this. I mean we called everyone by their skin color, hey yo man you black, you brown, you high yellow, you pink, you whatever you know? I mean it wasn't it was what God gave your eyes to look at, it wasn't about a racial identity, I never--I didn't know anything about racial. As a matter of fact, when I came to this country, my mother said, "Son you can't call people black, you gotta call them Negro." I said, "Ma why, what's a Negro?" 'Cause when I grew up I never heard the word Negro, I heard the word black, I heard the word brown, I heard the word yellow, I heard all those words. But I never knew what Negro meant, that's how naive I was, so--so as far as I'm concerned she was a Trinidadian, I mean you know we were black, I mean I didn't stop and say that we were anything other than. 'Cause when I moved to Brooklyn [New York, New York], we moved into a black neighborhood, I mean that was it. My aunts were black, I mean--so I mean it was--it's a strange phenomenon in terms of the way I look at it and they way I was brought up. Speaker 1: Okay. And why did she say you can't call people black in Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Because back in 1949 they would've killed you, you couldn't call anybody black then, are you kidding? It was an insult and I couldn't understand this, this was--this is what the white Americans' psyche had done to black Americans, they weren't called black Americans, they were called Negroes. You called somebody black man, they jump in your face, say, "Hey man what you all me black for man, I'm going to cut you man, I ain't black man, I'm a Negro." And I couldn't understand this--this philosophy, anyways it was--I couldn't call anyone black (laughter) it wasn't until years later when one of my friends what I used to run with, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] who was going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and got up and started to talk about, "I'm black and I'm proud of it," and then James Brown picked it up and said, "I'm black and I'm proud and I'm black and I'm proud," and then that is when black--being black started and even then it was a tremendous opposition to it. A lot of Americans, people of color let me call then this, 'cause I don't wanna differentiate, people of color was very upset about hey man, I'm not black, man I'm a Negro, I'm a this and then it was all this fighting inner fighting going on about African, it wasn't even African American. It was--it was all this thing, Negro, I'm black, I'm not black, I'm this, I'm you know, I mean it was--it was that point of clashing but it started out of Howard University with a Trinidadian who was saying man, I'm black and I'm proud was picked up by James Brown, and this is a highlight, one of the most important revolutionary moments in the history of black America. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I had to ask that, I'm old enough to remember that kind of reaction from people and I know why but we're asking these questions for the sake of those who are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's okay (laughter). Speaker 1: You know that's so-it--yeah that was a dangerous thing to call somebody black then. Speaker 2: It was, believe me man I mean you know here am I, I don't you know all of this a purpose (laughter) I don't really appear black you know. But back in the day, being black and being a Trinidadian blackness was a state of mind, it was a consciousness, it was how you were raised, how you were brought up, it was--you knew somebody man. I mean you just psyched them, you just felt then the way they walked, their feeling, yeah. You just knew they were I mean it's not about that external you know we were a little bit more internal back then. Now everything is external man you know the baggy pants, the clothes, "Yo man what it is," you know. It wasn't then, it wasn't like that back then you know? At least where I grew up in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York, New York] which is really the Harlem [New York, New York] of Brooklyn you know, it was tough way to go man-- Story_ID: 418070 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] talk about growing in St. Vincent [British West Indies; St. Vincent, St. Vincent and the Grenadines] at all, I mean did she have a chance to go to school and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, talked how about poor it was, she never went to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She never went to school it was very poor, you know, I mean those islands the English of course owned the islands you know and they raped them you know. They raped them like taking out the fruits and the vegetables and whatever, whatever-- Speaker 1: That's interesting 'cause it's the Virgin Islands, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the same--same thing you know? They just took it all out and the poor people lived on the bananas. My--my grandparents had a small little piece of land and they would grow their bananas and their bread fruit and you know sell it in the market place. Carried it on top of their heads you know, the same thing, and she used to do that and she got tired because she was twelve, so she was a woman at that point. So her sister sent for her because she could work, make a little bit more money in Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago], my mother came to Trinidad and at thirteen had a child with an Indian man. And who is my first sister. Speaker 1: Now this would be an East Indian. Speaker 2: East Indian. Speaker 1: Indian. Speaker 2: East Indian. Speaker 1: Living in the West Indies? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. 'Cause again, in Trinidad we had a lot of Chinese, lot of East Indians, we had Persians, Persian rugs, I mean we had, it was the most cosmopolitan, even today, it's the most cosmopolitan island in the world. I mean you have the most beautiful women and men, I mean the coloring, is--I mean they have blended and melted so beautifully. I mean if God just wanted to have red roses you know then it would be boring to just see a whole bed of red roses but thank God we can see different colors in a garden which makes it beautiful. And Trinidad is like a garden of colors of people that are so intertwined you know. They used to call me B.C., now B.C. means a black Chinese, and if they're dark skinned, you're B.C. more so you were B.C. you know black Chinese I mean so. You have all these strange beautiful people with straight hair, long hair, all my brothers and sisters married black West Indians or black Americans and I always used to tease them and say they have this convertible hair you know. They can do whatever they want to do with it you now and they have this dark little skin, brown skin or light skin whatever with a little bit of slanted eyes. I mean they're beautiful--it's kind of--I mean we're all mixed up I mean look, we're all children of God right, we all bleed, we all the same. The only thing that you hope for is that we have but a short time on this earth such a short time. And your life is your highest possession and if I threaten your life I give you the right to take mine to protect your own. So if we can live in peaceful coexistence where I value your life so you can then value my life, we could peacefully coexist under God 'cause we're all children of the Lord. But unfortunately, (laughter) it doesn't work that way because we all want to take something from somebody, and it's a shame, I'll talk about that later but-- Story_ID: 418071 Speaker 1: When did your mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] come to Trin- she came when she was twelve right to Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago]? Speaker 2: No--yeah to Trinidad, yes. Speaker 1: And then when did she-- Speaker 2: Then she met this [East] Indian guy-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she had a baby-- Speaker 2: She had a child with this Indian guy and then the next year as she tells me the story is, is that she had met my father [Henry Aleong] who was a Chinese cook who had come from, which I later found out came from Hong Kong. He was just a cook in a restaurant and she got pregnant again and I was born--I had a little bit of difficulty when I was born and she tried to communicate with my father but he--he claimed that I wasn't his child for some reason and I was still you know. And of course he didn't speak much English, she spoke English obviously. So she had two children, one little girl and one boy and she didn't know what to do. So she took me to the restaurant and left me at the doorstep and went upstairs and told the Chinese cooks and the people that that was his child and she left me there. So all the Chinese cooks ran downstairs (laughter) and they looked at this little child there and they you know she had left. They picked me up and they looked me over and they said, "Can't be any Indian child he looks like he's Chinese, must be your child." So that's how my mother and father got together and I--so I was born out of wedlock at that point several years later, my father did marry my mother and I--they went on to have five other kids. I had--actually six other kids, I had one brother and five sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my father eventually did well enough to own his own restaurant and my mother went on to own her own restaurant and we did fairly well. I was sent to private school, by the time I was twelve I had--I had been--I had skipped a lot--I had private tutors, I was preparing for the Cambridge Oxford entrance examination which is the big thing in Trinidad. We--the greatest form of compliment or adulation you would get is when you came home and you had a book from your school stating that you're one, two or three in your class. I had a lot of books, so I had studied by that time, French, Spanish, Latin and of course English, trigonometry all of this at twelve and I was preparing--at that point my mother had kind of outgrown from my father I never really saw much of my father because I was always in school or getting private lessons. As a child I never had the opportunity to go out and play with the guys, I never went and play ball, I was always studying I was my father's first son. It was the responsibility to be educated, and that's all I ever did, I never had a childhood, never did, I never could go play soccer you know I mean on the streets you know. The only time I got into was one fight and that was--I was a ball boy for the Catholic priests and you know they play--the white priests would play their tennis and I would carry the ball. One day we were leaving the park and two guys jumped me and my brother and I couldn't fight 'cause I just you know a nerd I guess so (laughter) he had to defend me you know and I ran the hell home you know. But that's how naive I was but my mother decided--she spoke to her aunt and they were more opportunities in New York [New York]. So in 1949 after took about a year '48 [1948] to '49 [1949] we finally arrived in New York on May the second of 1949. Story_ID: 418072 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna stop here and go back a little bit. Speaker 2: Sure go on. Speaker 1: And I wanna go back to your father [Henry Aleong], you said your father is from Hong Kong? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know much about his side of the family in terms of the--there was--he did apparently live in a Chinese community, I mean or had a small community of other Chinese people that he was associated with-- Speaker 2: No the only time I knew my father was when he was living with us. Speaker 1: No, I'm saying that when your mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] took you as a baby-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to these other Chinese-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They examined (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He probably was living with-- Speaker 1: He was part of some kind of community, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I'm sure he was. My father--the thing that I can remember about my father was the fact that--two things. In those days, the noodles, you know the Chinese noodles, well they didn't come pre-packed and pre-cut machine and all of that. He would have to make it so what they did, they had this long bamboo pole and this big table and he would ride more or less pound the--he would-the--he would walk across the table pounding and grinding that flour until it became paper thin. He would cut it and then put flour and then do it again over and over, and I remember as a kid, when I would go there, I would love to sit on the pole only time I act--I interact with my father, only time that I would sit on this pole and he would bounce on the pole (laughter). You know what I'm saying and he would grind this--the like the--you've had won ton, right? You know how thin that won ton skin is, well it starts as flour and whatever and that's how you fine--you would have to pound it down 'cause they didn't have machines in those days. Now, that was the first time with my father, then the second time would be that I always remember that he would come home like at one o'clock at night and bring home all the curry chicken and shrimp that was left over and he'd wake us up, and we'd eat. It was the greatest thing 'cause to get curry chicken and shrimp at night, right? Then we go back to bed so we wouldn't be hungry in the morning, but by the time we woke up he was gone, so he had to go to the grocery--the markets and buy the fresh vegetables from six until eight, walk to the restaurant start cooking, you know what I'm saying? And then after the lunch period, he would come home like at two o'clock and that's when he smoked his opium, see and so that for two hours then that was when he'd sleep. And then he would go back at the restaurant again at like 4:30 for the dinner rush and then come back home, that was seven days a week. That's all I ever saw my father, now as I got into high school, at like ten or eleven, I would get off at like two o'clock and I would you know, sometimes I be--when I would go to the restaurant, and then maybe five or six times in my entire life I would sit around the cook's table where they had this big table everybody would sit Chinese style you know what I'm saying? And I would eat, but that's the memory of my father you know, him coming home. And then the third thing would be--he used to suffer from a gas, so he would give me a few pennies if I would just sit on his stomach and bounce on it you know what I'm saying (laughter) so I used to bounce on his stomach and then he used to go into his little opium den you know and smoke his opium (laughter) and then go to sleep. Story_ID: 418073 Speaker 1: Was that fairly common then to for people to smoke opium and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: It wasn't illegal apparently. Speaker 2: It was very illegal. Speaker 1: It was? Okay. Speaker 2: Oh very illegal. As a matter of fact, the British used to bust our house down maybe three times a year. Everytime the ship would come in they know that the Chinese were smuggling opium and they knew that somebody had to buy it, right? So my father [Henry Aleong] never invited anyone to his house to smoke, I mean it was not a habit. It was like you taking a drink to me it was not illegal and I used to love the smoke. I'll tell you a story later 'cause I used to go into his den and watch him prepare this stuff. And the exciting thing about it was that--I remember one day he was arguing there was two Chinese guys and they had brought-- I went into there to see what they were doing, he's arguing. And the Chinese have these scales that you can weigh paper on you know the back is you know. And they were taking a loaf and peeling off paper, there was a little clump and they'd be peeling paper off and it was a clump of opium it came like--like asphalt because I knew what asphalt is. I mean we have it all over Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago], all over the ground, right? Look at this piece of black thing and they're pulling paper, I didn't know it was opium, I thought it was asphalt, what the hell they're doing? So it turned to that if any piece of that paper touched that opium it had to be weighed, had to be weighed, so they were pulling the paper (laughter) arguing this touch this anyways. So what happened was that finally of course he would buy it 'cause he had the money to buy it and then to process it, is something unusual. I mean and this is a story (laughter) to itself how you would process it to get it to eventually to the point of where it's been refer to as black gold. And it was something else my man, it was something else. Speaker 1: Well how would they process it, I mean-- Speaker 2: I know you wanna know that and I knew he was gonna ask me that okay (laughter). Well, if I was a DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration] agent, and I have--and I have a thing from the United States federal government DEA agent where I--I spoke to them on behalf of trying to recruit people of color in the DEA but--but back then if I was in the British intelligence I could--I could pretty much find out where opium was being cooked. You would take this clump of opium and you'd put it in a pot with water but you couldn't cook it inside. Because opium has this tremendous smell so of course weather permitted in the [Caribbean] Islands anyway we had cold pots outside, right? So you would cook it on a cold pot outside of our house but you see but before that we were prepared because everytime we ate oranges, we always used to have to save the peels. Because when he was cooking the opium he put the peels into the hot coals so that it would blend in with the aroma (laughter) of the opium so if I was a DEA agent, all I had to do was where's the orange peel coming from (laughter) but I know, but unfortunately they didn't know that. So he would cook this opium then he would strain it to take out the rocks, then he would cook it again and strain it, take out the rocks. Then eventually he would even wash--he would--he would boil the rocks again to make sure that everything t was out of the rocks, okay? And then eventually he would strain it and--and boil it and strain it, eventually he would pour it into a vial because that was pure opium. Story_ID: 276984 Speaker 1: So now we stopped when we talked about this vial of black gold okay? Now what he [Aleong's father, Henry Aleong] would do is that then he would go--he had a little room and it was very elaborate and I used to go in and watch him, because he would have his--his opium pipe and he had this little burner there, and it's very ritualistic. What he would do he would stick a little I don't know what metal, whatever into the opium and then he would coagulate it and then would warm up and you know and then it would get to a little point then you would roll it along the pipe the outer edge of the pipe and he would dip it and roll it and my God it took so long. And finally it would become like tip of a pencil, the point of a pencil and then he would stick into the pipe then he would light it then he would smoke it. And I used to love the opium smoke but I used to love the--the almost the artistic way in which this thing it wasn't like man give me a joint, it wasn't like that, it was so beautiful in the way that it was ritualistically done, you know what I'm saying? And it was just like--and then he would just go to sleep. And just to digress, when I was sixteen and I was in college and I was in a play I went to this party and, man I had my makeup on, and you know I looked good--the first party I ever been to my life in college, 'cause I was playing half human half beast anyway. So, they had me made up you know so I put on my suit and I looked go you know and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were made up in this out- this-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I made up and then I took the little horns off so I looked like I was an actor. I go to this party you know it was ninety-nine and nine tenths percent white of course and it was at Brooklyn College [New York, New York] which was at that point 90 percent Jewish. So I was at this party you know and, man I felt good that I was accepted, man and I one of these actors you know. I wasn't--didn't want to be an actor; I just wanted to be accepted. I got sick and the guy said--I was sick I was ready to throw up on--and the guy says I said, "I'm sick, I gotta leave." He said, "You not sick man, you're all right." I said, "What you mean?" He said, "You contact high." I said, "What? What do you mean contact high?" He said, "Man, you been up here inhaling all this damn marijuana smoke that's why you sick." And then a flash came to me (laughter) that when I was inhaling my father's opium, he used to run around all the time hit me in the back of the head and say, "What's the matter boy you crazy, you crazy?" whack in the back of the head 'cause I had no I--I guess maybe that's why I was such a great student I had no idea--but it was kind of funny like ten years later, right to draw this--these two parallel lines. Anyways, but my father, I really didn't get any culture from my father I didn't speak the language. All I knew was one thing when I was bad or he said I was bad he would take a match and light it and he would say focaai, focaai, which means matches, that's the only thing I can remember. And one, two, three in Chinese, yuht, ngee, sahm that was it, and the--three cuss words, other than that, I grow with my mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong], I grow up with the neighbors you know. I grow up with the kids in school, but I never saw my father, never saw my father. I didn't have a father relationship because he was too busy in the restaurant you know trying to make a living for seven kids you know what I'm saying? Story_ID: 276985 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, you've already talked about on some level but--well what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights of course were the highlight of my life as a kid was the Carnival. You know every year, Lent time; we had the Carnival like in Brazil and Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago] I mean you know that was the thing, you know all the people jumping up, the Indians with themselves and everybody having all the different themes and the people on the--on the tall sticks you know? I mean that was exciting, I mean we all--everybody lived the whole island lived for that one event every year. And they--whatever little money these poor people had, it all went to--into a costume so they can have their two hours of fame because it would be marching in this hot sun back and forth for prizes and of course the Calypso. People were trying to come up with new songs (unclear) and everybody like that you know trying to get their music and the best songs. The smell I love is curry, I love every--anything curry, man. Curry chicken, curry goat, curry beef, I love the Indian rotis, the roti where you can put anything curry, curry rice in it with potatoes or whatever, I mean I love curry, okay? Let see, so the sights, the sounds and? Speaker 1: Smells. Speaker 2: Well the smells were the curry is and the sounds was the tin pan, the ping pong. I grew up--you know what a ping pong is? A ping pong is the steel drum, we call it the ping pong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's the Trinidadian word the ping pong (making musical sounds) you know. That's--they take a steel drum, a drum that had oil they cut it off and the pound out the notes you know and then they can play notes on it. So those were--as a matter of fact, I could remember I was very proud of the fact that well--when my mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong], my gosh, every year, Christmastime we had to polish all the brass, things we had in the house. We had to varnish all the furniture all over, I mean it was a ritual thing, we hated it but we had to do that right all polish. And the used to have the [SC] Johnson wax and these little cans this size, so we had these cans so I remember I wanted to be a Trinidadian, right? So I remember taking the pan, heating it up on a cold pot and tried to find some notes you know so I can--I can become man--I was a Calypso player so I had this three little notes I could play 'Mary Had A Little Lamb' (humming) I mean--I mean I was-I was hot man, playing my little three notes (laughter) can versus twenty-five notes on a ping pong. I never really had--the only other sights I can remember was one day we used to live near the [East] Dry River [Port of Spain, Trinidad, British West Indies; Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago], which was a nice section and it's very funny, and I travelled all over the world making movies and stuff. But in this country rich people live on the hills in poor countries the poor people on the hills, (laughter) really it is, right? And one day I'm sitting there and I know it's a hurricane or whatever but I'm sitting there and all I can see flying over our heads were the tin which were the roofs of the people's houses and it was flying the wind had it. And I'm looking at this tin, man; it was like 'The Wizard of Oz' (laughter) when you saw the--all them thing. And everything was flying over the top of our house going out towards the ocean. And that wind just picked up, you know because the poor people the thatch roofs and the--and the tin roofs and all that stuff. That was a sight I will never forget in my life, of course for sixty years later, I'm still--I still remembered it. Speaker 1: So you were about ten years old when you saw this? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that was funny. But--but I didn't play much cricket which is what we played, and I didn't play much soccer, but I knew what it was. I mean you know, I used to kick at rock, I mean you--you got to pick up some things. And then of course I learned to throw with stones 'cause you have nothing else to do at home when you take a tin can try to knock the can down you now, so I had good control-- Story_ID: 276986 Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you your father's name, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my father's name was Henry Aleong, A-L-E-O-N-G. Speaker 1: And you said there's a story behind that name, it's not really what it sounds like-- Speaker 2: Oh, well when my father came (laughter) to the island of Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago] with all the other immigrants he couldn't speak English, so they asked him what was his name? So whoever was speaking said his name is--it was Leong, his name was last name the root name is L-E-O-N-G but in Chinese, as a respect to the other person, they usually add the word Ah. Like in Spanish they say Don Juan, Don Smith, Don Jones, Don Ricardo. In Chinese, they say Ah Smith, Ah Wong, and his name was Leong so they say Ah Leong, so then the English wrote A for the A-H in front of the L-E-O-N-G. So it became Aleong, which is three syllables with Chinese names not like (laughter) so it became Aleong. So (laughter) that's how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Does it have a--does it have a specific meaning, I mean, do you know what it means? Speaker 2: Something, I mean I--I don't know--I don't--you know I been to Hong Kong and some other places, I'm asked somewhere along the way. And my first--my first--my Chinese name is really not Aki its Assing it would be Assing, A double S-I-N-G. But there's a story behind that so, my real name was actually Assing Aleong, that's-that's the way it was. However, later on I will explain why I changed it. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or do you wanna hear that now? Speaker 1: Well, we may as well--well, yeah--well I--what do you think; you think it's better-- Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: --to save it or-- Speaker 2: Well let's say we will talk about my growing up in Brooklyn [New York, New York] and one of the--one of the and how I got involved in--we'll talk about it later. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's fine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I just wanted to get--so his name-- Speaker 2: Gotta get to America. Speaker 1: Now with the name Henry, we know that's not a Chinese name but-- Speaker 2: I don't know what my father's Chinese name was. Speaker 1: Okay, but he called himself Henry? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Henry Aleong, that's all I know, I know nothing else about him. Speaker 1: Do you know if he came over as a--with the [U.S.] Merchant Marine or something or how he-- Speaker 2: No. The Chinese came to the [British] West Indies in 1850s to work in the sugarcane fields in Cuba and all over the place. The Chinese came to the United States in the 1700s aboard the ships that were in Louisiana. The Filipinos came also in the 1800s to the United States, so they were merchant seamen, they were all over the place. The Chinese were travelling, especially the southern Chinese, the--you know the Hong Kong from that side and not the Mandarins, it's the northern ones so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These are the darker Chinese right? Speaker 2: The darker yeah. They--they travelled all over to find work, they came for the Gold Rush you know, they build the railroads in California, they built seventeen railroads in the West. They were in the sugar plantations, they went--they were all over. As a matter of fact, the Chinese are known as the Jews of the Orient. If you go to any major country, whether it's the Philippines, Thailand wherever, they're the ones that control most of the wealth. Because they work hard, I mean but they have been--they have penetrated that whole--wherever they go, they work for themselves, you know. And they maintain their own thing, but the thing about the Chinese that they always intermarry. They never stay alone by themselves so you know for example all the Chinese fled, they didn't want to be slaves, they fled to Mexico. And they intermarried with the Mexicans; it's like the Chinese intermarrying with the blacks and the Indians. Wherever they go the Cubans, wherever they go, whatever country they go to, if they allow to marry. Of course they couldn't marry white women because that was against the law so you didn't have that mixture here in the early 1800s and 1900s, even the 20th century. But in most other countries they were not prohibited and they married local women and had the children. And then they now--the thing about unfortunately and the reason, and this is first time I'll ever say this, the reason my mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] left my father was because he had a wife and a child when he left China like most of these guys did. And after he became successful, somehow or the other, his wife prevailed upon him to have his son which would be older than I am to come to visit and when he came to visit she came along. And my mother felt very broken up about that, so that point you know she felt like she had been living in bigamy or whatever. She decided that it was over, so in order to save face, and she was not an Asian woman, but in order to save face, and allow them, she left with me and my--the baby, my youngest sister to move on to New York [New York] with the intentions of eventually sending for the rest of the kids. So that was the reason why they parted. Story_ID: 276987 Speaker 1: When you were growing up in Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago], you said you were like very focused student. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did you-and--did you--was church a big part of growing up at all or religion? Speaker 2: No. We belonged to the Anglican church because that's the English Catholic church. Funny--very funny incident is that the priest-- of course my father [Henry Aleong] was the best cook in the island of Trinidad and his restaurant was located in the heart of town. And we used to do a lot of banquets so one of the things that I used to do was that I used to go and have to buy him pigeons, 'cause I could make a few dollars off of him. So I would go and buy--the pigeons would have to be four weeks old if they were a little bit older, the bones would be too hard. So I would go around and buy these squabs you know, and I pay like a dollar for it and charge him a dollar and a quarter you know so I could make my money (laughter). Then I decided, hey man, this a good little thing for me, so I started to raise my own pigeons, right (laughter) and sell it back, he didn't care, you know what I'm saying? Because the customer paid for the squabs so I used to do that--we used to you know raise pigeons and sell it and whatever. But anyways, one day, the priest came in to the--to the thing, and my mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] was there and he says, "You should all be Catholics. We come here all the time, we been supporting the restaurant, you gotta become Catholic." So I said all right, all right, so the next day she took us all down and we got baptized as Catholics, (laughter) right? So for the two or three months being a Catholic I became a ball boy, right, for the priest were playing you know. But then I never went back to the Catholic church (laughter) I was just to go back to the Anglican church whenever I did go, which was very seldom, so I never really went to church. My mother was a very spiritual lady, I mean you talk--she eventually-she eventually ended up being a preacher but I grew up with seeing people on the corner Trinidadians you know, preaching the Bible falling down with the spirit of the Lord you know, I mean that was just speaking in tongues. I mean that was not foreign to me, I mean it was--I would have to run to the corner to get coconut in the morning 'cause the drinks in coconut juice was fantastic, I mean I loved that. That talking about you know when they shake it up and cut the top off and you can drink the juice you know and split it open and get the nice--and you see the people on the street corners man, you know just preaching for the Lord and falling down. And eventually later on in my life I mean I became a Christian and see my mother used to speak in tongues to me all the time and talk about ask and you shall receive and she was a good woman, man. I think she imparted an awful lot on me about the Lord and about treating people equal and doing the right thing, man. And the good Lord has blessed me thank you Lord for my seventy years, so you know I'm-I'm deeply grateful for that, that my mother passed on to me. Story_ID: 276988 Speaker 1: Your mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] moved to New York [New York] when you were about fourteen you said? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so. Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-eight [1948]? Speaker 2: Nine, '49 [1949]. Speaker 1: Nine, nine. Speaker 2: Forty-nine [1949]. Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949]. Speaker 2: May the second, 1949, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was that, were you--were you--did you have any reservations about leaving Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago]? Speaker 2: No I--yeah I did I kind of--I stopped schooling for about a year because it was always like we're gonna go, we're not gonna go you know immigration you know how that stuff goes. So I got delayed for about a year you know I didn't really 'cause I'm so excited about coming. I mean I didn't know much about America or anything like that it was my mother, I was my mother's favorite son and my other--younger sisters so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did you see like American movies and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or hear any American radio. Speaker 2: No, no, no. The only thing I remember is when they--when the only radio I ever remember was when they broadcast the fact that America--that the Japanese had bombed Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] and they were gonna go to war [World War II, WWII]. 'Cause we didn't have television the only thing we had was radio. And I never listened to much radio back then I mean you know that was--I was too busy studying so radio and--the only thing that was important to me was you know the Carnival once a year you hear the music but it was never--I never listened to the radio it was not a--this is like an American thing. All the kids on their you know their--their new gadgets, listening to radio looking at the MP3s and the whole thing, no. Radio was not a way of reaching me at that point might been other people, I have no idea. But I was too busy trying to study Latin like dominus, domine, dominum, dominorum, dominos, dominis, you know "Parlez-vous francais?" "No, oui, oui!" You know, hey, "Se habla Espanol?" You know all that kind of stuff, you know? And I was trying to learn about trigonometry, I didn't have time to listen to radio (laughter). But I was a frustrated singer. And I remember (laughter) that I talked my mother into letting me go in this contest one of these big things. Speaker 1: And this was in Trinidad? Speaker 2: In Trinidad, yeah, in Trinidad. And she took me one day and the prize was like a case of Coca-Cola or something it was--that was on the radio. So I went up there (laughter) and they saw me coming and I said I wanted to--so I was one of the contestants so I sang this song and I got a bottle of--I got a case of Coke. But it was the funniest thing, 'cause when we went home, I think it they broadcasted later and I was gonna sing a song like--it was like I love you for sentimental reasons (singing) you know but I was singing I love you for sentimental reasons I (laughter) I had speeded up the song so fast it was so funny, I was so nervous. That was my--that was the only time I ever had a chance to leave my (laughter) house and that was my entire life, that was my minute--five minutes of fame, until I got to United States. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was New York like for you when you first come to New York? Speaker 2: Well, it was a culture shock obviously; my mother went to work as a maid. She didn't have any money or anything like that. Speaker 1: Did you live in a Brooklyn [New York, New York] right away? Speaker 2: Yes, we went to live with our--her so called adopted aunt, The Cotringtons [ph.] who sponsored her for coming here, okay? And I lived right across the street from Boys High School [Boys and Girls High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] so I didn't have to go far. I was--I just got out of out of my house and walked right across the street and that was Boys High and that was it, I went from there to there. Story_ID: 276989 Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry; I didn't ask you the name of your grade school in Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago] and what was the name of the school that you went to? Speaker 2: Well it was regular school, and then I went to a school called PEI, which was Progressive Educational Institute [Port of Spain, Trinidad, British West Indies], other than the grammar school obviously. But I was attending PEI, Progressive Educational Institute. Speaker 1: Sounds like a private school. Speaker 2: That was kind of a semi-private high school, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And those students were who finished academically high were the ones who eventually would take the Cambridge Oxford entrance examination. Speaker 1: And you were studying for that when you were. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. I was prepping for that; I mean that's the whole--that's the whole thing for anybody that means anything. Wasn't sports. It was when--you know we were more education oriented. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, so-- Speaker 2: So I'm in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Boys High School [Boys and Girls High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] was--I mean it's been said by many that West Indian education's much better than--West Indian high school grad is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --equivalent college grad over here. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. Speaker 1: Did you find that--you said it is huh? Speaker 2: Yes, it is, it is. As a matter of fact, when I came here, I really didn't study because it was cultural shock, I didn't know what was going on the first few weeks I was there. I was standing up outside and three girls, of course they were black girls, living in the neighborhood came and said hi. And I ran inside, I was scared, I was taking the garbage pails out, man I was so scared of these girls I didn't know--I ran inside. Because where I come from, if you have a girlfriend you gone get married. It's not about dating, man, it's about you know and say hi to me man, that's like damn I ran inside (laughter). I didn't have any dates, I mean I was--I went to Boys High School, an all-boys school, it was easy for me, it was very easy for me, okay? But I tell you two things, 'cause it's very important, it shaped my personality and it shaped my life. And the first day I was in one of the--I was in a civics class and they were talking about this General [Robert E.] Lee and you know great southern gentleman, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah blah. And General Lee, so I thumbed through the index real quick and I see this picture and I looked, and I saw this picture of this white man and I jumped up and I said, "Damn, look they made a mistake, there's a man here, white man named General Lee" and everybody laughed at me. Because where I come from all Lees were Chinese, I never saw a white man with the name Lee before. Then I'm standing up by the window the guy says, "Look out, look out!" And I stuck my head out the window (laughter) you know. I could've got a vase hit, look out means pull your head in, not stick your head out, right? I mean that's how naive I was. And I finally became--and I finally--'cause I bought into this American dream and I gonna say this to you right now. That I think the [U.S.] Constitution should've been rewritten, which should've said that we are all created unequal, but we have the right to pursue happiness and to live a good life, really. And the reason I say that is because there's so much double standard, we're not equal, we never will be equal. Two of my best friends Ray, Charles said to me "[HistoryMaker] Aki [Leonard Gonzales Aleong], there's no equality, I'm a black man and I got one eye, there's no equality, never will be. All I want is an equal opportunity, okay, equal opportunity." And Sammy Davis [Jr.] said the same thing, "I'm black and I'm Jewish," and I said well you know, "I'm--I'm Asian and I'm black and Jewish" and maybe we can convert Frank Sinatra and then whole world would've been changed, right, so that was funny. But in essence, I think the fact that coning from Trinidad that we are all unequal, but we're all human beings. And I think it has kind of shake my thing, I know today things are we say you know but we're all equal, but I think that was one of the things which was the sell. Sure, we're all equal that worked for the white people, the Polish the Irish you know the French the English the Anglo--they called it the Anglo Saxon triangle that came here, forget about Eastern Europe. They were all equal in color, but how can you as a person of color be equal when they can look at you and see your eyes are different, your skin color's different, you're not equal. And they can segregate you, discriminate against you and put you in a box immediately. So there was no equality, man, there has never been any. Where I came up, where we were the majority, the people of color you follow me? Hey but it's not in this country and I think--now things might be changing and maybe I'm gone get a little bit mellow, but you teach your kids to be equal. No teach them to be unequal. To be unequal in fact, that they are individual and not like anybody else, because God made us intangibly different. There's not two persons on the face of the earth that are alike, not two, so do not ever try to be like somebody else. Just look inside yourself, and develop yourself for who you are and what you are, that you are equal to yourself. But not you see you are unequal because you are equal to yourself. Story_ID: 276990 Speaker 1: Boys High School [Boys and Girls High School] in Brooklyn [New York, New York] is it like--was it a mixed raced school, was it all black or what? Speaker 2: Well interestingly Boys High School, Boys High School was the number one academic school. Number one academic school in Brooklyn that was you know a local school. So everyone wanted to go to Boys High. Boys High that point of course was what 85 percent white or 90 percent white and mostly Jewish, when I went there. I graduated at sixteen a little bit after, a little bit older than sixteen, I was an arista student which means I was at top ten percent of my class. And I went on to Brooklyn College [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Now before we get you there, I just wanna talk some more about Boys High School. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now did you--you coming into Boys High School right on the heels of World War II [WWII], I mean you look very Asian, you think--you think yourself as being a Trinidadian or West Indian and you come in and you look a lot like the pictures of the Japanese that the country taught to despise for during the whole war. Did you catch any hell for your looks or in high school? Speaker 2: No, no. Well, the war was over, this was in '49 [1949] to '51 [1951], the hysteria was primarily on the West Coast you know some of the Chinese--some of the Japanese fled to New York [New York] and changed their names to Chinese. We'll talk about some of those actors who changed their names to work. But no, in New York there wasn't any, and you know I didn't have--I didn't mix. All I did was go to school and come back home. Go to school, I had no friends, because I was very shy, I was five--five foot tall, I was--I was a loner, I didn't fit in, I didn't know. My mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] was busy working two jobs cleaning, sweeping floors and mopping floors. I couldn't relate to her aunt, you know what I'm saying-- Speaker 1: Why not, I mean what was-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I didn't know them, I mean didn't know anybody and I was never as I said, when I was growing up in Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago], I was always by myself. The only thing I enjoyed at that house was that I happen to go down to the basement and I--I was very much fascinated by reading a set of books that my uncle had hid away called 'The Decameron' tales ['The Decameron,' Giovanni Boccaccio]. Are you familiar with 'The Decameron' tales? Speaker 1: [Giovanni] Boccaccio, Boccaccio. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Boccaccio. Boccaccio was around-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Boccaccio's Decameron tales. They're very racy and sexually oriented and that was (laughter) the only time I enjoyed living there was reading--here's a young kid, right, and (laughter) loved reading Boccaccio's Decameron tales at sixteen, man. So he was very learned guy but he--I thank him for introducing me and then later on and, anyways. No it was very difficult I mean I couldn't--I didn't fit in so I just went to school, came back home, went to school you know and that was it. Speaker 1: Usually the Jewish environment I mean it's a little bit more liberal than the regular white environment. I mean they're not really you know the same-- Speaker 2: But I was like five foot tall, nobody would pay me any attention, I didn't play any sports, I didn't do anything I was just--I thought I'd take up the clarinet you know just to do something but then I didn't bother. I still didn't even know my song from my school 'cause it was foreign to me I was a foreigner, and I spoke English but I was still a foreigner, adjusting trying to adjust. So for two years, it was just strange, just very strange. It was--I don't remember much about Boys High, not--I never went to a football game I never went to a basketball game (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were only there for two years? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So you graduated at age sixteen? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, see you graduated (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I can remember some of the things that happened. After that, I graduated things started to open up a little bit. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at Boys High that you remember that you really-- Speaker 2: Not one. Speaker 1: Did anyone take any special interest in you? Speaker 2: Nobody did. Speaker 1: You had to be special, you probably you know. Speaker 2: Nobody did, no one, that's how lonely I was, man, no girlfriends, no boyfriends, no male friends, no nothing. That started to change though after I went to college. Story_ID: 276991 Speaker 1: Okay now where did you decide to go to college? Speaker 2: What or where? Speaker 1: Where did you decide to go to college? Speaker 2: Oh, I had the grade point average to go to Brooklyn College [New York, New York] which was the hotbed (laughter) in the '50s [1950s] for the liberals, man. When McCarthyism came in man, and they're were grabbing people from Brooklyn College 'cause that was the hotbed of liberal thought back then. But anyways so I went to college and--but I was still--so then what happened was that I had moved out of--of my mother's [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] house. And I was like you know hanging out at different places you know and this is when I got into a gang. We--we called ourselves the Bandanas 'cause (laughter) so we used to wear bandanas, okay? Speaker 1: On your head? Speaker 2: Yeah, around the head, yeah and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what kind of gang was this now? Most gangs are fooling around kind of some kind of ethnic identity but what kind of gang was this? Speaker 2: This was an ethnic group, man. They were brothers and that's it, they were brothers, me, and I don't even think there were any Puerto Ricans around but it was just a bunch of black dudes, man. Speaker 1: Now you were at the--we forgot to talk about this, we talked about it before we started. But you--when you came into the U.S. you came in the name--under the name of Gonzales, right? Speaker 2: Leonard Gonzales [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong], yes. Speaker 1: All right. And you didn't tell them you were Aki Along--Aleong. Speaker 2: No, no, no. I hadn't no reason to tell anything about my Chinese name. I was Leonard Gonzales my high school diploma says Leonard Gonzales, my U.S. passport says Leonard Gonzales. Speaker 1: So you--you used your mother's maiden name? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was always Leonard Gonzales, I mean it didn't matter to me what my name was. I knew my name was Leonard Gonzales. So anyways, I get into Brooklyn College, and at that point I'd moved out, so I used to hang out with my--one of--a guy named Bolero Martinez [ph.], who is black you know, he's got this--I don't know if he's Puerto Rican or mixed, but I know he was black with a name like Martinez. And so we formed this little group on Jefferson Avenue, which was around the--school from Boys High [School; Boys and Girls High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] and I moved into this little place called--that was burned out and it was this one bedroom place that was the only that wasn't burned, so I was in there. But while I was going to school--oh I remember why I couldn't have friends, I worked in a hardware store, you know. So after school I would run to this hardware store, it was called Tarzian's Hardware Store [ph.]. And I was making seventy-five cents an hour so everyday I'd go after school, man. I go up there and it didn't matter to me so I was working. You know I mean again, the work ethic, man you cannot sit around not work you know my mother's working. I gotta work man. So I'm working like a dog you know and lie to the guy told him I was sixteen. By anyways I was a good salesman taught me, I mean I knew every bolt I knew what size the bolt, look at it people would come and do my thing. And one day I went up in the attic and I found some glider guns I had no idea what glider guns were. So I asked the guy you know I got the old box up there you want he said no, so I took it home. So now we're the Bandanas, right so when we opened this box they were glider guns. And like glider guns is you know you put--you pull the spring back you put your glide on and you shoot it right? We were the baddest guys mainly because we put a pipe on this glider thing can put a bullet on there, and man, you got a gun. Speaker 1: Like a zip gun. Speaker 2: A zip gun, that's right, my brother. So now, back in the days, all we ever wanted was Sneaky Pete (laughter) whoever that little bit a wine 'cause that was the hot thing. There was no marijuana there was no cocaine you know the brothers had no guns because the Italians had the guns, so now the Bandanas had their little zip guns, man, so we were bad you know. Story_ID: 276992 Speaker 1: So, where I used to live, there's Prospect Park [New York, New York], you've heard of Prospect Park, right? And you have heard of the famous Empire roller rink [Empire Roller Skating Center, New York, New York], we integrated the Empire roller rink, that was my first confrontation with the law and with whitey. Now the roller rink was on the other side of the park which was heavily Jewish, so Bolero [Martinez (ph.)] and I and three of the guys used to go skating there. And Bolero was my idol, man; he was like 5'10" about a hundred and sixty pounds, thin, wiry, good looking man, looked like Romeo, man. And this guy man could skate, he did this you know wow, man. After a while all the girls used to come over to him, right, and then I was skating so then you know now and then I wouldn't ask anybody to dance but they would come over and grab me you know so I was, hey man, I was starting to integrate, right? Lo and behold, one day I'm skating, all of a sudden the girls coming over and they're passing me, we used to call it the knives were called shivs or putting--they were passing me these shivs, I put it in my pocket, what's going on? They had called the cops so there's only three black guys, man you know myself, right so what they did was they stopped Bolero and everybody and they frisked them, right? They frisked them you know to see what they had, right? I walked right by the cops, they never bothered with me (laughter) I walked right by, man. I (laughter) you know, so I used to carry this shivs whenever there was any problem, I would separate myself because I would be carrying either a marijuana cigarette or I'd be carrying the knives in my pocket you know what I'm saying? And smiling at the cops (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't think you were black? Speaker 1: No, no, they never thought I was black, which is another story why I peep whitey and we'll talk about that later (laughter). But--so that-so---but Bolero man we used to--as a matter of fact I remember when Cher went to the Empire roller rink it was a big volt thing about how she went there skating blah, blah, blah. It was tough, man, so when I used to go to Brooklyn College [New York, New York] about six--about twelve blocks up, was the natural boundary. The natural boundary and it's always the train, Atlantic Avenue was there the train would come in from Long Island [New York] and I never went passed that boundary, I lived in my little ghetto, I never went. However, to go to Brooklyn College, I had to take the bus and everytime the bus would pass Atlantic Avenue I would get paranoid (laughter) because I was going into foreign territory. Now isn't that a shame, isn't that a damn shame to think about that? The college was in the other side, but because of this, we couldn't go past, I mean it was like an unwritten code. I used to feel scared but I had to go to school, right, so we used to take the Nostrand Avenue bus and go past that way to go to school. Anyways, so at Brooklyn College and at that point, with the gang activity you know what I'm saying, I was starting to fine my--a little bit of acceptance. I remember one night Bolero and I went down to Greenpoint [Brooklyn, New York, New York] to go to this party, I'm going to a party man, man I'm feeling good man, I'm going to this party. It's an all black party, man and you know and I can't dance, man (laughter) so I'm sitting down you know some guys come and say, "Hey what's the matter, don't you want to dance Bro?" "No, no, no, man I can't dance you know." So finally Bolero comes to me and said, "Hey man you in a lot of trouble." I said, "What are you talking about a lot of trouble?" "Man, these guys they don't like you man, they think you stuck up." I said, "Man but I want to dance man, I wanna get with the ladies but I can't dance, I'm embarrassed." So well we got a problem, I had to climb out from the second floor out of the bathroom window (laughter) and hang out and get out because they were going to kick my ass (laughter) because they thought I was stuck up, man. Imagine that man, had to climb out the back window. Story_ID: 276993 Speaker 1: The other incident, I'm living with Bolero's [Aleong's friend, Bolero Martinez (ph.)] parents--with the mother, he didn't have a father, and I had a--I had--they called the ambulance cause I had a real bad pain, and they took me down to Cumberland Hospital [New York, New York], and turned out I had appendix, an appendix attack. Well of course I had no money whatever, I laid in the hospital with this pain and eventually I found out that it had ruptured and turned gangrenous before they operated on me (laughter). So I was really sick, man, so I mean that's--that I mean in the ghetto man I mean they don't give a shit one way or the other so I mean it exploded so what the hell is gangrene so finally they got to me, so. I get out holding my side and I have a quarter in my pocket, right, so what you do? You go back to mama right? So I got on the bus, got off the stop to go see my mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong], I walk up half a block and she's not there. So now I have ten cents left was fifteen cents for the bus I'm walking back to the bus station, I'm looking, I don't know what to do beg for a nickel whatever. Two brothers come up to me and they put a shiv up my face, "Give me your money" and you (laughter) know I'm doing a song and dance and "I ain't got no money man (laughter). Look here, look it I just got out of the hospital, look at my stitches," (laughter). They said, "We don't give a shit, let me see your pockets," so man they grab my dime--and that's the only thing I had to make a phone call man I'd be stuck you know. So then they said, "Man, we ought to kick your ass," (laughter). All of a sudden, excuse me, this guy comes out says, "Hey, Lenny [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong] how you doing?" so they turn around all of a sudden. Say, "You know this guy?" "Yeah, yeah, he's cool man, he lives up the block." The guy said, "You lucky man, you know I ought to kick your ass," you know, so they leave right? The next day, I'm back in my neighborhood with--and we're waiting for the girls to come out of Girls High School [Boys and Girls High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York], walking down the street. I'm with my cousin Bolero, I call him Cousin Bolero, we're standing up there, who comes walking down but the two same dudes with two ladies man on their hands man, you know pumped up you know. I said, "Bolero man, those are the guys, man that jacked me up." He said, "Yeah he did man? That's not right." He walks up to the two guys, he said, "You see that little guy over there? That's my cousin, man you jacked him up, you had no right to do that man." So the guys said, "So what you gonna do about it?" One against two, right, had the ladies you know the brothers are ready to kick some ass, right? Bolero said, "You know what, put the ladies aside for a minute and you can take me on." They said, "Sure man right now." He proceeded to kick the shit out of both of them, that's how bad this guy was. He--I mean Bolero was like wire, he was just tough man, he beat them so bad afterwards, twenty minutes later, war spread the word around. They lived around five blocks they were gonna come on our block, war was gonna take place, man. They--they wanted to kill my yellow ass, excuse me (laughter) and they were gonna beat him up (laughter) but I was the instigator. So we got our people ain't nothing going down man, you know we can't--you know we're gonna protect (unclear) or whatever. So we're preparing for battle man, we get our zip guns and the whole nine yards (laughter) ready let them fools come they don't know what we got, we got fire power (laughter) well anyway, so make a long story short, they didn't show up (laughter) because somebody must've told them that we had some shit going with us, you know, but that's Bolero. Story_ID: 276994 Speaker 1: Bolero [Aleong's friend, Bolero Martinez (ph.)] is a sad story, Bolero was eventually recruited by the Italians to run numbers because they needed the baddest dudes because if you weren't bad, you couldn't collect the bread. Bolero was the number one runner from our neighborhood, you know, and in you know out here in California they say Watts [Los Angeles, California] is a ghetto, but it's beautiful when you have a one story house and you have trees you know and you know. A ghetto is man you have four, five stories and you have a thousand people living in a building you know and one block you have your own pimp, your own runner you have your own numbers man and you got whatever you need. Man, everything is all on one block, you don't need another block to survive, it's just keep your shit on your block, right? So anyways, he used to run the numbers for the guys and of course we didn't have real heavy drugs. I mean we didn't have any drugs then, the thing was you know some wine, some beer you know having you know back in the day that was the thing. And Bolero should've been a leader. Bolero had all the qualities to be a leader, to be successful man, but he didn't have the opportunity. Fifteen years later, after I had gotten out, became a movie star, I went back to Brooklyn [New York, New York] and I brought him with my own money to give him an opportunity. I brought him here to Los Angeles [California] and I said look man; I had no place to stay and your mother let me stay with you. She fed me and I'm gonna take care of you now. I was living in a nice house, I tried to get him a job, he couldn't fit in, he would walk five miles, ten miles to go downtown, you know he was just, he just couldn't make it man. So I had to send him back so another five years go by, I'm starring in a movie in New York [New York], I go to New York, I call him up again, you know, "Come over [HistoryMaker] Aki [Leonard Gonzales Aleong] man, I got a big thing man you gotta help me man, you gotta me man." What I said, "What you need?" He said, "I need like fifteen hundred dollars." I said, "What you need fifteen hundred dollars for?" He said man, "I can buy this shit here, gone be dynamite man, I can turn it over I can make some money. I can get myself clean and straight." I said, "Okay, fine, here's fifteen hundred dollars." He comes back later and brings me some cocaine (laughter) and says, "This is the half of it so I don't wanna blow it, it's yours keep it for me you know I'm saying in case anything happens." Well, I finished my movie, man, and I don't see no Bolero, so I take this shit like an asshole on the plane with me (laughter) and I bring it back to New York--back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I buried it underneath my house, right? And when I sold the house, I saying well this is (laughter) but anyways, but I mean this is--he got busted. I go back to New York again another show, and I find him and this time, he's really bad and I took a camera and I shot his arm and then I showed it at Brooklyn College [New York, New York] and when I showed it, it looked like mountain ranges, because of the tracks in his arms, he was a heroin addict. And nobody believed it was an arm 'cause I had zoomed right in on it. And his story was like he told me man, I went up to the Bronx [New York, New York] to find him, because I loved this man, I mean he was like my idol. And he said to me man, "I'm getting ready to sue this--this truck company, I'm gonna clean up." I said, "Yeah what, what you mean?" He said, "Man, you know what, I fell off the truck man and I was working and I hurt myself" and he was all bandage up with a broken leg. I said, "Well that's good man, you know if you want help I can get you a lawyer," I said, "tell me what happened." He said, "Well you know what, you know this what we do. The truck was there and I had my umbrella and I have a pad, looks like a delivery guy and I hook myself on it, open it up and I would steal the shit that's out of the truck you know (laughter) walk away with it and then go sell it," he said, "but damn it I hooked up, began taking the stuff out and I'm on the truck and the guy pulled off and I fell off, and I hurt myself." I said, "Well hey damn fool how can you sue somebody?" And then he said, "Well you know what?" So he kind of got the message right? But that was him, then he said, man, I'm talking to the brothers man, I'm telling them man, they shouldn't be no drug addicts, man that he was still a leader. He was still talking about that they shouldn't be doing the stuff that shouldn't be doing. They shouldn't be mainlining, man; they shouldn't be doing stuff man. And he had this wonderful quality about him that you know that this is the way to do it, this the right way and you know but he was a drug addict, man. He broke my heart, I've never seen him anymore, he's probably dead by now, you know, God, please take good care of Bolero for me, thank you (crying). I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Okay, take your time. Story_ID: 276995 Speaker 1: Were you going to Brooklyn College [New York, New York] during this whole period of time? Speaker 2: Yeah. In the beginning I was the only gang member that could really count (laughter) and we never did anything bad. I mean you know we were just banding together for protection and I got lucky I was (unclear) people that happened one of the few out of the millions of who got out and made a good living. Speaker 1: Now you said earlier that there's a story related to how--how you became Aki Aleong [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong]. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was going to college and I was slowly assimilating and one day I was in a class and the teacher said--English teacher said, "Would all the guys stand up?" and I stood up and I stood up and she picked out and I was one of the shortest, there was two of us. And she said, "If you would go over to the modern dance club, they are looking for dancers for a play called a [William] Shakespeare--called 'The Winter's Tale' [William Shakespeare]. And then you'll get credit, you don't have to come back to class." So I said, "Oh, really? Good." Now from--as Trinidadian and television was young in those days, I used to go see movies you know and those days used to (crying) it was very difficult you know to make a living and to eat. And we used to buy you know the two day and three day stale bread you know and get the handouts and go to The Salvation Army and get clothes and things like that. And so anyways, and then like I'm saying to you like sometimes I would take brown paper bag and make strips and I used to roll my mother's [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] hair 'cause she didn't have enough money to buy clips and stuff you know curl it up and it was tough. So anyways, I went to this audition supposedly, I didn't really know it was an audition and there was about eight or ten short guys and the teacher said, you know jump across the floor and do this and do that. And I jumped across the floor, and had a little bit of movement and of course coming from Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago] I had a natural instinctive movement because I could play rhythm. I mean rhythm was part of my life. And of course I looked different so I get--they picked me and I became one of the four satyrs in--in 'Winter's Tale' which is a play by Shakespeare which went on. But during that time, the teacher asked me, she said, "You have a lot of rhythm and you're good and we're lacking men in dance and will you come back?" And then for the first time I was around a bunch of women, young girls, and they were all nice to me you know. They would all say hey, why don't you come and join you know. Guys in the Jewish college you know, they didn't have any athletes really, so I was getting accepted and I said yes. And then there were a couple of guys there that were saying hey you can move you know why don't come and join so. I started to go and hang out there but my grades were terrible because during the break time I was interested in dance anyways and mumbo and the cha-cha-cha was coming in and all the guys who had all the girls were the best dancers. And I remember my very first dance I had, I was standing up at a piano and the--the girls that people be saying things you know how they sing bawdy songs you know? (Singing) And like "Mona Lipschitz Mona Lipschitz, men have laid you, they have laid you with a golden smile. Mona Lipschitz," you know things like that. Then all of a sudden the music came on and I turned around like this and there was a girl there that just turned like this and she took my hand. I was so embarrassed I didn't know what to do, so that was my first dance, so I danced for a little bit, right? And that was my first dance, that's how embarrassed I was so, anyways, the--I kept going back to this dance class and then these couple of guys said, "You know what, Lenny you're good dancer man, you know you should consider it." I said all right in the meanwhile I had a regular job you know. Story_ID: 276996 Speaker 1: Did you take dances classes [at Brooklyn College, New York, New York] then after-- Speaker 2: Well, I used to cut classes and go down to the lounges you know and watch these guys do the Mambo and the Cha-Cha and man I--my whole dream was to be able to move like that so I could get me a lady you know what I say? 'Cause hey man my hormones are kicking and I'm seventeen years old and I never dated in my life you know it's kind of rough so. Anyways, so I my--my--man I went from like a ninety something average (laughter) to like failing courses, dropping courses you know what I'm saying? Anyway, so these guys were telling me you know what, maybe we could set something--are you interested in dancing? So I said well the summer was coming I said I gotta work man, so I went back to my regular job making seventy-five cents an hour you know I was in a hardware store. I got a new job full time man, like forty hours at seventy-five cents an hour that's like thirty something dollars a week, man I'm feeling pretty good, I got some money in my pocket you know? Speaker 1: So what were you about eighteen now or-- Speaker 2: Yeah about eighteen. So I'm--I got the job and school you know during the summer and then so the guys call me up and said look man we can take you down to the Henry Street Settlement House [New York, New York] and maybe the guy can give you a scholarship (background noise). Story_ID: 276997 Speaker 1: So you went to Henry Street Settlement House [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: So the guy talked me into coming down to the Henry Street Settlement House and I went to see this gentleman whose name I forgot. And he put me through some paces you know. And I jumped around and you know did my little pirouette and things and he give me a scholarship, a half a dancing scholarship. So I was very pleased and this was of course during the summer of 1954 and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're twenty then, I guess, yeah, about twenty years old. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954], yeah. So then the other guy told me that there was this guy who was starting a studio and it was an African dance studio, would I be interested? I said yeah, why not you know, so I go over to see this guy his name is Cyril Jackson and he says, "You wanna be a--you wanna do Afro-Cuban?" I said, "Sure I'd love to do that." He said, "Well, if you help me paint the place and whatever," so sure. So I became the painter, I painted up the studio and--and then the classes began. They had people like Chita Rivera some of the greatest dancers would take and this was on 46th Street and 8th Avenue, between 8th and Broadway. So I was going--I was working taking ballet and going to--and taking Afro-Cuban you know. So one day--one day, the drummer didn't show up and so the class the guy was gonna discontinue the class, and I said, "You know what, I could drum." He said, "Come on man, you could drum?" I said, "Yes, I could drum." He says "All right" 'cause you have to drum you know so, let me just--one moment here. So he said, "All right let me see you drum," okay so I did. So I said okay so the count so (drumming )one, and two and three and four, and one and two and three and four you know 'cause I grew up playing this (singing) I used to do that kind of stuff anyway. Speaker 1: Oh yeah that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He looked at me; wait a minute okay, so I became the drummer of the class, right? So I was like little celebrity, right? So one day I finished another jazz class and it was like seven o'clock and by the time I walked by this watering hole it was on 46th Street, it's a bar. I used to walk into the bar and go into the telephone booth and pretend that I was making a phone call (laughter) or somebody would--that's how lonely I used to be, man. Anyways so this day was about like 7:20, I walking by, somebody says, "Hey, Lenny [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong]" it was the other drummer, "Hey Lenny come on in, man." So oh, yeah, yeah, right away so I go in and they sitting down and put me next to this beautiful Asian girl and she says, "Hi how are you?" And I said yeah, you know, "Hi, how are you?" And she says, "So what do you do?" And I said, "Well I'm taking classes" and she says, "Hey you'd be great for--they're doing the national company for '[The] Teahouse of the August Moon,'" and, I said, "What, what?" I had no idea 'Teahouse of the August Moon' sounding like you saying (unclear). I'm looking at this girl, right? So I'm you know--I'm next to her whatever and then about like half hour later, she gets up and she says, "I gotta go, I--we have call." I said, "What you mean you gotta go for call? What, what you talking about?" "It's curtain call." I said, "What's that?" So she gets up and leave, right? Story_ID: 276998 Speaker 1: Two weeks later, it's now 9:15, I'm walking by the same bar, same guy again, "Hey Lenny [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong], come on in." I go inside and here's Cyril Jackson, my beautiful brother, owns the place. He says man, "Hey Lenny you wanna go to a party?" "Yeah, why not man?" He says, "But I need a tie." So in those days you know I was the gofer. "Yeah let me go get it." Man run 42nd Street [New York, New York], "I can get you a tie, right?" So this other guy the drummer says, "Come on, let's go. Get the money, we'll be right back." So I hit 8th Avenue, get to 45th Street and he looks up and there's '[The] Teahouse of the August Moon.' And the guy says, "So did you audition today, how did you make out?" I said, "What're you talking about?" "Didn't you go on audition man it's a big play." I said, "No I didn't audition." He says, "Come with me." So I go--he takes me and I go on there and I--he knocks on the door and he says, "Look when the guy comes out tell him that you're late for the audition, okay?" And he says, "Have you ever done anything?" I said, "Yeah, well you know I did a play at Brooklyn College [New York, New York] and you know I'm studying at Henry Street Settlement House [New York, New York]." He said, "Well look, tell the guy you did that and you did experimental work in--in Connecticut." So I knocked on the door and the guy said, "I'm gonna get the tie, I'll be right back, right?" Knock on the door, this big Irish guy come up, "What you want?" I said, "Sir, I'm sorry but I'm late for my audition and I--the train was broken down and I'm sorry I'm late." The guy looks at me, I'm in my Salvation Army clothes right, my face is--he says, "All right come on in son." I go and I sit down and I hear all this noise going on, then all of a sudden it's like I'm saying, shit, I gotta go to the party man, I can't sit here and wait. Then I hear a big thunder and clapping then this big tall, 6'2" guy comes out grabs me by the hand, says come on hurry up and he takes me up this spiral staircase to this office. "What's your name?" I said, "Lenny Gonzales." "Your telephone number? What have you done?" And he's writing this stuff down and I start to laugh, and he looks up at me and he says, "You're cute you know." I--okay, I says, "Okay, thank you." And he writes says, "We'll call you, don't call us, we'll call you, right?" So I run downstairs and it's late and I run to the bar man and everybody's gone, I blew the party, I blew the party man, I'm so mad at myself. Now little did I know that the play was on, that the audition was over at seven o'clock, that the play which was on Broadway starts at 8:30 nobody goes backstage in their life, you have to be stupid, absolutely stupid, and that's what I did. They put a joke on me that how naive I was, right? So when I saw the guy man, I still didn't know because I didn't know all that noise, I didn't know what was going on, but the auditions had stopped at seven o'clock, the curtain call was at eight o'clock for the girl, obviously and the play went on at 8:30, right? And I came in at 9:30 and a play--I mean you gotta be stupid, man. Anyways, two weeks later, I get a call, "Hi this is the Martin Beck Theatre [Al Hirschfeld Theatre, New York, New York] would you come down to audition?" I say, "What?" I go down right to the audition now I'm getting a little bit more hip, right of audition, right? I go down to (laughter) the audition and there's like about three Asian people standing up on the outside around the corner, right? So I stand up like everybody else, finally I get inside the theatre I'm sitting on a bench and this is the--and who comes walking down the spiral staircase, but this same girl Barbara [ph.]. "Hi Lenny how are you?" And everybody turns and look at me and I'm saying oh my God, man, "Hi" (laughter) you know like I'm the man, right? So I walk out on stage and there's two or three people sitting on stage, and I can't see there's somebody in the audience 'cause you know you on stage, you can't see, it's black. And they guy says, "This is Lenny Gonzales and he's good for the goat boy and he did experimental work at Brooklyn College, blah, blah, blah." And they said, "Yeah, yeah, good, good, good," me and my Salvation Army--I mean I look really you know--. "Sit on stage," so I sat there this continued on, I said what the hell am I doing here? Finally it's about seven o'clock, seven--the guy says, well, lights go up Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse two big producers of the play. "Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, you're now all now all in the first road company of 'Teahouse of the August Moon,' congratulations. Those who have their agents, contact their agents, those who don't have one, see Mr. Bernstein [ph.]." I walk over to Mr. Bernstein, "Hi Mr. Bernstein, how are you? My name is Lenny Gonzales, could you tell me you know what am I supposed to do?" He said, "Yes, son, no problem," says, "you get $125 a week." I said, "What? A hundred twenty-five dollars a week?" He said, "Yes, yeah that's what extras get. What, you want more?" I said, "No, sir, no, no, no please, please." One hundred twenty-five dollars I could never compute. I could never compute that anybody was gonna make $125 a week, not where I come from the ghetto, you know. Not after I worked for seventy-five cents an hour setting up pins in a bowling alley, I used to clean out the traps out of laundromats, seventy-five cents an hour. I was an usher in a theater. Story_ID: 276999 Speaker 1: When I was in college [Brooklyn College, New York, New York], I was a hell of an athlete, even though I was small. Because the Jewish boys that were there, in the beginning were not good athletes. So I went after the tennis team, and since I could play a little bit of soccer, I was on the soccer team, by the way. Because I could kick the ball with the stones, right I had good movement I was fast. So I know that when you look at somebody's foot, you can fake them out, right? So this guy gives me like I'm Errol Flynn, he gives me a sword and says, "See what you can do." It's a big guy, right? So I look at the guy (laughter) and I fake him out and I whack him, whack, boom, he said, "You good, man." "Bring on another guy, man." So you know, I'm looking and watch the guy's feet again (laughter) I do this, he goes this way, I hit him back, he says, "You on the team." So I got on the tennis team--on the fencing team. So then, I got to play tennis, well I mean, I'm pretty good at you know--so I went on the back wall for a little bit you know and I hit the ball and I got pretty good. 'Cause I'm, you know, I had good coordination so they put me on the tennis team. Then lo and behold they needed somebody to do batting practice, so I said you know what, I can pitch, they said come on, you too small, man. I said, but I can get the ball over the plate, they said you can? I said yes, I can, because in Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago], if you wanted a mango or something you had to get a rock and knock it off. So you get pretty good with the fingertips and know how to throw. Man, I could throw the ball over the plate 99 percent of the time, and it was fat, because I could not all that weight. And they loved it, they could see little ole Lenny [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong] (laughter) throwing that ball, so I was pitching batting practice, right? So now, comes the summer, right, I thought that maybe I would go to the Catskills [Catskill Mountains] like all the Jewish boys would go to, right, because at the Catskills they be waiters they make money. You know when I got a job after I lost my job at the hardware store. Oh, they send me out for jobs like factory jobs, I would put pins on dolls' heads, I'd be pushing a rack down Broadway, you know rack man, like a--like a--that's the kind of job they send me for, because that's the kind of jobs that came in for the college, right? I got those kinds of jobs I didn't get the nice jobs to go to the Catskills to make the good money, you know. Hey man, my name was Gonzales, I was a Latino, Puerto Rican, whatever, slob, whatever, I got those kind of jobs. So there was no equality okay, even in school at that place. So anyways, oh God, I'll tell you. So, I'm now $125 from Mr. Bernstein [ph.] and I--it's sinking in, right it's sinking in $125, I'm thinking $125 [as an extra in 'The Teahouse of the August Moon']. Story_ID: 277000 Speaker 1: And then he says, "And those who have not seen the show ['The Teahouse of the August Moon'], they can stay for the night." It's now 7:30, so I walk out the side entrance it's--they tell me which way to go. And I walk out and for the first time in my life, it's like eight o'clock, and I see a multitude of white people, I've never been in the multitude of white people in my life. A multitude of white people all dressed up, mink coats, I mean I know, no, I mean they coming in and me and my Salvation Army standing up on the side watching this. It's like I mean it's like a miracle, I mean I don't--I've never seen this. Finally, the usher gets me and puts me in a seat, and the music goes on, the thing goes up, I've never seen a play in my life. Because when I was in college [Brooklyn College, New York, New York], I still didn't--I didn't see the [William] Shakespeare--the play ['The Winter's Tale'] I was in because I just was on stage. And I never liked plays because in Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago], we're into plays, I mean that's--in the ghetto, I mean who's into plays in the ghetto, come on, I mean you know. You like Shakespeare? Come on, it's not a thing so I used to go read the reviews and then do my summaries, right (laughter). 'Cause I didn't like none of that stuff it was not my thing. I wouldn't read you know who would read [Geoffrey] Chaucer or whatever--I mean you know it's not that kind of stuff so. Anyway, so here comes the music and all of a sudden the lights come on and this little guy runs out there, his name was David Wayne, great actor. He runs out there and he says, "Oh, a lovely ladies kind gentlemen, please introduce myself." Gong, "Ah Sakini my name interpreter by profession, education by ancient dictionary Okinawan by whim of Gods." Boom, and then all of a sudden everybody's applauding, slaps his hand, the curtain goes up. And it was the most--as a kid, it was the most exciting thing to see a Broadway play. First act curtain comes down, everybody gets up and I'm walking and I said shit am I in this stuff, man, hanging, I see the people, I didn't have any money to buy no drinks (laughter) see them ordering this stuff, and I'm looking around you know, they looking at me. Then the first act, curtain goes down and where they discovered they gonna make some money selling a batata which is supposed to be whiskey. And the then second act opens up with all the--all of a sudden the villages have become beautiful, the women in kimonos and gorgeous, man. I'm looking, oh my God they're beautiful, right? Then all of sudden, end of act two they have tear the whole thing down because they're doing illegal whiskey. And then--and then so act--curtain goes down and I'm all depressed you know, what is gonna go on because I've never seen a play finally in the end of course everything works out all right. So it's all over and I'm saying wait a minute, am I in this, what's going on? I mean I had no idea because I was not interested in plays, I was not--I was just trying to get into dance, I didn't know anything. This was like a strange country, you know this is like--like taking black kids you know what I'm saying that have never seen a play, that don't know you know what I'm saying for the first time. I mean it's like this is what I was, right, into this world, which is a complete different world. So by the time the play's over and I can squeeze myself to get through the crowd 'cause I'm trying to go--I don't know how to go the front door (laughter) because I didn't come through the front door (laughter) I gotta go back out the back door, I'm going backwards. Finally by the time I get there, sitting right to the right going out is David Wayne's dressing room. And he's sitting on the floor taking off his--his oriental eye makeup you know whatever. The lids they used to put on the thing, and I'm looking, man 'cause I'm fascinated and then people walking hitting me on the shoulder, enjoyed your play, good you were good, you were good. That's (laughter) exactly; we all look alike, right? And I'm saying oh thank you, thank you, right and more people you know them Asians guys running after the girls, and I'm still standing there 'cause I'm fascinated looking at this man taking the thing and all these people with their mink coats. People saying "We enjoyed the play" you know and congratulating me, I'm not in the play, damn it. So, that began how I got into the play-- Story_ID: 277001 Speaker 1: Now the rehearsals are on, I'm doing the thing, and nobody wants to take care of the goat. I'm the goat boy, so it's my responsibility so they gave me some money to--one day they said well when they brought the goat final rehearsal and it was raining, man. They said, "Look, here's some money, take this goat and take it up to Central Park [New York, New York], because that's where it belong." I have a goat on a rainy day at 7:30 in New York [New York] walking on (laughter) avenue a white goat, right trying to find a cab, trying to find a cab. That's how stupid I am, right (laughter). I walk and it's raining so hard (laughter) on 47th Street, I walk into a bar, because I couldn't get wet anymore (laughter). And the guy says, "Wait a minute now, are you kidding (laughter)? Who wants a drink, you or the goat?" I'm not--I'm giving up drinking right now (laughter) and I had this goat. Anyways, I was grateful for that goat, my friend, because I finally did get in the cab and took the goat up. But we went on the road with two of the greatest actors in the world, Burgess Meredith, Scott McKay, and I used to bug Burgess all the time. Why do you say the line this way you know 'cause I wasn't an actor, man and I was just stupid I didn't know what was going on, but I was in this play making $125 a week. And the coup de grace was I got paid fifty dollars a week for taking care of the goat by cleaning up the shit when the goat would crap on the stage (laughter). I was the goat boy, I got fifty dollars a week man. Do you know what that meant? I put that money in the bank, man fifty dollars a week for a year and a half, I never touched it. Do you know what I mean, man, I mean didn't care when I get up the goat in the middle of the scene and I go out there and clean up just like anything else, you know? Fifty dollars I took care of that goat for--for a year and a half, man. Oh God I was grateful to that goat (laughter) believe me. I don't know about Americans, but I mean I was a West Indian, man and I had to make my money. But anyways, so-- Speaker 2: So did Burgess Meredith take-- Speaker 1: Part of Sakini. Speaker 2: The part that David Wayne had before? Speaker 1: Yeah, and Burgess Meredith one of the greatest actors in the world, then--and--but then I began to realize about my name. My name on the original program was Leonard Gonzales [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong] and people would say well, who is Leonard Gonzales, because they never (laughter) saw any Spanish people in the play (laughter). So one day for Christmas though at two months later, the cast of the New York company sent a--a tape and like David Wayne was complimenting Burgess Meredith you know Eli Wallach was com- you know. And then the goat boy in New York said please--by that time I changed my name back to Assing Aleong 'cause it sound more Asian, right? But my name is spelled A-S-S-I-N-G and Aleong is A-L-E-O-N-G but sounds like Along. So the goat boys says, "Please give my regards to Assing Along with the goat lady ass" (laughter) and everybody started calling me Assing Along with the goat (laughter), so. You know, I man--I goofed I should've kept that name, I would've been a super star today with a name of Assing Along, it would've been a joke but one of the--I was stupid man, I made wrong mistake. Anyways, so what happened was that, since it's '[The] Teahouse of the August Moon' and in autumn, it means Aki and it's the August Moon, the Japanese guys got together with me and said, "You know what, why don't you call yourself Aki?" So I changed my name and from them on I became known as Aki Aleong (laughter) and it has stuck with me for fifty years. And it's funny, man but--but I was Assing Along, became (laughter) Aki Aleong I think that's funny. But anyways, so I went on the room did eight hundred performances of that but the sad thing about this is tha- and then I began to realize about racism in a real way. Not--there were no understudies to play the role of Sakini which was the Japanese role. Not--I had Eddie Bracken played it, Eli Wallach played it; all the white actors played not one Asian ever played the role of Sakini. When I went back to New York and I did it at [New York] City Center [New York, New York], they even had a Mexican woman, white woman to play Sakini. Never on Broadway was Sakini ever played by an Asian actor. Twenty-five years later with 'Miss Saigon,' they had a white man again playing and had they had Asians playing Sakini back then like myself or some other people, we would have developed the--the amount of people in the pool that would be necessary, but they never did. That was the first time, and I was always upset about that. Story_ID: 277002 Speaker 1: So I ended it--this ended in 1956 and during that period of time when we stopped off in Chicago [Illinois], I went to the Goodman Theatre, I studied acting there. When I was in Royal in San Francisco [California] for six months, I studied with a private coach, when I was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], we were here for eight months you know what I'm saying and I studied with a private coach. But I was terrible, I mean I was terrible how could I play Dr. Fox at the Alamo? He's white, I couldn't--I--I couldn't I mean I didn't know. How could I play Davy Crockett I mean you know, I mean--I mean it wasn't--these were all tailor made for white actors, I mean you know we're talking about '56 [1956] on the road so. Speaker 2: So this is quite a dilemma if--if a white roles are for white actors and even the Asian speaking parts are for white actors, then what can you play? Speaker 1: That's exactly so I didn't really--I couldn't get into those roles. So anyways, I get back to New York [New York] and I was--I didn't have an agent, so I didn't have to pay ten percent, so all that money I made. In the meanwhile, I was on the road and while I was on the road, we're in New York--I mean in L.A. and I met Marlon Brando. And we used to hang out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About what year was this? I'm sorry about what year? Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956] okay. Speaker 1: Brando was very much interested in one of the ladies and we were living together. Brando used to come over every night, man and hang out. And one day I was asking him a question, I said to--he was he was talking to Pat Suzuki great, and he was asking Pat, he says, "Pat, how did it feel to be in a concentration camp?" you know. And I said, "Brando, what the hell are you talking about? Man she's American she's no Japanese she was no concentration camp." He said, "Don't you know, man the Japanese were interned and put--." I said, "What the hell you talking about?" That's how I learned as a foreigner that Americans had locked up the Japanese. I had no idea. But then I realized Brando was gonna play Sakini [in 'The Teahouse of the August Moon'] and we all thought that Burgess Meredith would allow him to come on stage and play Sakini, 'cause he was a great actor. We were hoping he was hanging around you know for two or three weeks. So then I figured that maybe he was trying to do some research, you know what I'm saying outside Sakini whatever. But what a great guy he was, man, I mean and he would sit on the floor and we hang out and talk and eventually he did play Sakini but none of us from the play got into it because they shot it in Japan and whatever, whatever. Speaker 2: In the movie you mean? Speaker 1: In the movie, yes. Speaker 2: In the movie version. Speaker 1: In the movie, the movie version, yeah, of it, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So anyways, but he was the first guy I met, but to me what Brando, he wasn't you know, was not--just another guy but. Then eventually like Eddie Bracken played it and so forth and so on I mean always remember Brando. He was such a warm human being. Speaker 2: And political too apparently, right? Speaker 1: Oh yes. As a matter of fact, he crossed my path later on when Stanley Shapiro, who was one of the great producers who produced the 'Pillow Talk,' the Doris Day and the Rock Hudson movies and stuff and he produced the movie with Brando. And they wanted to--the--should be--did not want to distribute the movie because of Brando's politics. And he was--I was at his office, man because I was trying to set up an arrangement for him to meet with [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy to put Berry Gordy in the movie business. And so Stanley was close with me and we were talking about how difficult it is politically but it was easier for him to help Berry Gordy, who did not have a movie company at that point, than it was to get his own film with his own money with Brando in it, man. He was on the phone hustling trying to--, "Hey man, forget about the politics forget about the politics, man, it's a great movie." Speaker 2: What film was it that-- Speaker 1: I forgot the name of the film, I could look it up, we can check later. Speaker 2: Was it 'Burn!'? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Was it 'Burn!' B-U-R-N? Speaker 1: I don't remember the name of-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: -- Brando's film, but I--I can check, you know IMDB to find out but it was--it was--that was the truth. Story_ID: 277003 Speaker 1: I arrive in New York [New York] and oh--you know we were in Chicago [Illinois] for quite a long time and for about a year so that's when I was going to school at the Goodman Theatre which was one of the greatest you know theatres in the United States. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. And I used to have at night on the weekends I had my own show at a place called the Preview Lounge [Chicago, Illinois]. And the Preview Lounge was a Dixieland jazz joint but upstairs they had a room that we converted into a Latin dance thing. And I was the star of the show because by then, I had become one of the best Latin dancers. And we had a little trick on the road, me and BarBara Luna and Pat Suzuki. We were the three young kids, right? Now we would go into a town and Pat Suzuki was a great singer, she ended up on Broadway, by the way. She would sing a song, an American song knock everybody out and then I would ask them to play a Rumba because they didn't know about Salsa. And BarBara and I would get up and do this fantastic wild routine and the next thing I know BarBara is beautiful. And every guy in the house would be sending her flowers; I mean the whole town belonged to us, man. We had this scam going man (laughter) so to make a long story short, I was on the Preview Lounge, man I was--by that time, I had overcome my shyness, okay? I was the brother on the prowl, man. I mean here am I, star of my show doing my stuff, making my spins and the ladies were coming and they all wanted to dance with me. I mean I'm top of the game, right? In walks this blonde with a tan on you know, beautiful lady, she comes up to me and says you know I--would you dance with me? So hey, man that's my show right, I dance with her, she's beautiful dancer. She was from Miami [Florida] and it turned out that I kind of got a crush on her you know af- what a brother with a blonde I mean back in the day, right you know? You'd be stupid not to say no, right (laughter). So I had a crush on this lady and she was--she was just visiting Chicago and so I got to know her a little bit you know, we hung out. And later on she went back to Florida, but in the meanwhile, man I was doing my thing, man. I used to say that my little room used to be like the revolving door at Grand Central Station women's room (laughter). I mean I had my posters you know back then. You know my posters big posters on the wall and the green lights, and the blue lights (laughter) you know what I'm saying? 'Cause that's all you can afford, this long hallway with just one room where the bed was in the closet and it would come down (laughter) 'cause I couldn't afford anymore while I was in Chicago, you know what I'm saying? Man, it was--it was a pad man, I tell you man; I had a lot of fun. Story_ID: 277004 Speaker 1: But anyways, so, the play eventually went to Boston [Massachusetts] and closed I went back to New York [New York] and they send me up--so I went to an agent for the first time, "Yeah, yeah, we got a part for you to go up and read for a houseboy." So I go to read for the part of the houseboy and the director says to me, "Interesting voice. I mean what have you done?" I said, "Well I just finished '[The] Teahouse of the August Moon' with Burgess Meredith, eight hundred performances." "Oh really?" "Yeah, and I studied at Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois]" which I did, he said you know what he said, "You know what take the script, go home and come back and read for the confidential blackmailer." I said, "Okay." Take it, went home, looked at it, never acted in English, never acted in English. Because 'Teahouse' is everything like (speaking in Japanese) hi, you know all the Japanese things, right? You know "Sayonara," all that stuff (speaking in Japanese) well anyways. So I take it to go home and I come back and I read it and guy says, "You're hired," and I don't know what I'm into. "How much?" "Three hundred dollars a week." "Really? Three hundred a week, four weeks, oh, wow, okay." Who's the director? I don't know, William Wyler he only happened to win an Academy Award [Oscar]. The play, [W.] Somerset Maugham's 'The Letter' he won an Academy Award for directing Somerset Maugham's 'The Letter' [sic.]. Who's in the cast? He flew John Mills in from England, who's now Sir John Mills. He got Michael Rennie from England, great actor and he got Siobhan McKenna, greatest Irish actress in New York at the time, and then he talked Anna May Wong to come out of retirement to play the woman, and me, little ole me. Live television, 'Producers' Showcase,' ninety minute live, right, you can't screw up, ninety minute live. So anyways, we rehearse for four weeks, blah, blah, blah, I had a little fight with Mr. Wyler. I remember him choreographing Michael Rennie smoking a cigarette, right? And I'm supposed to come in and I'm gonna--I'm sneaky, I'm trying to get to something in the office and when I open the door, there's Michael Rennie. And Mr. Wyler said to me, "When you open I want you to open your mouth like you're surprised." And I said to him, "Mr. Wyler, I would never open my mouth, man, I'm from the hood if I'm going to steal something I gone go the other way. I'm going to try to hide it. I'm gonna 'Hi' (smiles) or do some shit, right?" He said, "No, I want you to open your mouth." "Okay." Comes the play on television, live open the door, I didn't open my mouth why should I open my mouth? Hell with him. I mean I'm the actor on live television who controls the shit, not the director; he can cut away from it. The play went on, made my twelve hundred dollars. Story_ID: 277005 Speaker 1: Then there's another play. Pearl [S.] Buck wrote a special, special one hour show for 'Robert Montgomery Presents' ['The Enemy']. And at that point Shirley Yamaguchi was the leading Japanese actress. So they put out a call and she's supposed to play a nurse, and they're looking for her husband. Now I don't know how old I am, I'm twenty something anyways, this woman is forty something. So I went down they said, "You know you too young for it, were looking for" you know--anyways they tried all over. Finally they call me in and lo and behold I get the lead to play her husband, Pearl Buck show, right? Rehearsing was four hundred dollars a week now. I got the lead, right? Man, rehearsing so comes the dress rehearsal, I walk up and I'm supposed to--the scene is all about this couple, this Japanese couple that met in--in the [United] States he was a doctor she was the nurse, they fell in love they're back in Japan and now at war and all--all people that are connected in the medical fields be naturally a part of the government--part of the soldiers and what or whatever, okay military. So the thing is I'm on the beach standing there with my wife and I find an American washed up on the shore. And the whole story is, what hell you do with this American? You know even though you have this conscience of being a doctor, the Hippocratic Oath and whatever, whatever that was the whole thing, okay? So, I'm standing up there put my arm around her, the director [Tad Danielewski] says, "You can't do that." I said, "What do you mean I can't do that?" He says, "Well no, Japanese people are not supposed to be you know show emotion you know, just stand up there, and you can hold hand and you watch and you see the guy." I said, "Oh really, good thank you, right?" We get to dress rehearsal, time action, camera on thing; it goes out nationally across the country. 'Robert Montgomery,' number one show, I put my arm around her, I kissed her, I squeezed, I did everything I wanted to do, you follow me (laughter) and there's not a goddamn thing they could've done, because they couldn't take the camera away from me. That's about--that's the beginning that what taught me that people you know I mean they--we are supposed to act in their impression, their second handed knowledge of who we are. And they write that type of stuff, second handed knowledge and they direct us second handed knowledge. That's why we never had Academy Awards [Oscars] as black people, that's why we never had a lot of things because we did not have control of the truth of what the moments should be. So I learned my lesson at a very early age. Story_ID: 277006 Speaker 1: You know what? Three days later, I get a call, "Hi, look we would like you to come to Hollywood. We'll pay you five hundred dollars a week for like five weeks and, we got this movie." And I said, "Oh, thank you very much you know I appreciate it but I'm not really interested you know" and I hung on the guy, I thought it was one of my friends. Two days later, I get a call again, "We'll pay you a thousand dollars a week. This is Twentieth Century-Fox [Film Corporation]. We'll guarantee you six weeks of work." I said, "Yeah, who is this?" "Yeah, this is what it is." I says, "This is not a joke?" "No, thousand a week, six weeks we need you to fly out here on--can you leave in two days 'cause we start shooting." And I said, "Sure, why not, send me the tickets." I was on that plane--I was on that plane my friend on the red eye on Saturday with Pat Hingle one of the greatest actors, we both were in the movie and I came out to do a movie called 'No Down Payment,' directed by Marty Ritt [Martin Ritt], starring Tony Randall, Joanne Woodward, Cameron Mitchell, Jeffrey Hunter, Barbara Rush, the Twentieth Century-Fox's top talented that were signed. It was all about 'No Down Payment' was the time in California where you can buy a house with no money down; they were pushing all the houses in the [San Fernando] Valley [California] out here, were building them for fifteen thousand dollars, twenty thousand dollars. And my storyline was one of the couples were my best friend and we both work in the hardware store and they moved the store out to the valley. He bought a house out there, he's on the city council, our wives are the best friends, the kids play and now I'm trying to buy a house there. And they won't sell it to me, so I go to him and I say, "Look, something funny going on man, you on the city council, could you please try to intercede for me," and he doesn't. And Marty Ritt said to me, "Hey kid, don't play it so angry," and I said, "Damn you Marty Ritt. I mean if he's my best friend, why would he not help me, why we he not go to bat and try to get me a house?" And Marty said, "Wait, wait, wait kid come on, he says I'm Jewish, man. Look I mean I'm from Boston [Massachusetts] they used to throw rocks at me, man and you gotta be--you gotta be cool about this, you know we can't play it like that." He's the director, anyways to make a long story short, the scene was done, four months later, I move my wife, the lady was--became my wife later, moved her out here and I would call him up on the phone. "Hi, my name is [HistoryMaker] Aki [Leonard Gonzales] Aleong, I got five thousand dollars to put down on a house, five thousand, come right over." I walk over and guy looked at me and my white wife and they say, "I'm sorry the house is sold." I said, "What you mean it's sold? You just told me." He said, "I'm sorry, it's sold." Finally I got it. One guy said, "You know we can't sell you the house." I said, "What you mean you can't sell me the house? I got the money, man." He said, "Because the realtors code state that I can only sell the house if there's two or more minorities living here." I said, "How the hell am I ever gonna get in if there isn't even one?" Said, "I'm sorry we can't sell it to you," and that was the beginning of a total shock in this country, man. I knew it was coming but that was really right up in my face. I couldn't buy a house in the San Fernando Valley and now they allow cockroaches in, man. So I took a position that I was going to get even with this business, I was going to be an individual, I was not gonna sell out, I was not gonna play games and I became a Hollywood hermit. And for fifty years I have not had one director, one producer or one friend give me a job. Because you can never legislate decency you either decent or you're not. I may've made a lot of mistakes; I may've made a lot of mistakes because this business is changed. It's not about talent; it's about who you know, it's about networking all that stuff. I'm a stubborn old man, but I have my pride and I have my soul and I wanna walk the streets. And eventually it's opening up now, 'cause I understand it. But I never sold out, man. I could never do that, so I gave up the business, I you know I gave up the business, went into the music business. Speaker 2: Now, 'No Way'--'No Down Payment' was 1957. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 277007 Speaker 1: --When did you go into the music business? Speaker 2: Well after that ['No Down Payment'], I did a lot of shows (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah did a lot of-- Speaker 2: I did several movies, I even starred in a movie--I have top billing with Frank Sinatra, Steve McQueen, Charlie Bronson, Peter Lawford in a movie called 'No Down Payment in '61 [1961] [sic. 'Never So Few,' 1959]. I starred in 'The Virginian' I mean I did a lot of movies; some of the interesting stories is for example like when I was doing 'Never So Few' with Sinatra. And he was a great guy, man I mean we'd sit together and talk and hang out and all the girls would want to come and take pictures, but he wouldn't want to take pictures, said they wanna use for publicity. But he would take pictures with me and all of the little Asian kids all that stuff, and he was very upset at the producers, the movie. Because it was a man's movie the way it was written was a bunch of Americans and English who were up in the Kachin country, it's like the Hmong country, and they were there to observe the Japanese and worked together with the natives. And it was just a man's story and I was part of the [U.S.] Navy crew and the whole thing. And then when we started the movie, MGM [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer] decided to write a love interest then bring Gina Lollobrigida in the film, and Sinatra got very PO'd at that, man. He was upset because this had nothing to do with--so they--what they did with my part is that they cut it down, they made me die so that he could get shot and go to R and R and meet this nurse you know this it--it was--it changed the whole script. So a little story was that it was around the Fourth of July when we started and so he asked me to go get some fireworks, so I got some fireworks, man, from China Town. And in the middle of a take, (laughter) he be lighting firecrackers up, man, blowing up the thing--it was--then Richard Johnson was a great English actor, stupid idiot. One day he takes a whole string and the guy's walking around with his--with his script you know in his pocket and he drops it down the--down the chute (laughter) like it was--had exploded and that blew everything up, you know. Then MGM got pissed off then Frank's guys got the idea now, they went and got the big bazooka stuff in the middle of a take, man. You'd hear this stuff going off, boom, upsetting tape, so finally the police arrested them and Sinatra got a good reason to say he walked off the film. So he walked off the film and they made up and whatever, whatever, but I mean he figured that he had his deal going. That's when he started Reprise Records. So I'm sitting there one day hanging out and I'm doing my thing (singing) you know I'm playing my drums, he walks by and he says, "Hey you can sing." I said, "Yeah, yeah, man you know Frank, I doing this stuff all my life." Says, "You know what? I wanna record you." I said, "Sure, why not?" He said, "Go tell Mo Ostin I want to record you." So I go to see Mo Ostin who ended up being one of the biggest men in the music business. I said "Frank said--." He said, "Okay, here's a thousand dollars, go make yourself a demo." Demo, well okay. I had made records before, by the way, with when I sold that group [Sherriff and the Ravels]; remember I talked about that group? I made the record, went to Chicago [Illinois] and sold to (unclear) which I didn't go on, it's called Shambalor. Speaker 1: Yeah, Shambalor, right. Speaker 2: Okay I'll repeat that. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that's a story that we can't--we shouldn't skip over. Speaker 2: Okay now when we come back-- Speaker 1: Give us the years on some of these things. Speaker 2: Anyways so, anyway (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--what year is this, what year is, what we talking about, what year? Speaker 2: This is '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, '61 [1961]. So I go and I cut this demo, I wrote a little song called 'Trade Winds' ['Trade Winds, Trade Winds'] and--and lo and behold they said hey man we like it. So I get the whole full treatment, man. I get all the money I need (laughter) to produce my record. AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists; SAG-AFTRA] paying me, the singers the whole nine yards. I get Perry Botkin, Jr. to arrange it and the record came out good. I was the first person--now they call me Asian, right? I was the first Asian American ever a number one record in Los Angeles [California], the first one to get on the Top 100, it was called 'Trade Winds.' Anyway Sinatra calls me in--it was number one in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and his manager I won't mention his name, he's today but called me in and said you know what kid, we like the record, but we want the publishing. I said what do ya--no, no I gotta call, a call yeah we want the publishing, I said who the hell are you, get off my phone, man. So I get a call from the president of Reprise come right over, you know who just insulted? I said who some ass idiot call me and tell me he want my publishing of the song I wrote. He said that is you know who that is, that's Sinatra's manager. I said so what, naive me, right? He says, well the record's dead, forget it, I said what do you mean, just like that, he says yeah he says if you don't give him the publishing the record's dead. So moral of the story is arm got twisted, they got the publishing, they put the record out and then they send me to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I was supposed to go on to 'The Dick Clark Show.' But it was so much stuff going down which is another story, about the sitting and talking to these people. But, hey, yo man we gone put a hundred thousand in your juke box, I'm gonna give it the man here, Sinatra; man the mic man you know. I'm sitting there talking about grand jury stuff, and I'm paranoid, man I don't know what--I didn't even know what grand jury was until I came back and people said you're stupid man. They could've thrown a bomb in front of this little place you go there. Story_ID: 277008 Speaker 1: Anyways the record--then after that I--I was paranoid, I ended up doing--I had the lead to 'Ben Casey.' I was the first guy signed I guess--I guess you called me Asian American at that point. Film one hour series playing Vince Edwards' best friend had a contract for twelve hundred dollars a week. [Frank] Sinatra's people says their right because Sinatra's people produced 'Ben Casey' for Bing Crosby Productions. And my contract said if I had a hit record, I'd make eighteen hundred dollars a week, which was more than 'Ben Casey' was making, but they had the control, 'cause if it was a hit record it would mean a lot, right? So anyways, there was a little incident which went down, so I'm starring in the show I mean I did the pilot waiting for the show--it was picked up and the people called me in at--at for the Bing Crosby people say, "You know this contract is killing us, we can't afford you, gonna have a hit, record, we can't afford to pay you this kind of money. You're making more money than the star." I said, "Well it's a contract, right? I mean Sinatra's people." Said, "No, we gonna cut the--cut the cord with Sinatra." I said, "Why?" They said, "Well Sinatra and--and Desi Arnaz had a big fight and we're cutting the cord." I said, "What the hell you talking about?" It turns out that Desi Arnaz--that Sinatra went to Desi Arnaz because we're shooting at Desilu [Productions] and Sinatra asked Desi Arnaz, look like a you doing 'The Untouchables,' it's a big hit, is it possible maybe some of the gangsters can be Irish or Polish do they all have to be Italian? You know, I mean could just--you know make it even you know, it doesn't have to be--'cause I got a lot of Italian friends man and they're asking me, you know? Desi Arnaz says get the hell off my goddamned stage, man 'cause he was big, you know? And that broke the relationship between Bing Crosby, Sinatra and Desi Arnaz at Desi studio. So they went over to another studio, that time, then they dropped out. Howard Koch [Jr.] was producing the whole thing, and it ended up that they brought me in and I thought I was with a clan because they were gonna do--they were gonna do this big movie that they just made a remake of starring (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'Ocean's Eleven'? Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: 'Robin and the 7 Hoods,' is that it? Speaker 1: No, it was the one starring Denzel Washington. Oh, that bombed, the remake of 'Manchurian Candidate.' Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: They were gonna do 'Manchurian Candidate' and I had a wonderful opportunity to play the role [Chunjin] that Henry Silva played because I was part of the clan. But then once that came out and then I--I gave up the same thing 'cause I was very much afraid I had a family and I didn't wanna get involved in all that stuff. And then they dropped me because they couldn't afford me so they cut my role out as the best friend to Vince Edwards and wrote an ambulance driver for eight hundred dollars a week. So I kind of like--it was politics that I didn't know about, man I didn't wanna be involved, I didn't have a manager. It was kind of strange stuff that was coming down at that time. So, I ended up just going back to acting and saying hell with the singing and hell with all of that stuff, you know. And so I continued acting starring in different shows and whatever, whatever. Story_ID: 277009 Speaker 1: Lots of TV shows everything from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, lots of TV shows. Speaker 1: --'[The Life and Legend of] Wyatt Earp' to I mean, I've seen a lot of things-- Speaker 2: Yeah a lot of TV shows. I did '[The] Outer Limits,' man, I mean you can go through my resume. I did 'Outer Limits.' Speaker 1: Plenty of shows. There's-- Speaker 2: Tons and tons of shows. Speaker 1: 'Dr. Kildare,' there's 'Outer Limits,' 'I Spy.' Speaker 2: Yeah, 'I Spy' with [Bill] Cosby, I can tell you about Cosby the first time. Yeah, we did a show was the third show I did with 'I Spy,' Cosby and Bill Culp [Robert Culp] comes on the set. And poor Cosby, Cosby you know wasn't really an actor, he was a comedian you know, he didn't really know the technique of the thing, you know what I'm saying? And here's Robert Culp, Culp was good with Cosby, man, Culp was really these are some nice guys, man. And I'm acting with Culp and so--and he would just take him through the ropes and it was--it was such a nice thing, you know. There's something I wanna say about Mr. Cosby, and a lot people don't know this, I think it's very important from a black historical point of view. There was a young kid, there was a white kid that I met when I was starring in 'No Down Payment,' that I took a liking for and I invited him to come to my house. And he came to my house and later on you know he just disappeared. And one day, I ran into him and he was one of the producers of 'The Cosby Show,' I don't remember which one it was. And he invited me to come--'cause I was in New York [New York] flying back and forth, and he invited me. And we had a talk and he said to me, "You know what, lot of people don't realize this, but this man is doing for the black community and will probably never be recognized." I said, "What-what?" He said, "You know what he demanded that when there was a role for a fire captain, or a doctor or psychiatrist or someone that had stature, he demanded that they be made black." So that the kids that are looking at the show would be motivated and say, "Daddy, I didn't know there was a black fire captain." "Daddy, I didn't know there was a black police chief." "Daddy, I didn't know there was a black surgeon," and lot of people don't realize how effective a picture is worth a thousand words. And one of these is I mean I played tennis with Bill before and--but I--I this is the story that really want people to know. That how we had to fight to make the subtle changes, this is a very powerful medium. Imagine that, I mean this is something that people should know that Cosby did, he wouldn't say it, nobody would say, but I would say it. Because I think it needs to be said that--that his influence helped to move our agenda forward. This is very important coming from a white boy that I helped that was nothing but an extra that rose up in the ranks, okay? But this is how important that it was very important in those days that you had the power to show the imagery that was uplifting, and I just wanted to make that statement. The other statement I would like to make is about I believe sincerely that a man like Cosby and even a man like [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy should be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, the Nobel Peace Prize. Berry Gordy brought black music into the white bedrooms of America, he started a revolution by introducing into the bedrooms of white America rhythms and music that had hit--up until that time, was covered by white men like Pat Boone and [Elvis] Presley. They took black artists, man and covered them, that they could never be exposed, and this was the beginning of a turn. Now what rap music has done which represents 60 or 70 percent of the charts today, is that Berry Gordy and Motown opened the door, opened the lock, the Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg and Eminem and 50 Cent and all those guys busted the door wide open, man. And the combination of all of this is when you look at the Nickelodeon awards [Kids' Choice Awards] which I just saw and I was blown away. I was so tickled to death how far we've come to see that the awards were given and maybe 60 percent of them were to black actors. The Bow Wow show for example was number one and have all these screaming white kids. I mean this is--so you know what I'm saying? I mean that to me is the culmination of where we should be going. Story_ID: 277010 Speaker 1: Yeah the movie I think you misidentified it as 'No Down Payment' the [Frank] Sinatra movie (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It was 'Never So Few,' right? The movie we were talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah, the movie was 'Never So Few.' Speaker 1: And this--and what year was this one, this was-- Speaker 2: This was in 1960, '61 [sic. 1959]. Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay. Speaker 2: Sixty [1960] '61 [1961] yeah, directed by John Sturges one of the great directors of the world and--yeah the movie starred you know Sinatra, Steve McQueen, Charlie Bronson [Charles Bronson], Paul Henreid a whole lot of great actors at that point, and brought in Gina Lollobrigida. We talked about the fact that you know I was sitting in, that's how I got my recording contract. But some of the other things which were interesting is that the Steve McQueen role was actually written for Sammy Davis, Jr. you know that's the role of the wise cracking truck driver you know the guy that takes Sinatra around that pals with him, you know. Typical of the relationship that Sinatra had with Davis. One of the stories are is that one day we're shooting and Peter Lawford comes on the set and he says damn, man, shit, my car got into an accident, who wants to buy it? So I jumped up and said who wants to buy a car that was in an accident? They's all laughing he says well you know what, the car's gonna be worth a lot of money, I said a car with an accident worth a lot of money, you gotta be crazy Peter. He says yeah, the next president of the United States was driving my car and got into an accident. Leave the dent in, you know, I should've bought the car, man with the dent, that the next President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy would've had, you know? And it was a wonderful relationship to bring Kennedy and Sinatra and that whole gang, man. I mean they were just bunch of playboys, man. They were just hanging out, having fun. The Sammy Davis thing was, as a of people know, Kim Novak was the franchise at, I think it was Paramount Pictures [sic. Columbia Pictures] and the man who owned that I forgot his name but who owned the studios was very much afraid that the publicity that was going out between Kim Novak and Sammy Davis would ruin his franchise. And Sammy was at the top of his game and you know the word got out that it was a dangerous play. And the word went out that Sinatra had told Sammy, "Hey man you know you can have any woman you want, I mean any woman you want, I mean you know. You know Kim Novak is cool, man but you know she's just another lady." And Sammy, you know top of his game, "Hey man, I love the woman, she loves me, you know, that's it." So the word went out that they decided that they had to stop Davis somehow and if it meant his losing his life whatever they had to dispose of him. Sinatra supposedly heard about it and didn't want that to happen but they made a compromise. And the compromise was that if the accident or something would happen, and he lost an eye, then it would be a way to save face for everybody. So to this day I will go to my grave stating that in a way Sinatra saved Sammy's life. They were--they were kind of separated for a while, you know? And then--of course Sammy proved that he could marry a white woman by going to--for May Britt, he proved that he could do that, you know, which he did. And so he got his pride back and he lost an eye in the process and then he got back into the clan, you know. But you talk about loyalty and friendship by two friends Sinatra loved this man. He didn't have anything to do with it, he prevented it, you know. So that's--that's what I heard, man and I was there, I was hanging with them, you know? Nobody came out and tell me exactly you know that--it makes a lot of sense, makes a lot of sense because Sammy was supposed to play the Steve McQueen role and that made Steve McQueen. That is the roll that busted Steve McQueen out as a major star. Speaker 1: So he lost his eye about the time that he was supposed to play that role? Speaker 2: Yeah [sic.]. Speaker 1: Never got a chance to play it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Never could get a chance, he was estranged from Sinatra anyways because he wouldn't listen. I mean he was--he was his own man, you know. Top of the world, he can do whatever he wants to do, which he did do. You know, he went out and got a beautiful lady, but Kim Novak you know. So after that it was just one of those things. Interesting story, but I think that, as I said I will go to my grave believing that that's exactly what happened. Story_ID: 277011 Speaker 1: You were in a lot of television shows and movies and I'm gone ask you about some of your favorite roles in a minute, but I wanted to know how--now here you are, you're playing Asian roles, I guess you have much right to play as any other kind of role. But you're not--you're not as tuned to the Asian community as people think you are because you're raised on the black side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the black side, man. Speaker 1: As a Caribbean black person in--in New York [New York] and everybody think you're Hispanic with a name Lenny Gonzales [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong] in the beginning. And it's a lot of cultural-- Speaker 2: I'm like a Frank Silvera and a Juanita Moore all rolled into one, yeah. Speaker 1: Right talk about--now those are your predecessors in terms of doing this. Juanita Moore, of course she was in 'South Pacific,' she played-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I saw Frank Silvera do '[A] Hatful of Rain' in New York. He was great in playing the father, the Italian. Polo [sic. John Pope, Sr.] you know, and you know he was great, great actor, great actor. Speaker 1: Silvera played Mexicans-- Speaker 2: He played everything. Speaker 1: He had like--he was Puerto Rican and black ancestry. He played like Mexicans a lot. He played Arabs, he played almost everybody. Speaker 2: He was an actor, man he could play anything. Now for me for example, I played Chinese, Japanese, Korean you know Malaysian, Tahitian you know and those were the days wherein the racial lines didn't--the discrimination I mean--we've got a lot of problems which we'll talk about as far as the Screen Actors Guild [SAG; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] and what it is. But in those days, it was the actor I mean I did '[The] Outer Limits,' I played different kinds of characters and I was even in the 'Three Stooges Around the World,' ['The Three Stooges Go Around the World in a Daze'] so the question here it was the acting ability. Now what happed when we pushed, it's kind of a double-edge sword, but we pushed to get statistics on--on people of color then what happened is that then there was a double-edge sword wherein the Japanese just wanted you to play Japanese and the Chinese wanted you--because everybody was in a cesspool and instead of building a bridge and coming out you know they were fighting each other. It's almost the same thing that was happening on the black side. Speaker 1: So--so you're saying that the Japanese only wanted to play--wanted Japanese to play Japanese on the screen. Speaker 2: And the business went along with that. Because it wanted to get these racial groups, you follow me, satisfied so we had that problem. Again it's the same thing that would happen in terms of in the early days when you were light skinned you got an opportunity. And then in the '70s [1970s] when it was black was in, the darker you were, the better you got, and now today, what you have is--is white American defining what--what blackness should be a la the women. If you look at television today, you look at the black women all with straight, curly beautiful hair, they're all light skinned, you know what I'm saying? You know you go from--I mean that seems to be the model when you darker you gotta step back you know thing if you're white, your right, if you're brown, you stick around, and if you black you go back, right? And when really look at it, it's really taking place. The darker sisters having a tremendous problem because within--again from the white psyche that controls this business, those are the prettier ladies. You know I mean this then you know lighter skin and the hair and the commercials and you look at it. Speaker 1: Have you ever seen a movie or commercial where the wife was darker than the husband? Speaker 2: I don't know, man I you know I stopped looking at TV a lot because I'm turned off, but I mean if it is its rare (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know it's tough, I don't that it's happen, I've never seen-- Speaker 2: That's exactly, I don't see that. So--so the question I'm saying to you we getting redefined, we're getting redefined, for example, where Lucy Liu who typically Asian, right, the white people who control this business gave her a white father. And they--she's a--gave her a white father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're talking about in 'Charlie's Angels'-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. A white father and Jap- and an Asian mother and you never saw the mother, just a picture of her. I mean I can continue and tell you how you how the inadequacies of the casting and how it's done. Anyways we can get back into that because as I was on the National Board of Screen Actors Guild in 1982 and then again in the '90s [1990s] so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before we-- Speaker 2: We can talk about all of that later. Speaker 1: Yeah, before-- Story_ID: 277012 Speaker 1: But I just wanted ask you, how in the beginning when you played all these different Asian roles-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --basically, how was--what feedback did you get from the various Asian communities about--about who you were--were they confused about who you were and what you, you know did they ever (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there was no Asian community, I mean what has happened within--in 1964 when I fought--when I--we organized the group in Los Angeles [California] fighting for residuals in perpetuity it meant that in 1964, when I was starring in TV show we only had, got paid for five reruns, okay, and that was it. And then company owned everything, I got up in front of Charlton Heston's face and said, "Look man, you're hyphenite, you are a producer, you're not gonna give us six and seven and eighth rerun, come on, man 'cause you wanna keep it in your own pocket." 'Cause everything has already been paid for, and I jumped on his desk, man. I mean we were--I was mad because Screen Actors Guild [SAG; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] didn't do what they were supposed to do which was to say every time it's played, man you gotta pay the people, what is this, right? It took them ten years, ten years until we got residuals and perpetuity for everybody, you know. Speaker 1: And that's from what year to what year? Speaker 2: From '64 [1964] until '70 [1970] something, that's when it finally got through. So because I was--I was making five grand a week doing--doing a television show, okay? Today it just went up to six thousand, thirty years later. What have they done for me, man, you know? Anyways, that's another ballgame and another story. But so the--the thing about the Asian community and the Mexican community has been lagging behind because you're looking at this perspective in 2005. What are they doing? They're not united and they haven't been united and it's only because from the black consciousness they're now becoming united. And I'm trying to help them to get united, but they were not united back then. Speaker 1: So you're saying that--that the black actors basically have taken the lead on civil rights in terms of the movies and--movie industry? Speaker 2: I definitely and I will tell you how we began and some of the little games we played to start to do that. Story_ID: 277013 Speaker 1: And the percentages which will tell you because sitting on the board--in 1982, blacks represented four percent, four percent, man, four percent, okay? As the national chair of Screen Actors Guild [SAG; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], co-chair of the [SAG Ethnic] Minorities Committee, Minorities Committee [Ethnic Equal Opportunities Committee], right? I found that there were like--while I was in New York [New York], I organized the program and I got over four hundred kids of color, blacks, mostly blacks, Asians some Native Americans, some Latinos. And I went to Madison Avenue and I said you know what, they're not in commercials, we were in even fewer commercials back then. I said we need a program, so being on the board of SAG, they said oh fine, well he can't do nothing. So I arranged the--a program wherein they would come in and audition these four hundred kids over a period of five months. And what it would be after they negotiate that they would--the kids would come in and they would already have a commercial they can read. But at the night of the audition, Madison Avenue, which controls everything, would then bring in a commercial in and then they can read and we'll tape it. So what I did was that I got some of the members of the board then I--then we videotaped. And I interviewed each kid, you know and most people--most actors you know they have--they don't even know what they look like their pictures don't represent them, it what they think it would be you know. Their hair is out of place, the whole nine yards, so I school them for like two months, then I put them on camera, and then I had them do commercials and they got in sync with what themselves would be, and then eventually Madison Avenue came in. Now during that period of time, we were negotiating contract for commercials. They said, the Madison Avenue said, you know what, we're not gonna pay you on a hundred percent of a commercial because you already lost 25 or 30 percent of the market. Because VCRs were coming in, people were taping; they were knocking out the commercial, so why would we pay you a 100 percent of the commercials? So being the chair of the Minorities Committee and I understood that, what was interesting was the fact that if you took 75 percent of the target audience now right, and most of that 25 percent that slipped away were mostly white-- Speaker 2: That had that kind of VCR. Speaker 1: That's right that had that money, right? So now we're at 75 percent looking at it, right? Now if you have at that point 30 percent, okay, you had Latinos you had blacks, you had Asians, right, which could represent 25 percent, right? Now that 25 percent out of 75 percent, pretty healthy chunk, how much is that, 30 percent, right? So now you have 30 percent so your target audience is now 30 percent. All of a sudden SAG didn't do anything, so Madison Avenue--so my program was just coming in place. When they came and saw these kids, kids were doing Tetley Tea commercials, right, the brothers would pick up the cup, yo brother man, hey man, this good Tetley Tea, and they, they didn't one like traditional Tetley Tea, you know I mean they brought so much pizzazz and a different way of doing things. They brought their own soul to these different things that people were blown away, right? So what happened is that we started to get more jobs in commercials because, not because SAG was doing anything, but because they were targeting at 40 percent of the market. Interesting, it was nothing to do with anything else, except pure dollars, okay? So now today African Americans are 18 percent from '82 [1982] to today 18 percent of the jobs at Screen Actors Guild, 18 percent and rising rapidly. Latinos, a year ago, were 5.7 percent and they represent almost the same as African Americans. They've now risen 6.7, Asian Americans were 2.2, 2.4 percent for the last four years. And Native Americans had one slight gain last year from like 0.1 percent because they had a TV series that ran three days, a miniseries, there were more actors, so that's why it raised. They're microscopically out of the picture. Now, there are reasons why we can talk about why this increase and whatever, whatever. But it wasn't because of Screen Actors Guild; it was because of the fact that the demographics and the money and what you're looking at is the fact that they were targeting certain markets. Story_ID: 277014 Speaker 1: Now when we talk about the record business which I was in, if any company wanted to get into the business the first thing they did was get into the black business. 'Cause it was easy to control air play, was easier to target the market place and then once you made your money, then you could put it on the white. Example, I was national promotion manager for PolyGram Records under Tom Noonan, I was brought in because I was the expert, okay? Now, here am I, I got a James Brown album, they give me sixty thousand dollars to promote it. Speaker 2: Now what year is this, this is-- Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], '72 [1972] yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Sixty thousand dollars to promote it, they take a white act from England like Slave or Rory Gallagher they put $250,000, okay? Now, I'm supposed to take my sixty thousand dollars and spread it, 'Get on the Good Foot,' sold a million and half records, without any white air play, million and a half records without any white play. I go to Chicago [Illinois] WLS, you heard WLS, right? Speaker 2: That was super station. Speaker 1: Number one white station, right, super station. Speaker 2: Larry Lujack. Speaker 1: They were not playing 'Shaft,' it's not my record. I said why you not playing 'Shaft'? They said well you know it's not showing up demographically at the stores in outlying areas. I said well you know what, it's not my record but it's selling a million records and look how much selling in Chicago, obviously the white people can't find it out there, they're coming in and buying it downtown. Obviously and what you doing is right, so that was the problem. So the question is there, which I'm gonna get involved in later, is that the conspiracy between the record companies which by the fact of the free goods, making the prices in the major cities into the--into the big white stores and chains cheaper, it forced black people to go downtown and was raping our neighborhoods of the money. Because it was cheaper to buy the records outside and this is a conspiracy which why I got fired for. But the problem is we didn't get--so with the James Brown situation I had to spread sixty thousand dollars, I couldn't do it. Because they know that it--we could spread it around, you know what I'm saying, but they weren't interested in building it because on the pop side they could sell maybe five million. But they were short sighted because today had they done that, this business would've opened up like what they did with rap. That was the, you know we're talking about a situation which the analogy is the fact that they didn't put the money in it, and so we couldn't do it. But in the meanwhile, as far as the sales is concerned, the black neighborhoods were getting raped because we didn't get local advertising money, okay. We couldn't get national advertising money, we couldn't get radio spots, we couldn't get the free goods that were necessary. For example, you know like I know, in the old days when you went to a black shop, they played the records, right? Played the records, man this something new, man here you are brother, yeah what, okay play it, right? So we went in, me and I went in and I dropped some free goods and say test this record out, and if it would sell, you know I would know that. So a James Brown, 'Get on the Good Foot' comes out, the guy don't have enough money to buy a thousand, he goes to the One Stop which is a white One Stop and he buys ten, okay? He buys another twenty, the next thing you know he may have sold two hundred, okay, he gets no free goods. The record becomes a hit, the downtown Sam Goodys I want five thousand, they get fifteen hundred free. So what I did was I said you know what boss, I got five guys here that bought two hundred each, I put them together, that's a thousand records, I need three hundred free to give him. What, are you kidding me, we can't do that. I said what do you mean you can't do that? When I started in business, there was only one black distributor, Ernie Leaner [Ernest Leaner] in Chicago. Then we pushed and I helped a guy named Simpsons in Detroit [Michigan] by giving them things. I utilized the record companies' money to do certain things like going to Operation Breadbasket [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] (laughter) by supporting the National Association of Radio and Television Artists [sic. American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (AFTRA); Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)]. 'Cause black radio was important to reach the black community, I mean we had to do things in order--it's the same thing with [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] 'cause he had go through. I mean I--we send the people down to march, the thing was that we would had to come together in way which was rather unique but in a way to support the black community to survive. Now unfortunately, I got fired because that extra--if you sold a million records, three hundred thousand free, okay, that's a lot of money. Where do you think payola came from, where do you think the--the-I would want to be a president of a record company for free, because I can get all that two hundred thousand, extra hundred fifty thousand free, right here, no taxes, nothing. So they controlled it and there were no brothers, that's why I formed FORE, the Fraternity of Recording Executives. Because it was no brothers in the power position to control where the money went for advertising, for promotion of whatever, whatever, whatever. So the question here is I don't mean to digress, but-- Speaker 2: When was FORE formed? Speaker 1: Well, FORE was formed in I think '73 [sic.]. Story_ID: 277015 Speaker 1: But anyways, so--so just talking about James Brown quickly to understand--so that you can understand the dilemma is the fact that the control with the free goods and the control with the advertising dollars and the whole things were in the hands of those white executives back then. We didn't have any black executives, one of the first was Reggie Lavonne who came out as a disk jockey from WWRL [New York, New York] who took the position over at Capitol Records and fired me because (laughter) I was--they had to bring somebody in above me to get rid of me. So he fired me, kept Ron Mosley [sic. Robert Mosley] in New York [New York]. And eventually they would get--then Ed Wright was my first boss, he was the PD [program director] and WABQ, okay in Cleveland [Ohio]. And he was--they brought him in at Liberty/UA [Liberty Records, United Artists Records], he was a cool dude, man, and real nice guy. The question here is that there's--this is something--even the conspiracy that Columbia [Records] had Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] write a paper ["A Study of the Soul Music Environment"] on how to get into the black business by destroying it, is ridiculous. That's all out there, I even have a thing that shows you that says don't--have you ever seen the thing about don't play Negro records? Speaker 2: Well, no. Speaker 1: You haven't? I should read it for you. Speaker 2: Is there a memo about not playing black records? Speaker 1: Oh, my God, no, no, this you have to read-- Story_ID: 277016 Speaker 1: One of the interesting things about the conspiracy that took place with the recording business, with broadcasting, with film, it's been ongoing. I think things are changing somewhat, but I mean I must want to give you a little perspective. For example when I would go to the South for example say Houston [Texas] the names of the disc jockeys were owned by the white radio stations. White disc jockeys got three, four hundred dollars a week, black disc jockeys got $125 a week, plus the groceries that (laughter) they were selling you know that they could take home. And the names--their names the disc jockeys names were owned by the radio stations. Names such as Hotsy Totsy, Dizzy Lizzie, Okie Dokie on and on, very derogatory names. Those were the names that the disc jockeys had to perform under. And if they didn't like the disc jockey for some other reason or whatever he got too uppity as they may say, they just fired him and put the janitor on. And I can tell you a case in point where one of the guys who became one of the biggest disc jockeys was the janitor. So I mean--I mean it's just a horrible situation. And then these were some of the notices that went out and this is fact. Put out by the Citizens' Council of Greater New Orleans Incorporated, gives the building and it says New Orleans, Louisiana and permission is granted to print this circular. It says, "Notice! Stop. Help save the youth of America. Do not buy Negro records. (If you do not want to serve Negroes in your place of business, then do not have Negroes' records on our juke boxes or listen to Negro records on the radio.) The screaming idiotic savagery of these records are undermining the morals of our white youth in America. Call the advertisers of the radio station that play this type of music and complain to them," in big broad letters, "do not let your children buy or listen to those Negro records." I mean this was just part of what we had to do and of course in the days--in the early days some of the best records that came out that were played on black radio never got to see white play. Because they were covered by white artists like Pat Boone and Jimmie Rodgers and even the King, Elvis Presley. Story_ID: 277017 Speaker 1: So I mean it's been and then of course, the conspiracy continued further later on when Columbia [Records] commissioned a study ["A Study of the Soul Music Environment"] to see how to get into the black business or how to curtail it or derail it. And very interesting study that was done and from what it stated was that they had to buy black record companies, Columbia did. They had to steal the acts and what they did was they bought Stax Records [Memphis Tennessee]; they stole Michael Jackson, okay? Speaker 2: That's right he left he left (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. And then--and then what they did was they started to buy up black record companies and--and slowly squeezed them out. So eventually Stax folded, so Stax was not a player anymore, you follow me? Now in the old days they had--they had Leonard Chess and Chess Records [Chicago, Illinois] and had Vee-Jay [Records, Gary, Indiana] and all those companies. Speaker 2: Vee-Jay was black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Vee-Jay was black. Speaker 2: That was the company that brought The Beatles over. Speaker 1: They were the number six company, largest company in the world when they had The Beatles, okay? Jimmy [James C. Bracken] and Vivian [Carter] Bracken were two black shop owners in Chicago [sic.]. Unfortunately that's a story should be told they ended up back in Chicago [Illinois] penniless after they were bamboozled and swindled when they came to Hollywood, back to this little record shop. And then there were--of course Leonard Chess was unique in the fact that he was white but he promoted a lot of black music. Dootsie Williams out here owned DooTone Records [Los Angeles, California] and then there was--in Houston [Texas] I mean and then there were record companies in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and you know like Philadelphia sound, right? Gamble--then it was Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff] and whatever, whatever. So the question here was that the white companies were now buying up and squeezing out black ownership 'cause otherwise they couldn't control it and that's how they controlled it through distribution. So the question here is that that was the strategy that they employed, now the other strategy was that in order to become number one, when you are number one in the music business you can control the stores. You can walk in and say, "I want this position here, I want my posters here, I want you to take this amount," you have weight. So what they did was they started by buying up black companies so that it would make them as a total company have a higher percentage point. So Warner Brothers [Warner Bros.-Seven Arts, Inc.] you know, okay--Warner Brothers bought Atlantic [Records], they bought Cotillion [Records] they started to buy up all the little labels. Columbia bought Stax and whatever, Capitol [Records] brought me on board in with some other people like with [Robert] Mosley. They gave Holland-Dozier-Holland about two million dollars and they had [HistoryMaker] Freda Payne's 'Band of Gold,' they gave a white guy [Rick Hall] down, I forgot his name, in Muscle Shoals [Alabama] to create black music again. So what it was, was that by the time you would add each point up, so each little--so if you had five or six extra points, added to the fact that you had Capitol Records and Columbia Records vying for position, whoever had more black product would just make them become number one. So then that was the game that being played, you know at the expense and the same time, black executives were slowly beginning to come into the business. Like Arnold Larkin [sic. HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold] was a lawyer at Capitol and eventually they brought him over to Columbia to head up the Columbia black division, okay? Now, they never brought over anyone that was extremely--it was one gentleman, who was in sales at Columbia, so they were bringing other people in, but at the same time, the business was still controlled and the way that the monies were parceled out for promotion and even free product and advertising was still second class. It was only a matter of using it to become number one; it was not giving it the full promotion like they do today. So that was the beginning of what was going on within the business. Story_ID: 277018 Speaker 1: Now what I did was that I gave up the business, acting business in '64 [sic. 1967]. And the reason I gave up the business in '64 [1964] was because I was the star of a show called "The Virginian" and in the episode it was called 'Ah Sing vs. Wyoming.' And in this show it was the story about a Chinese man who had worked on the Virginian ranch made enough money and wanted to go into a town and open up a Chinese restaurant. And he had bought a picture bride that was coming in from China, he opens his restaurant up and he's burned out by the whites. He opens it up again, he's burned out by the whites, they passed a civil ordinance, he opens up again, so he violated, they jail him. Eventually that case went up to the civ--to the Supreme Court, it went through the state court to the Supreme Court, it's called 'Ah Sing vs. Wyoming.' And in the historical element, Ah Sing won the case, okay which allowed him to open the restaurant. Because they had no reason to discriminate against a restaurant, this is the story about a Chinese man. The way they wrote the story was the story was about the Chinese man who was always in jail who disobeyed the law while opening up a restaurant and they had drunken lawyer named Edmond O'Brien who was well known actor. And it was his story, it was all about him you know trying to get this guy off and you'd see what cut back now and then to see us in jail you know what I'm saying. Then he went up the Supreme Court finally won the case, and the boy is released. Now if the case is supposed to be Ah Sing, it's about Ah Sing, his suffering what he's going through. Charles Bickford who was--who his boss, a big guy comes to him and say, look give it up and come back home. To make a long story short, it was all--the story's all done from a white point of view. Speaker 2: Like a lot of stories were (background noise). Speaker 1: Like most of those stories, right. Speaker 2: The minorities are the backdrop. Speaker 1: The minorities are nothing but the backdrop, so you know I mean, I'm from Brooklyn [New York, New York], man. I'm looking at this stuff, I said I starred in movies with [Frank] Sinatra, blah, blah, blah; I've done all this stuff. What's it getting me, it not getting me anywhere, I mean this is ridiculous. I can't change anything, I'm fighting at Screen Actors Guild [SAG; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], we finally did get through to get them start motion on the residual payment so. And then I unfortunately the problems with racism and my wife and I got separated so I got into the record business here [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: This is in '64 [1964], same year that you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-four [1964] yeah. Speaker 2: --in to quit. Story_ID: 277019 Speaker 1: So then I quit. Then on from '64 [1964], '65 [1965], '66 [1966] I went to work for--for Liberty/UA Records [Liberty Records, United Artists Records] and I started to learn about promotion and I was put out on the road. And this is how I was learning about promotion and then--and then unfortunately Liberty/UA was bought by Polydor [sic.] and then I had to move to New York [New York] and then this is while I was running PolyGram's [PolyGram Records] black division you know promoting Millie Jackson, Joe Simon. Speaker 2: James Brown. Speaker 1: James Brown you know. I created, for example, like they didn't want to spend any money and [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers had an album [sic.], 'Ubiquity' and I said to him, "You know Roy we gotta sell it. I tell 'em what we're gonna do. I'm gonna get them to spend some money." So I renamed the album 'Red, Black and Green.' Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I--I printed up ten thousand pens, ten thousand posters, I did everything ran back and said, "Look man, the brothers out there; they need red, black and green as the sign, man." So the company [Polydor Records] went with it and I flooded that stuff out there and Roy, it became a hit. Speaker 2: I've got it (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, there you go, (laughter) you got it, red, black and green, so it worked, right? But when I was at--when I was at Liberty/UA I had a thing where I broke Bobby Womack, 'Fly Me to the Moon,' and what I did was I went and I got--I got an airline ticket, man and I printed up the disc jockey's name on it and you know and I sent it out all to them and it was right before the convention. You know, the national convention where all the brothers come to hang out and have fun, whatever. And they all thought they had a free ticket, they played my record, it was a big hit (singing) "Fly me to--," Bobby Womack. Then finally somebody read the ticket and it said destination, moon, it wasn't destination to the Miami [Florida] hot spot, man. I got into trouble, but I got my hit anyways. So the problems was (laughter) I mean it was talking about you know we had to do that, I mean but--I mean then I promoted--I promoted you know 5th Dimension, got The 5th Dimension off the ground and then The O'Jays and then-and then there was a little label Minit Records [New Orleans, Louisiana], and right now I forgot his name, he's such a great singer. Who did, anyways, but so we broke him, but then I--then after that, I went over to Capitol [Records] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what year did you go to Capitol? Speaker 1: No, no, no after, no, no. I went to PolyGram first and then of course within the political hassle that I worked for Tommy Noonan, but then this is when I started to hire other black promotion guys to send them out. Because I created my own budget, I had like a 4 million dollar budget and it was easy to try to you know manipulate and try to get guys out there would hire people. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So terms of chronology you, did you go to-- Speaker 1: Yeah, no, no. After--I'm sorry after, Liberty UA-- Speaker 2: You went to Polydor. Speaker 1: To Polydor, yeah. Speaker 2: And then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause Liberty was sold to Polydor. Speaker 2: Yeah. But you said then you went to Capitol. Speaker 1: Then I went to Capitol. Speaker 2: And what year was that? Speaker 1: I think Polydor was--when was, no, no, no, no. Liberty/UA was not '64 [1964] it was '65 [1965], '66 [1966] I think. It was '65 [1965] or yeah '65 [1965] '66 [1966] yeah. Then I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I know what's wrong. I think you're off by three years. Speaker 1: Yes, I am off by three years. Speaker 2: 'The Virginian' was in '67 [1967] it's on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'The Virginian' was wrong, 'The Virginian' would've been '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Was it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. And on this chronology it says it was '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'The Virginian' was '65 [sic. 1967]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Was after that, it was '66 [1966] yeah '66 [1966] '67 [1967] with Liberty, I think I kind of--it may not have been right after that. I think I floated for a while, I don't remember exactly when it was because I ended up at--ended up at PolyGram in '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. So it must've been later because I was--I was just--I was very distraught with the business at that point. I think for a couple of years I didn't do anything. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then I got the job with, it's my fault--then I got the job with Liberty yeah, when I met Ed Wright. Ed Wright, who was the--yeah so it's like '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. So I think the last show was '66 [1966] actually yeah, whatever it was before you were right '67 [1967]. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 277020 Speaker 1: So then I went to Liberty/UA [Liberty Records/United Artists Records] then I went to Liberty, then Liberty sold, and then I went to PolyGram [Records] and that's when I had more control and I--we started to help black radio in that point. Because it was very important to penetrate to get, I can read you something but anyways (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can just tell us, is probably better than trying to read. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. But anyway so, the--the thing was that because of my--are you taping? Speaker 2: Yeah, we're rolling, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Because that I had some measure of power in terms of the guys and whatever, I could write in certain expenses you know. For example, I used to fly into Chicago [Illinois] for Operation Breadbasket [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] you know, we supported all the NATRA, which was the National Association of Radio and Television Announcers which was the black NATRA, National Association of Television [and] Radio Announcers which was the black organization at that point, which was trying to come together. We went to all the black conventions that they did have, I funneled money to keep them going. Together with some of the other guys that would just you know rising in power at that point. I know one of the people that I met that I--that is--that remains one of my best friends today is [HistoryMaker Reverend] Al Sharpton. It's a quote from a letter that he sent to me about you know--we used to run the street. As a matter of fact, remember the Sonny Carson story ['The Education of Sonny Carson']? Speaker 2: Right, from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, he and I were trying to promote the Sonny Carson story, which was very important at that point. It was a very important film; it didn't get the wide distribution that it should've gotten. But we did the best we could in Brooklyn [New York, New York] to kick it off. Speaker 2: 'The Education of Sonny Carson' was the movie, yeah. Speaker 1: 'The Education of Sonny Carson,' yeah. This is what--this is how I really met Al and then I--then of course being the head promotion at PolyGram, Polydor [Records], I brought him on board and this is when he met James Brown and this is where the relationship with him and James has always lasted. Now one of the things, excuse me. This is from the National Action Network [NAN] written by Al Sharpton. It says, "I'm congratulating you in your appointment of [HistoryMaker] Aki [Leonard Gonzales] Aleong as the national chair of the Screen Actors Guild, EEOC [Ethnic Equal Opportunities Committee]." This was in the 2002. "Aki and I grew up in the poor mean streets of Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York, New York]. He graduated Boys High School [Boys and Girls High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] and went on to Brooklyn College [New York, New York], but he never forgot his roots. We went to the streets in our community to support and bring attention for Sonny Carson and his film about the Attica uprising. Aki went on to head up PolyGram's black promotional staff and later on for Capitol Records and Liberty UA activist corporation. He used the resources available to support the events in the black community. He went into meetings in Chicago with [HistoryMaker] Reverend Jesse [L.] Jackson's Operation Breadbasket. He fought for equal advertising monies to go to black radio and newspapers and television. He fought and obtained free promotional records to be distributed in our communities, so we could compete economically with the big merchants. He tried to encourage and help develop the first black one stops in this country. He fought to get white radio play for black records, such as James Brown, Barry White, [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes, et cetera. He help bring this country together by bringing black music into white American homes. This has paved the way for black mainstream activist with hip hop and rap today. One very important contribution was the support for NATRA, the National Association of Television Radio Activist [sic.], aka the black disc jockey association, the pipeline to the black community in those days. You fought to get them equal pay, better working conditions and black ownership of their own community stations. Lastly, together with some other brothers organized and form FORE the Fraternity of Recording Executives, Aki was elected president. This position jeopardized Aki's career and he was fired and could not get a job in the record business. Aki fought to get black executives positions in the music business, radio and television industries. To highlight the plight of the small black record shops, the plight of economic dollars out of our community, et cetera, Aki's a true brother my friend of thirty years he has made a difference and will always continue to do so. Madam President I would be happy to meet with you and your board and make myself available for any press conference to support SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] and Aki Aleong. Yours in progress, Reverend Al Sharpton, president and CEO." Story_ID: 277021 Speaker 1: You were president of FORE [Fraternity of Recording Executives]--you lost your position in the record industry. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then you went--you went back to acting, as a result? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: I didn't happen like that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Being an activist and fighting you know for parity and doing what I can, I was blackballed. No actually I wasn't blackballed, I was whiteballed, let me explain that. I was whiteballed from the music business, the reason I said whiteballed, is because the whites had the power. Blacks had no power so you couldn't be blackballed, you were whiteballed, you follow me? I was whiteballed from the business because I could not be trusted. Because I was fighting to get some of what should've gone back into the black community. So I was dangerous, so I was fired. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is what year, this is '80 [1980]? Speaker 2: No this is '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay, cause he indicated in there it was '80 [1980] something. Speaker 2: No this was--this was the letter written in 2002 to support my election as the chair of the Screen Actors Guild [SAG; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], EEOC [Ethnic Equal Opportunities Committee]. Speaker 1: Okay. I understand that, but I thought he said that you were fired in the '80s [1980s] from the record industry. Speaker 2: No, no, no. Anyway, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, it was in the '70s [1970s] all right? Speaker 2: The '70s [1970s]. So couldn't find a job, and this is where I ended up you know. I couldn't--I didn't want to be a waiter 'cause I knew too many people be kind of embarrassing, right? I couldn't (laughter) drive a cab in New York [New York] 'cause I was afraid to get shot, I was still a scaredy-cat, so I took a job back in my own neighborhood as an ambulance driver, making $125 a week. And--you know I used to drive you know the citizens of Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York, New York] you know the older folk I used to take them you know we had to pick them up and take them and--take them to the doctor you know their once a month visit. Where the doctors would give then their placebo and whatever, whatever and make it easy. And then they would have a little time out, some fresh air, then we have to take them back to their hell hole. During those periods of time, because little old Aki [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong] was always (singing) "Yeah, all day all night Marianne come on," you know singing having fun. I have to say to you that it was quite an experience you know going back home and--and feeling the plight of the people and understanding the thing. Story_ID: 277022 Speaker 1: But, it is very important, before I sank to this low point, after I was fired from the music business and I floated for a while, [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers called me up and introduced me to a guy by the name of Norman Connors. And he said, "Look, Norman's a great talent and can you help him?" So I met with Norman and I kind of liked him, he was kind of cool dude, he would take his drums on the subway to do a gig for twenty-five dollars. And I said, "Norman, you know I never managed anybody but maybe you know, maybe I can manage you, you know. I know people in the business." So I decided to become a manager. Anyways I went and I talked to his record company who's a small independent company and talked them into letting us do an album. And they knew that I had worth because I knew I could get records played, right? So they agreed to give him twenty-five thousand dollars to do an album. And a guy by the name of Skip [Drinkwater], I forgot the name of the producer, came in. And this was where the beginning of black FM radio was just coming in. Speaker 2: Skip Myleski [ph.] something like that? Speaker 1: No, Skip, I forgot his name. But anyways--he was a white dude, but anyways, the producer and I was telling him that you know black progressive music was coming in and what we do at that point if we're taking any song and putting, like Blue Note [Records], 'cause I used to run Blue Note by the way. Because when I was Liberty [Records] it was Liberty UA Blue Note. So the question was that they would take a song and put it up a little jazzy way and put the voices on, you know what I'm saying to make it for progressive music 'cause it wasn't hard, it was a simple formula. But anyways, so I came along and I said you know what, this kid is good, we can--we can do it. So we cut the first album and it sold like thirty thousand. Then I went back and I said you know what, let's do another album, and the company said yeah. Because you're doing a jazz album, you don't have twenty-five, thirty thousand dollars; you get your money back pretty quick. So then [HistoryMaker] Jean Carne, who is one of the greatest singers used to sing with Norman. So then on the--on the second album Jean wanted more money. She wanted--and we couldn't afford it, so he and I--Norman and I went up town and we discovered Phyllis Hyman. We saw Phyllis Hyman in a club and we said you know what, she's pretty, she's cute and she's good enough. So we put Phyllis on the second album with Michael Henderson, and then that clicked. So now we were in good shape, went back to the company and the third album, 'You Are My Starship,' sold a million records. And I took Norman from twenty-five dollars a night playing his drums in less than five months to making ten thousand a night starring with Grover Washington [Jr.], opening act and all over the place. And what happened was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy-six [1976] around? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 1: That's it. So what happened then was that all a sudden, here I got a number one record, man big act. The record companies forgot about the past, now they're calling me, right? They calling me, so I--'cause I made a deal--I made a deal for a guy by the name of Prince Phillip Mitchell who wrote 'Starting All Over Again,' I made a deal I got two hundred thousand dollars from Atlantic Records for him, and he wrote you know. He had wrote 'Starting All Over Again,' and he wrote some other great songs. He was a great artist, so we got him signed to Atlantic, and then what happened was that the 'You Are My Starship' record, his contract was expiring. So I supported Norman with my credit card, bankrolling his tours and whatever about $150,000 'cause I knew his contract was expiring and there's way I was gonna re-sign because we'd owed that company like three, four hundred thousand dollars, okay? So I made a deal with Clive Davis and when the contract expired, I got a million dollars for Norman for doing three albums. Unfortunately my contract expired with Norman and my lawyer--my white lawyer friend; I won't say what nationality he was, but got--he screwed me. Story_ID: 277023 Speaker 1: So Norman Connors--so contract expired and I signed him to Clive Davis at Arista [Records], three albums, one million dollars, $333,000 for a jazz album, man that was unheard of, and then we negotiated to also record Pharoah Sanders. So we did the first album you know Norman is flying people, paying them quadruple scale you know what I'm saying. Flying them from New York [New York], you know what I'm saying, all that stuff, and things were looking pretty good. But then unfortunately as I said, the lawyer did me in. My contract had expired with Norman and he took over the contract. So I'm in the hole over a hundred thousand dollars and I need to get that paid off of my credit card. So finally they made an arrangement with me that they would pay off some of it. I was still left with twenty thousand in debt; but at least it was better than nothing. So I lost Norman at that point, but you see Norman was--was very foolish, because I came out of the motion picture business. I wanted to do the first real show like 'You Are My Starship,' I wanted to create a starship, I wanted to create you know the kind of glitz and stuff that the movie business had, that the kids are doing now. You see and the thing with Norman, Norman couldn't sing, I cut the track--as a matter of fact, we used the rhythm track to cut 'You Are My Starship' 'cause Norman is great, but he can't keep a beat. 'You Are My Starship' was done with a drum machine and Norman never sang the song. I mean it was the greatest scam that I pulled. Michael Henderson sang 'You Are My Starship,' when I took Norman on the road; I always had to have another singer. 'Cause Michael Henderson never went on the road, 'cause he didn't like Norman. I had roadies who could duplicate the song and they would sing 'You Are My Starship,' and Norman would play his stuff. So we took one hit and parlayed it into a jazz album 'cause Norman's really a jazz drummer. Then we had Phyllis Hyman and then we had Eleanor Mills who would come on scene. We signed other singers and I also man, on the road you know we were making ten thousand dollars a night, opening for Grover Washington [Jr.], you know, I mean the record was really big up there. And then of course we recorded Pharoah Sanders and that's another trip, man. Pharoah was very difficult, you know, he loves to be out here in California near the water. It was--it was it was tough recording Pharoah but we came up with a great album, I'm proud of the album. The problem is when it came time to promote, I'd say, "Hey Pharoah, man we're gonna, what you want?" Says, "Give me a bus." Well, I said, "What have you got man, Clive Davis is ready 'cause we're selling records." Pharoah never showed up. Pharoah did his thing, he don't like to promote, he don't want to do anything. The man is one of the greatest horn players in the world, but he's not with this modern stuff, man. He would rather just go off in his corner and do his thing, you know, we couldn't promote the record. I mean it got out there, but I mean we could've busted that out with--cause was a great album, it was really great album. Gary Bartz and him, and we had the best musicians. But anyways so, after that I had no money (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So let me ask this: Gary Bartz is from Brooklyn [New York, New York], right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Norman Connors from Brooklyn, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, both from New York, I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carlos Garnett was another one. I just wanted to-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, yeah, all the New York guys, man, yeah. And of course--and of course but it was great you know. It was great with--with Phyllis Hyman, you know. She was really great, and she was grateful and Michael Henderson and all those things. Story_ID: 277024 Speaker 1: I recorded people in the doo wop 'cause I was known at the time between '65 [1965] and '66 [1966], '67 [1967] before I went on to Liberty [Liberty/UA; Liberty/United Artists Records], I was producing--remember Bob & Earl 'Harlem Shuffle'? I recorded for them, I recorded them, I recorded Vernon Green and The Medallions, and I took Barry White and introduced him to Russ Regan and he helped me produce one side of Bob & Earl. And I helped Barry White get started; I used to take Barry White, because I was broke at that time in my little Volkswagen. And imagine Barry White sitting in a little Volkswagen, man. I can say I discovered Barry White because I helped him get off the ground by introducing him to Russ Regan. And because he produced this thing and his career just zoomed out. I discovered a guy earlier called [The Mighty] Hannibal his name was Jimmy Shaw that was my first encounter with the Muslims. Because Jimmy Shaw was a Muslim and we went down to the temple down here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I said you know Jimmy Shaw don't happen, man. And so I changed his name to Hannibal, The Mighty Hannibal, he's kept it for like forty years, The Mighty Hannibal. I also produced some doo wops, I was known in the doo wop society as a doo wopper. Now, the thing I want to really go back is that in '57 [1957], we're talking about the music that I actually got into the--the music when I made all this money and went back on my--I was in Brooklyn [New York, New York] and these guys were standing up singing their song Sheriff & the Ravels. And I liked them and I decided to put some money them and to record them and I took the record to Chicago [Illinois] and sold it to [Ewart] Abner and it got a lot of play and it's the record called 'Shombalor.' And I'm gonna sing a little bit it goes and it's--it's--the reason I like it--it was the song about you know about--about convicts marching in you go (singing) and got a lot of play in Chicago it was a big hit. And so I had my little taste of the music business then. So I had learned how to produce so after this whole break up with the--with 'The Virginian' and all that, I decided, hey, maybe I should find my roots and go back. So I went back into the black community and found these groups, Bob Earl--Bob & Earl and Vernon Green and all of that stuff. And that's how I start--that's how I met Ed Wright because he saw me, he says, "Hey, man you know, why don't you come on board and--and work with me at Liberty/UA?" Story_ID: 277025 Speaker 1: I went to work for Capitol [Records] and I don't remember exactly when, but one of the things which were important in black music was--and I have to give credit to Stanley [M.] Gortikov. Mr. Gortikov was a visionary and he understood and we talked about the importance of what black music would be and this is when he gave Ron Mosley [sic. Robert Mosley] who was pass (unclear) and myself free reign, this is when they gave [HistoryMaker] Freda Payne and Holland-Dozier-[Holland] you now money and they created that. They created the Motown Sound there then they had the Funky Sound and Muscle Shoals [Alabama], and whatever, whatever. And this is why I restarted Lou Rawls' career all over again. Because we had the way to do with it. One of the things which was difficult, for example, is that like Capitol Records would ship their product from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to Dallas [Texas] and then that's the warehouse and then Dallas would then ship to New Orleans [Louisiana] or ship to Houston [Texas]. And I had a record that I got played by a guy by a guy, Eddie Freeway [ph.], and he was in New Orleans, and it was a black shop. And he had this big loud speaker on the outskirts of New Orleans and he would play it and he started playing this record. I gave him a records and records, before I knew that was backordered forty thousand records of this record. I go to Capitol, my own company and say look, we need the record, they said well we ain't we have to wait until it comes from Dallas. I said wait a minute now, you people here that don't have any black salesmen. I said Stan's records is ordering thousands and thousands of records, we gotta get it. So I forced them to drop ship the records in New Orleans, I mean in Houston so that the white guys would have to (laughter) take the records to the black stores and then to drop ship them in New Orleans to ship it out, and they didn't like that, 'cause they didn't want to work. Mr. Gortikov sent out a statement saying, and I wish I had it today, and I have it somewhere. That we are going to be in the black record business because this tower was made and your salaries by a black man named Nat [King] Cole, so we have to come together and put this music together. That was his dictum that went out, but these white people in the South they weren't buying this stuff. So they conspired and wrote the head and said that I was bad mouthing their white product. Because their white product was sitting in the store and sitting in the warehouse. I'm selling records, that's my job to sell records, and I'd go in and I tell the black one stop, "Look you wanna buy twenty thousand of my record?" "Yeah, sure." The guy was saying, "No, wait a minute, but we got The Beatles some other white stuff." I said, "Hey, it's up to you. What do you wanna buy? You wanna just take--just product, just to fill the stores shelves and you'll take it back? Buy the product." So I was in contradiction and we created programs, special program by giving product out, by seeing what would sell. Because in the record business, air play sometimes I used to have to stop a record because it wasn't getting sells, you just wasting air play, it's bad for the artist but we are in the business to sell records so we can pay the salaries, right? So if a record starts to sell, that's all we look for, so when a record is selling, you wanna prime the pump, you need to get bullets on the chart. You need to maneuver them; you need to get your men working different sections, so you have to have your team. I used to tell my guys, "Look, I know you're stealing on the expense account this week, because I got a call from Johnny, man, you didn't take him out to dinner. Come on, you put down you took him out two dinners and whatever, whatever, all right? It doesn't matter, I'm gonna okay, but remember when I need the record to be played and we need to get those bullets, you gotta get Johnny to play the record." That's what it's all about, you know, making friends and doing the things. So--so that was part of the game and I used to play along with the guys, I mean 'cause you know what they--you know guy would say, "Look, man this disc jockey, man he's hitting me up," and I said, "Well yeah, well when did his aunt die?" "She didn't die." "Yeah she did die man, yeah, I'm sending $350 for the funeral, okay?" "Oh, oh, thank you boss." "Okay, yeah, okay, make sure she's buried right; send her the flowers courtesy of Aki [HistoryMaker Leonard Gonzales Aleong]." I mean, you know, there are things that you have to do (laughter) to keep your team happy, you know what I'm saying? And it's part of the name--of the name of the business, but unfortunately, all the money in the world cannot break a record. It has to have that unique intangible quality, and it happens. I you know it's just really that kind of way, okay now-- Story_ID: 277026 Speaker 1: Before we leave the record industry and stuff like that, I don't know if it's the right time, but you had a story about Ray Charles you wanted to tell (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah about Ray Charles. Well, you know I produced records for different companies (laughter) along the way and including Ray Charles and he was great to work for 'cause I--I produced--I had took a group and he loved them and I produced them for his label. But one of the things that so wonderful about Mr. Charles is that he would run down this long hallway at the studio, I mean you looking like about a hundred feet. Nobody around him, he just run down, go into the studio and sit in front of a twenty-four track board, right? Twenty-four track board, and this man knew where every little button on this twenty-four track board was, and he would operate his own--he would push the reverb here, bring this down here, then he would say, "Wait a minute, horn number two, you--damn it you're playing out of tune." "Sorry, sorry, Mr. Charles." "All right, let's do it over again." You talking about a genius, I mean forget about just be a man, this man's finger would--he would just--he knew where all the buttons on a twenty-four track board was. That's how brilliant I mean his--and his hear was so uncanny, I mean he could hear a note off. I mean what a beautiful (laughter) human being he was. Joe Adams, with him I mean it was just like a match made in heaven, but it's the same--I mean this man would just--just to see him walk down there, get on the board and be energized and can see him, his fingers just--I mean I had eyes and I have to look to see which way the to put a button, man. But here's a guy, you know--and another great relationship other than Joe Adams is Mr. [Charles] Bobbit and James Brown, who have been together for like forty years, you know. James Brown and Bobbit, I mean here's again two black managers who stayed with their act and their act was good for them, and they have moved forward. So it's a very, great thing-- Story_ID: 277027 Speaker 1: But anyways, so in terms of Capitol [Records] and all of that, then eventually they had a--a collusion against me, and this is when they had to hire Reggie Lavonne who was the black PD [program director] who was a buddy of mine and who was a West Indian, he was now vice president of black division and then he fired me. Because he had--they forced him because it was too much dissent in the ranks 'cause the white people complaining. Speaker 2: Now this is in nineteen what, this is in late '70s [1970s] or early, what? Speaker 1: Yeah, in the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then--so then after the incident with the fact that I you know I had no money and was driving the bus after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're telling us about the ambulance but-- Speaker 1: The ambulance, yeah. Speaker 2: So you were driving, yeah. Speaker 1: So now I'm driving the ambulance and in three weeks I become a teacher. So they say, "Well hey you know, you make another twenty-five dollars, we have to train people, right?" I said, "Fine, no problem." So I take this brother and we go up to the third floor and we rolling out this--this woman and he says, "Hey man, I can handle it, I'm a big dude." I said, "All right, all right, all right, no problem." He takes her and he puts her on the first step and all of a sudden it--he can't hold it, and I'm at the front, so I have to turn around, man and I turned around and I'm holding the thing, trying to hold her, and he's struggle with it. And we struggle and we get her down to the first level and that time I collapsed. What he didn't realize was that the woman was like almost three hundred pounds but she had a cast, a cast on the leg over the blanket, which was another hundred, some odd pounds. So she was pretty heavy on that wheelchair, but he would you know this you know. He didn't examine nothing you know, said I got it man, don't bother you know. So then he had to pick me up and take me to my house because I couldn't drive, 'cause it was stick shift, I couldn't--I had no legs. So he took me home and he continued on and--so I'm laying at home-- Story_ID: 277028 Speaker 1: And I'm saying God--that night man I was on my knees--I said, "God, something you gotta do something for me, man I mean it's just--it's--you know I made five thousand dollars a week and I've made million dollar deals. I'm driving a bus for a $125, it's fine, it doesn't matter. But I need a sign, dear Lord, please, I need for you to help me," and--so I stayed there and then I got a call out of nowhere from a guy that said you know I've been trying to find you. I said what are you talking about? He said you know I knew you were an actor and they're looking for a doctor for 'Guiding Light,' they want an Asian doctor and I recommended you, man. And I don't know if it's still available but are you interested? I said I need work so I hobbled over there and I got the job, paid me four hundred dollars for the day. Speaker 2: This is a soap opera, the 'Guiding Light.' Speaker 1: The 'Guiding Light' in New York [New York]. Speaker 2: On CBS. Speaker 1: Yes, CBS. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: On CBS, they paid me four hundred dollars for the day, got another day out of it, and then I said you know what, maybe the Lord has answered my prayers. So then I--I never did extra work in my life, never did extra work, but as a SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] member, in New York you can do extra work under SAG jurisdiction. So on that show, I had met--I went back another day and I met somebody and they said well there's this casting people they let you do extra work, and I called up and the lady says I can get you two or three days a week, so I got--I got about four days in a--in a--as an extra making eighty dollars a day. And then the next thing I did was that she said you know if there's any little acting roles, which she didn't know I was an actor, I wouldn't tell anybody, you know what I'm saying? Just another Asian face somewhere you know what I'm saying? So I said okay and then I decided and God said to me you know what, you need to get out of town, you need to do something. So I went and I auditioned for a play and it was a three character play, and it was called 'The Interview' [Thom Thomas]. And in this three character play, the Japanese kamikaze pilot who got rescued--in the whole play he says no words and the lead is--is a--it's a Renaissance man in Rome [Italy] and this American comes to visit him and this is all a three character play. And it was gonna be in Chicago [Illinois], would pay $450 a week, and I would get a chance to get out of town and I took it. I was out of town for six weeks, man and two weeks rehearsal, and I got my life back together; you know I really thought about all of this and whatever. And I needed to get out of town anyways. So when I came back, I registered with the--with the casting people and then I don't know how I got, but somebody told me they were auditioning for 'As the World Turns,' they wanted a doctor. And I went down and they liked me and they said will you--we will take you to the networks, I said all right. You know, 'cause I really didn't care, I read for them and I was an extra on a--on another show, and then I called them up and they said, oh, we want to tell you we signed you. I said, what, yeah; we'll pay you six hundred dollars a day, minimum of four days a week and want you in a five-year contract. I said, "Me?" "Yeah, you." I went and I signed at CBS, 'As the World Turns,' (laughter) as a regular character. All of a sudden I'm making a minimum of three thousand dollars a week, man; I mean it was funny. It was amazing. Story_ID: 277029 Speaker 1: Before that, I tried to get on the board of SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] but they wouldn't get me. They had like six--they had six people in their [SAG Ethnic] Minorities Committee [Ethnic Equal Opportunities Committee], which I would call--remember that, please God forgive me but six HNIC's you know, that was just there to play game. And they didn't want me 'cause I'm too radical, but as soon as I got the contract and the guild found out I got the contract, they didn't want me to join any committees, okay? They invited me to become an incumbent on the board, 'cause I was a high profile person now, right? High profile person, so I became a member of the board like that, boom. I was a National Board [of the Screen Actors Guild] member from New York [New York]. So then this is when I organized the committee (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year is this, this-- Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, '81 [1981] 'cause Norman Connors was '79 [1979], '80 [1980] remember? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: National Board of SAG. Speaker 1: National Board of SAG, 1981. Speaker 2: Screen Actors Guild. Speaker 1: Screen Actors Guild. Organized, and this is when I did this other stuff about all the committee I talked about before on the hand which you can cut in there, right? So then, I changed the name from the disabled persons to the performers with disabilities, 'cause that sounded raggedy, right? I reorganized the subcommittees. I had an African American subcommittee, Native American subcommittee, an Asian American subcommittee, and the Latino subcommittee. And they then we all met, okay? And I tried to energize New York to come together because this is when I had this--this access program for--for Madison Avenue, the Madison Avenue access program. So things were going pretty good and I was working at CBS, so now as a national board member, they flew me out to New York for the national meeting so I'm back in California, right? So I'm back here and then somebody introduces me to this black man named Travis Clark, and he says to me, you know, "Hey, you're excellent, if you ever want to come back out here, I'd love to manage you and be, right?" So I said, "Hey no problem, fine." He calls me about six months later, and says there's a starring role in this TV show, are you interested? I said "Yeah, well sure, let them send me a ticket." He says, "Well no, no, no, no, if you come here, it's gotta be on you." I said, "Well all right." So I flew out here on my own money, which I had, read for the role and got the part, just like this. I left Hollywood like fifteen years early, come right back with a starring role. Starring role like that, all of a sudden they offer me two other roles. Speaker 2: What was the starring role in? Speaker 1: It was a thing called '[Tales of] the Gold Monkey,' 'The Gold Monkey.' That was my whole new re-entry. And then of course, I--they had decided to drop me at 'As The World Turns' and I sued them because as the Asian character [Dr. Sam Yee], they had never--they gave me a wife and two kids, which you saw but they never gave me a house, an apartment or nothing. I was just there you know what I'm saying, they never had any intention, so I went and I filed a discrimination suit and--and later on, fifteen years later--twenty years later when they were re-casting something and they wanted to--they liked me and wanted to fly me to New York, they dug back up and saw that I had sued them and nixed me after I had gotten the go. See how this paper trail follows you. I sued them for discrimination and I--I didn't win you know what I'm saying but I put it on record that they had no intention and at that point they were not many black people at all. It was a couple on--on 'One Life to Live,' but there weren't any Asians, they weren't that many blacks on TV. But once I sued them, you follow me, they had to straighten their act, because you just couldn't hire family, sure the whole family and don't give them some basis for existence. I mean all the things in--my wife would meet me in a coffee shop or in the hospital, or I mean come on, where's the house? Speaker 2: Everybody else, they'd go back to their house at some point. Speaker 1: Thank you, everybody, okay. Speaker 2: Or their apartment, whatever. Speaker 1: But anyway so in '82 [1982] I come out here, boom, boom, boom, I'm working, I become a regular on 'General Hospital,' okay, a regular on 'General Hospital.' As a matter of fact--and then I starred in--and then that didn't last too long either because one the Asian thing was over and my--but there were people like Tia Carrere who played my daughter--granddaughter you know and other people. So she got her break playing my granddaughter. And then I starred in a movie called '[The] Hanoi Hilton' and '[Braddock:] Missing in Action III,' and I started doing more movies. I was a regular on 'V' you know I was a regular on 'Babylon 5,' I did some series up, 'Street Justice,' up in New York and all that stuff. Story_ID: 277030 Speaker 1: Since I left the [National] Board [of the Screen Actors Guild] in New York [New York] to move out here [Los Angeles, California], then I couldn't be on the board. Because I was living out here so I didn't bother with that at all, until 2000 when I got called back into-in 2000, there were no people of color on national television really to speak of. And that's when the coalition, the media coalition was formed which is a group formed by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], MANAA, the Media Action Network for Asian Americans, the Hispanic coalition and the Native American coalition. And they got together and demanded from the networks a letter of agreement that they would meet yearly and start to talk about diversity. Being on the board of SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] and also they elected me president of MANAA, which is the Media Action Network for Asian Americans. I've been trying to get Screen Actors Guild to conform to what their contract says, which is the portrayal of the American scene. If you gonna do a basketball thing in New York, then I gotta see enough black people. If you gonna be in Montana, I don't expect to see Asians or Mon- you know. But so do the American scene, that's all we're asking you. Your contract says that, then have meetings with the producers, look at the pilots before they come out and make suggestions. They have still not done that, okay? They have not conformed to that. Story_ID: 277031 Speaker 1: --You were I think getting ready to ascend to the head of the minority committee of SAG [SAG Ethnic Minorities Committee; Ethnic Equal Opportunities Committee]. Two thousand two [2002] you took that--you were elected, right? Speaker 2: So we had talked statistics before about African Americans to this point having but 18 percent of the jobs and the Latinos, five point seven, going to six point five and Asians are still there. And we talked the media coalition which was formed. Now the meetings that were mandated, take place yearly and one of the interesting things that you can see when you go to these meetings, they have them at Fox, NBC, CBS you know what I'm saying? And it's very interesting, ABC, man it's very interesting. I have to give credit to a wonderful woman, Miss Smith [ph.] over at ABC that has developed some wonderful programs that--that encompassed anyone who wants to be director, writer whatever. I mean their programs were developed, she's a black woman. Now what happened after the coalition (laughter) put the pressure on the industry in 2000, all of sudden, jobs opened up. And at the networks, three women, black women emerged as head of the diversity departments, one at Fox, one at ABC one at CBS, okay? And there was a brother over at NBC but doesn't have as much power because [Jeff] Zucker at NBC, and he likes to control everything. So they don't have that stature, but these jobs were created as a result of the pressure that was put on which was a very good thing. So now they are there trying to develop programs, trying to do whatever, whatever. But one of the interesting things, for example, in a meeting that I had with ABC with everybody else there, to show you--this is two years ago, the head of ABC you know they have all their statistics and all their people around you the head of development and whatever, whatever, and they're talking about 'Friends,' you know. Their shows and whatever, whatever, and then I--I had some statistics which I'd gotten, I said you know what, there's a cop show called 'Dragnet' in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I don't see any black cops with leads you know what I'm saying? And this is a black city, you know and there's a lot of Latinos, right, and he said you know what, they're--we didn't make the show, we bought the show. So the--so the creative content belongs to the creators, you know we bought the show that way. However, when the show reverts to us, we can make some changes, okay? I said well that's reasonable enough, right? Will you make some changes? Yes. Lo and behold the first episode out of the box the following season, was a fantastic story about an African American cop and an African American story, you know I was good, because they did make those changes. However, I also went to him and I said to him, "'Friends,' great show you know, but I'm from Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York, New York], man and I don't see--I don't know a whole lot of white people, you know and I'm looking at TV I'd like to see some people color that's my friends. I don't see any people of color in 'Friends.'" Everybody's looking at me; I said "I mean their humor's good, man but I can't really relate to that, you know?" You guys got the 'George Lopez' show, it's making money now you know and that's good but it's a--you know but I mean what about--so then I said well who makes the decision of you know when the shows are brought to you to buy and whatever? And he says well we have a group here, and I said who are they, five white guys and a woman. I said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A white woman? Speaker 2: Yeah, and a white woman. So how can you make decisions and show people of color when you don't have people of color making those decisions, even bringing the shows here? Everybody shut up. So the question is that's the formula, and until we get people into the positions that can make those decisions, okay? Story_ID: 277032 Speaker 1: Now we have a problem, now when we look at the 18 percent, it sounds good you know? I mean it's even more than the population, it sounds good. And it's improving, however (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're saying 18 percent black actors-- Speaker 1: Black actors, yes. Speaker 2: On television today. Speaker 1: On television, yeah. Speaker 2: As opposed to 11 and a half percent of the population that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: In America, okay. Speaker 1: But, when you look at it, and you talk to the--the there's some studies done at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and some wonderful people Dr. [Darnell] Hunt and you know and--and the Ralph [J.] Bunche [Center for African American Studies, Los Angeles, California] you know out of that university of that thing and Darnell Hunt is a fantastic man and we had hired him to do at SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], to do an overview of African Americans in the business and whatever, whatever and--but like when we get together, 'cause I'm also part of another organization in the city, UPN and WBN whatever swells those ranks because of all these black shows (laughter) that, are they meaningful? Are they funny? Or--what do they really mean? I'm not trying to knock them, they're shows on the air but when we look at the major networks in terms of, it's not 18 percent, you follow me? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And how important are the roles? Speaker 2: Well some have suggested that black actors are being ghettoized in UPN and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, of course, very much so, and I agree with you. But that's what I'm saying, it swells up so when SAG says 18 percent that just swells it up but that doesn't mean it's--they're meaningful roles, it doesn't mean that there's substance, so we still have a lot of work to do and I'm not rested with the 18 percent. Speaker 2: Yeah, there aren't many dramas on UPN or the WB. Speaker 1: Of course not, of course not. Speaker 2: They're all comedies. Speaker 1: They're all comedies, and they like ghettoized. I didn't want to say that, but you said it, so I'm gonna repeat it. Speaker 2: That's what people say. Speaker 1: Well that's the truth, I mean what else can I say? I'm agreeing with you. But I'm trying to say to you, what I want to see is drama on the major networks on--you know what I'm saying that would indicate and depict families. For example, Spike Lee, I gotta quote him. I wanna do the Jackie Robinson Story; man nobody would green light it. Or I wanna do another whatever, okay? Nobody would green light it, right? Now, and he says until we can get into the corporate boardrooms where we can make the decision on green lighting the projects, we are the disposal of the business, and that's the bottom line, man. Whitey controls it and as long as they control it, their taste and their sensibility hey, that's their thing man, but like I said with 'Friends,' I don't enjoy that, because I'm not laughing at that kind of crap, okay? Lot of people do, but give them an alternative, give them an alternative, we take this country and we gave white America an alternative to hip hop music and rap music, finally. In my era they didn't give R&B music that same thing, and now that white America has it, where is it? It is 60 percent of the market, they have a choice. Give us the same in the film business, give us an opportunity to tell our stories and let's see what white America will take. But as long as it's controlled, and you look at the statistics, white men have 60 percent of the jobs at Screen Actors Guild, man and the writers at the guild are primarily white. So what are they gonna write? They're gonna write what they think of their second hand knowledge of you and me and the Latinos and everybody else. So until we can have parity, all right, give me 18 percent of the white writers' jobs, okay? There's nothing wrong, so they have 48 percent so what? It's still the majority, you don't have to have 18 percent, this is what I'm saying. I don't want a little piece of the black market anymore. I'm an American and I want a piece of the whole market, the same way the hip hop culture and rap has taken it over, why not everything else? We're not trying to take anything over, it's your taste, man you have freedom of choice. Give me the chance to have some freedom of choice to put my dollars down on it. And if I don't see black friends on TV how am I ever gonna to tune on to it? Story_ID: 277033 Speaker 1: Would you say with all that you have said and all you do as an activist, are you prouder of your artistic accomplishments than you are of your--your activism, which one are you prouder of your activism or your artistic or--or does it make a difference? Speaker 2: I've been more satisfied with my activism, because I've never had a real opportunity to even have a great role. I've had some excellent roles, but I'm yet still to have the kind of role which I think that should be written role for somebody like me or for other actors. Black actors, Asian actors, whatever, we're still within this ghettoized kind of conception of what white America thinks of us. But as an activist, and as a loner, I've done the best that I have that my ability could allow me to do, so I'm satisfied with that, but I'm very unhappy with the fact of the way the business is. So the only way that we can do is that we have to take and that's what happening with the--from the black point of view. They've revitalized Steven Seagal's career by putting him with a black rapper, right? I mean--I mean the market place is now moving where they using that type of force. So what is happened from the black movement, and I have to thank the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] because they put an awful lot of pressure on the coalition, okay? From the full knee down and the days in the past when I got together even with the NAACP back in New York [New York] to try to get some people introduced back here in Los Angeles [California] at Paramount [Pictures]. It's been a constant--you got to keep at it, man you got to keep at it and. For example, well look what Denzel [Washington] or Halle Berry, I mean where they at right now, they won two Academy Awards [Oscars], it's almost like the kiss of death. Other people moving on when last, I mean you know, it's the question here is until we can get the exposure, the proper promotion and the belief in the product so that the larger market place can make the decision, then we are unsuccessful. The whole trick is to take the product whether it be a film or whether it be music and say an expose it to the public and let them make the decision. That's all I want, and if I bomb, I bomb. Speaker 1: In order to get that, do you suggest that we continue to organize and-- Speaker 2: We have to organize. And what black America is doing is that it is energizing the Latinos, it's even energizing the Native Americans and is bringing together the Asians. The problem that the Asians have and the other groups have is very simple. As an African American, you have two things, you have color and you have the English language, right? You've got that, that's important, the Latinos have language and they're Latinos, it doesn't matter where there at, what color they are, right? Native Americans have a deeper problem 'cause I have faced that problem when I was running their subcommittee. And trying to get them together is that they have all these different tribes and they all hate each other but I--I formed a council in order to have a president of the subcommittee chairperson I made a council. So that because the only thing that's common to natives are--is a tribal council. So I had a tribal council to run their subcommittee until they elected someone. Speaker 1: They had a--there's an interesting--I guess in 1997 or so--or is it '95 [1995] or '96 [sic. 1992] that did a rerun, I mean a remake of '[The] Last of the Mohicans,' and I noticed for the first time you had all Indians [Native Americans] playing Indians. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In the movie. Russell Means is even in it, Dennis Banks (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Russell Means, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Wes Studi. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I think that they--ABC just had a miniseries that didn't do too well but I think that--I think you know stories from people of color will start breaking through-- Story_ID: 277034 Speaker 1: Now with the Asians they have the biggest problem. The problem is that there are fifteen major Asian groups they don't have the same language. Japanese is different from Korean versus Chinese versus Filipino versus Thai, so they're all different. So there's several different--fifteen different nationalities, different origins. But what's happening is that the young kids are coming together, they are breaking down those racial barriers, okay, and they coming together. They coming together with hip hop, man they come together with rap, they come together with the black culture. They wearing the clothing like the white kids are. You know what I'm saying? They are taking on and they are saying--for example, when I had an Asian American subcommittee meeting, at SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] and I have 125 young kids saying I want a job, man and they speaking up, the Asian has been in the past kind of docile, they don't--they don't speak up, they don't burn, they don't riot, they don't rape, so therefore, they the molded minority. And I don't get along with Asians 'cause I don't have that mentality, they sense it me--and immediately, he's not Asian, man. You know because I'm ready to blow up and be radical and they're not that way. So, it's--but the younger kids are becoming that way, and I'm reaching out, I'm trying to help them, you follow me? I mean I belong to the US ChinaAid society, which is important, I belong to--I resigned as MANAA, the president of Media Action Network for Asian Americans 'cause I don't have the time for do that. I'm not on the board of SAG anymore; I belong to the--it's--it's the Los Angeles commission on--on human rights, which I think is important, I support UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] when they have their different seminars and relationship to diversity, 'cause I think that's very important to come from an academic point of view. I started the-the--before I left SAG, the showcases between the networks where people of color, different groups come before they select ten of sixteen people, and they showcase them. And they do get jobs, that's just the beginning, it doesn't mean that much because--but it's the beginning. Speaker 2: And you talk about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The question is--huh? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The question is, is that the portrayal of the American scene is still the important thing. For example, they had two shows, medical shows in San Francisco [California], and San Francisco has 25 percent Asian population. According to United States government, 23 percent of the people in the hospitals are Asians and yet still there was only one Asian role, and she was a half Asian woman to make love to the white doctor. Now, that's not portraying the American scene. In Los Angeles [California] the Filipino nurses and the Asian nurses and the Indian nurses represent maybe 50 or 60 percent and they're not shown. And--and the sad comment is that I want to finish this by saying we're all human beings we're supposed to come together. And when you deny the access of little white kids in--in Montana someplace that's isolated, and they don't see an Asian doctor, an Indian doctor, black doctor, somebody they--they don't relate to them. So then when eventually--and statistics have proved that when you mix kids interracially, it triggers mechanisms for them to start to think how to react to become better human beings. Because they're forced to deal with these issues, so if--if a kid is in Montana and--and they see this Asian doctor whatever, and say who is Ma, strange guy, oh, he's an Asian doctor. What's an Asian doctor? Oh, really, so that it's the introduction and that's what a picture, like Confucius says worth a thousand words. And we need to show these pictures positively and as often as possible within the parameters of the portrayal of the American scene. I do not expect to see eight Chinese basketball players in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York, New York], man, it ain't, don't work that way, okay (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can I ask you-- Story_ID: 277035 Speaker 1: I have two questions in terms of being (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, great. Speaker 1: --an African American playing--you're Asian but you--you're more of an African American culture, but how do--have you learned anything about--anything more about being Chinese from playing these roles? I mean--I mean has it--has it forced you to kind of like learn more about Chinese culture than you could learn from your father [Henry Aleong] in Trinidad [British West Indies; Trinidad and Tobago]? Speaker 2: Interesting question. I am considered one of the bad guys in--a real bad guy, man, I always play the real bastard, you know. I torture people and--and in 'Hail to the King' [sic. 'Farewell to the King'] I ended up being a cannibal you know and I thank the Lord that they had all these bad Asians (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the movie with Nick Nolte, 'Hail to the King'? Speaker 2: With Nick Nolte, yeah, right, anyways but I played as a human being, I don't play as an ethnic. When they try to box me into saying or being an Asian, okay, and by playing it this way and they tried to sub--tell you like in the beginning when I said Asians don't hold hands and all that stuff you know. Hey man, they wouldn't have two billion Chinese from not holding hands, they don't get pregnant by excuse me whatever saliva whatever. They got to do something, they gotta love. Speaker 1: Do you get feedback from the--from the Asian community about the roles you play? Do they say they like this, but don't like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, they don't, I--I--I'm not-- Speaker 1: I mean they must recognize you at some point, and they said well I like this or I didn't like that, do they ever talk-- Speaker 2: They not formally together yet, that's the problem. Speaker 1: Okay, but individuals don't even (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they not really into groups, per se, they now becoming into groups. One of the things I was going to say to you is that interestingly, the internment camps for the Japanese, the young film makers, Visual Communications [Los Angeles, California] which yearly have shows, a lot of the young Japanese are making films about their--their grandfather's, their father's experience about the camp. What's driving the Korean community are the Watts riots, for example, I--we just had a little contest and there were like five girls, Korean women doing about the Watts riots. That's a very defining moment for them, okay? For the Chinese, you cannot name me one Chinese American actor or actress who can green light any project, name me one? Speaker 1: I don't know really. Speaker 2: There aren't any. Jackie Chan, he is Chinese, Chinese. He was a star true in fact is a star in his country. Jet Li is a star in his country, okay? Now, Bruce Lee had to go to China, 'cause he couldn't get a job, and my good friend, David Carradine stole 'Kung Fu' away. Now, the other question is, name me one Mexican American, or Latino American, young person, not one. You name me one, you name me one that can drive any movie here, not one, so that's not next challenge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There not any, they've got--you name me, can you? Speaker 1: No, I don't know. Speaker 2: There aren't any. Speaker 1: Now I was gonna ask you this question too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay say the question is that on the black side there is. On the black side there is because they're making movies and they have an audience and--but you know what's interesting BET for the first time after they were bought after three years is finally gonna do some black projects. Which is interesting call, right? But for three years after it was bought by a white consortium (laughter) they didn't make any product, but now they say they gonna make some. Story_ID: 277036 Speaker 1: --I wanted to ask you this question we discussed in the break and that was what do you hear in certain situations when people assume you're an Asian and not black about black people? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, oh, well-- Speaker 1: And can you tell us some stories--I mean a story about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know--you know like in the record business, you know a lot of things you come into budgets you know. And you talk a lot of things and a few say, "Hey man, and the niggers don't need this kind of shit," excuse my language, please you know. I mean--you know I mean you know they need the money, man, you know, I mean it's all this negative connotations, it's always coming down, you know. And I'm listening, I mean, you know and you know I mean I just can't jump and say look, "Shut your god dammed mouth you know, you stupid," but you know what I'm saying? But you understand and it is--it is interesting to peep their show because they're naturally assume that I'm not black and you know and being Asian you know we're molded minorities so we don't say anything or whatever, whatever. But white people have a different point of view, you know what I'm saying? And when there were black people they take on another point of view. They become politically correct, but basically, fundamentally, there such a long ways to go because they're just compromising it being politically correct. They don't really feel that, okay? Now there was a thing on television, which was interesting where a white family moved into a black neighborhood and they were struggling, man struggling, the white kid was being picked upon all the time. And the black family didn't think it was gonna work but the study psychologically proved that the white kids and the black kids were better off because they interacted with each other, they had interpersonal relationships and eventually, it helped and it's--and they did studies with the brains and stuff, man to show where it was activated more. That this is the way to go, not the separation, and I think that--I think that as we do more of that and as the older people fade away and all of that, you know what I'm saying, it's that we will come to realize that we're all human beings, as I said before. Do unto others, as you have them do unto you. Speaker 1: It's an educational (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's an education, yeah. Speaker 1: --problem, yeah, yeah-- Story_ID: 277037 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? I think you've alluded to a lot of them, but-- Speaker 2: I think what I see, and I'm very encouraged, for the first time, I'm seeing commentators on CNN and different stations that are just not news, they're discussing stock market, they're discussing political points of views, they are becoming part of Americana in terms of what's going on, okay? That's quite encouraging in the fact that they're just not pigeonholed for being on the news or whatever. I'm energized when I talked about before, when I see the Nickelodeon awards [Kids' Choice Awards], where Usher is favorite. Where Little Bow Wow's TV show, man and you see all these hundreds of white kids you know just loving the show, okay? And with Nickelodeon there were--there were not--primary it was like, what, about 90 percent white anyways, versus 10 percent you know. And you have all these screaming kids for all these black actors and I think it's an interesting time that, that generation, I think will be almost be colorblind. See I think that's where we have to move to, I think as we slowly move towards the penetration. For example, look at a very kind of a strange dynamic. You have all these white kids rooting for Shaq [Shaquille O'Neal], okay, rooting for great black basketball players and football players, but yet still in their homes, it's shut off. I mean it's a weird dynamic that's happening. So, but I think--when I look at Nickelodeon, I don't think they see Usher, primarily as just a black singer, that's it. Or Little Bow Wow as a black performer, I think they're seeing him as an equal. And I think that's where we have to come to. See we have to come to--so what has made this progress move very rapidly, is not exponentially yet is the dominance of black basketball players, you see them, right, black baseball players, black football players, right? What you have is a constant bombardment every--it's not just seasonal anymore, so you're seeing that dominance in sports there. Now you beginning seeing commercials, now you beginning to see on the news, now you beginning to see in the dramas, you follow me? So it's a constant reminding and when I see is happening, they're not just putting blacks in the commercials, just for the sake of color. They're becoming part of--and that is something that was not possible a few years ago. It was just a matter of color. Story_ID: 277038 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything that you've done to this point, would you do any major thing differently? Speaker 2: Yes, I would. I would tell all the young kids today that, you know you can never legislate decency. You cannot legislate decency; you must be decent at all times. And that decency comes from within, saying that understanding that we live in a world that's ever changing, and we must understand what those parameters are. I made a very basic mistake by isolating myself, there's a lot of good to it. Because it has prevented me from getting infused with negativity and all a lot of things that are bad. But for the young people today, if you wanna be in show business, learn everything that you can, not only be an actor: learn about what the writing is; learn about what the producing is; learn about what the cinematography is. Learn everything that you can about the craft, whether it be acting or whatever, because and what you will do is that you expand your ability to network with your own peers and all these different subgroups. My mistake is that I never network with anybody, now at seventy years old; I've taken more meetings in one month than in fifty years. Because I have to understand that this is the way in which the business is, it doesn't mean it personally affecting, you know what I'm saying? But it's important that you understand, now one of the things is you cannot create unless you're free, you cannot create unless you're free. When Michael Jordan goes to that basket, everything that comes in front of him, he has to create, he cannot think about, he's got to pay this bill or he's got to take his daughter there, he has to become completely free. And he just moves through those obstacles in such a way to be free to dump the ball. When you're acting, when you're singing, whatever business you do, you must be so concentrated, that's easy to say. But you must be free in order to create. So what you're looking for in life is to find within yourself that unique intangible quality because God made each one of us different. Look into yourself, start to develop from a little tiny seed, what you are, who you are, don't be afraid. You know if you have to ride a bike you fall down a few times, but you get up and you get stronger. And the obstacles in life is just a lesson for you to get to another level, so that's the key. To me the key is understanding yourself, and then putting yourself in the proper perspective to understand what the parameters are. Look at them, analyze them, get help to try to break down the barriers, but the barriers are within you. And you need to clear the cobwebs up, and you need a mirror, all great actors need a director, right? All great actors need a director to reflect back. But they're not doing--the director can tell them what to do, but they still have to do it, right? The only thing you have is this, is your instrument, this is my instrument. This is what God gave me, this is what I was born with, it grew a little bit, and then it's gonna go to dust to dust and ashes to ashes, it's all over, and we're gone. And you only hope that you can leave behind something that someone else can pick up and run with it, so that we can move the human race a little bit better to co-exist, to co-exist. That's all I ask is can we co-exist as brothers. We're all human beings. Story_ID: 277039 Speaker 1: Do you have any future goals as an artist? You're a good actor. I've seen you, you're a good actor. So you're an activist, but you're also a good actor. What are you--you're also making documentaries, you're trying to produce projects. What are your future goals as a--as a artist? Speaker 2: I have a project called 'Chinaman's Chance[: America's Other Slaves]'-- Speaker 1: That doesn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It takes place in--huh? Speaker 1: I said you know traditionally that does--that just not much of a chance, according to the (laughter). Speaker 2: That's exactly the point (laughter) it's a Chinaman's chance and it takes place in 1866. And the opening shot is that of a Chinese man hanging on a rope, pushing dynamite into a crevice, attaches the fuses, lights it, pulls on the rope to be pulled up. And the guy at the top who is a mixed blood African American, Native American says to the white guy, "Come on let's pull him up." He says, "Hell we don't need his kind, he's trying to make more money than us, he's a troublemaker, hell with him." Spits on him, and we follow down the spit hits his head, guy trying to--screaming the--the dynamite is lit, he's trying to get up, and it blows up and the smoke forms and it says Chinaman, and you hear the voice say, back in the day, when you didn't have a chance in hell, you had a Chinaman's chance. And it talks about the immigrants coming to this country. Now, it's a story about the Chinese who built the railroads and their trials and tribulations and the racism and frontier justice. And they're running away--the boy's running away because he's been accused of killing a white girl, and the posse's headed by a man whose son really, a white guy, who really killed the girl. And he tells his son, "Son don't worry about dead men tell no tales." So you know what is mission is, to shut up these people. But, I give this young man, a Chinaman's chance to escape every time he has an obstacle. Okay, now, but what I have done within this film, which I'm positive will get to Sundance [Film Festival], and it's just gonna be a new kind of--it takes place in a western area. But the thing that's interesting about it is that I show--this was a Christian country in 1860s okay? And there's a lot of Christianity going on, so and it's PG film, there no cus- cursing in it, but there's a lot of from the religious right that will be very right. So you show the ladies of the town who are morally right and want to help the Chinese. So we have the good white people and we have the posse bad people. We have the good Chinese laborers and we have a Shylock Chinese man who is just importing those people and taking advantage of them, right? Then we have the African American, Native American who feels guilty because the brother was killed, the boy who's running away, his brother was one that was killed. So he rescues the kid and tries to help him, can't tell him and he takes a bullet for him, okay? And I wanted to show that fact that here we have a Native American, African American who is doing something positive in trying to help the situation in that time period. Then they run into a family that tries to save them when the posse is upon them, and this couple, it turns out that she puts them in an underground, like the Underground Railroad. It turns out that this woman is married to a Yankee and this bad guy comes up and she tells him to get off. And she slaps him, and he slaps her, and it turns out she's an African American whose light skinned. And he says, "Hey you, Negro bitch, man I thought there was something wrong with you," and he kills them both. While the Chinese are down below in the Underground Railroad. But she had told them to go to the Mexican village. So they go to the Mexican village, which is a Catholic priest and they try to save, so I show that now some good Mexicans. Then of course the priest cannot make a stand there because he's afraid that the village will--so he sends them on to the banditos, who help them, okay? And in the end, what happens they trap the bad guy and as the Chinese man is about to hang the bad guy, he's rescued by the white sheriff, who is on his side. They take the Chinese man back to jail, but the bad guy breaks him out and the end, the bad guy kills the sheriff, kills his own son, who was responsible for all of this accidentally, shoots at the girl's father, who raised the young Chinese guy for four years, so he's kind of coming of age. And in the end, the Chinese guy blows him away with a gun, which shows he's become Americanized (laughter). Story_ID: 277040 Speaker 1: Now the subtle thing about all of this is taking a Western in 1866 and putting these people, you know what I'm saying, together. Speaker 2: Who actually would be in the West in those days, anyway? Speaker 1: But you wouldn't see--it's written from a--it was written from a different point of view. It's not written from a white point of view, okay? And I think that if I can break through with this, then there are thousands of stories that can be told with people of color, taken into different areas and that's what I'm hoping. I didn't construct it because I wanted to get this audience and this audience, you know. I constructed it as a piece that I think that was possible within that period of time. So what I'm hoping to do with this is to energize people to think outside the box. You know, there's stories about a black couple that was trying to get grapes of wrath somewhere, you know? You don't always have to be in the ghetto, you don't always have to be with the big muscle cars and the thing, right? That's do something--so that's what I'm hoping to do. To energize for us to think outside the box and it's an interesting, I'm trying to do it like Sergio Leone, which created the new Western. And I've raised a little bit of money, but it's hard because people don't see the vision, you know what I'm saying. But I--I've got a--I'm halfway home. So I'm trying to create a new genre, just not--'cause you look at the black films, the same thing. I mean, I'm tired of this the language, you know, it's so typically casted, you know what I'm trying to say to you? It--it's the same thing like the boy has knocked up two girls you know what I'm saying and the baby, I mean you know, it's gotta be more than that. I mean life is just not about gang--you know what I'm saying. A young guy, I mean it's glorifying, it's glorifying some of these--not that it doesn't happen, but there should be balance. All I'm trying to say is let's balance it, let's balance it with some other stories, some other points of view, something that might titillate you something that might want you to know what happened here, you know? And not just buy into this concept of hey man, you know, you know, you know. I mean 'Boyz N the Hood' is great, okay? But I mean you know how much can you keep doing the same thing over, and over and over? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I love John Singleton, I mean I--I think he's great you know and thank God he just sold his film. He just made that he put his own money into. Speaker 2: That's important. Speaker 1: Yeah, three point five million he sold it for eight. So that's where the future is, the future is for young filmmakers and for the community to come together and start doing things, you know that mean a little bit more. To have a broader perspective put it this way. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So then when white people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure. Speaker 1: See it, they don't get reinforced 'cause I was sitting with some white people the other day and they were looking. Look at this guy he was--it was--I mean he had a baby with one girl and a baby with the other girl and he's still living at home, I mean, you know what I mean, it's you know what I'm saying? Well, come on, man I mean it's gotta be more than that not every--not every black boy does that. You know what I'm saying? Not everybody, you know what I'm saying. Story_ID: 277041 Speaker 1: Tell me about your own family. I mean, do you have children or do you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I had six children and my oldest son died of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. I have five others. I'm not very close with my kids. I have three grandchildren, but because of--I don't want to say, I can't blame I mean you know. I mean I love my wife, I didn't leave her, she put me out but I wasn't fooling around. But you know this society ruined my life, I mean I couldn't live where I wanted to live with, I mean her, her stepson when you know hit the gangs and the whole nine yards. I mean he wasn't that way, I mean I was forced into a neighborhood that I didn't really want to live in, you know. I--and then of course I got a divorce and my kids were young, so they blamed me. I--I did right by my kids I gave my wife over back then, over $250,000 in property and things and my head was messed up, and I walked out, I didn't walk out, I was pushed out. And then this is when I went got the job in the record business to run because I needed to forget about it, and then eventually moved to New York [New York]. And then kind of just was lost for a while, so it's difficult when you're--in your early twenties man, and all of a sudden you have this racial stuff hit you, you know what I'm saying? And since I was a loner and facing all these problems, I didn't have anybody to turn to, and that's what's important. That's why it's important to have your own peers and your friends that you can turn to. I didn't have any family, you know which my mother [Agnes Gonsalves Aleong] was back in Brooklyn [New York, New York] and I mean I couldn't turn to her. That's why I didn't go back and then I eventually made more money and shipped it to Florida, and bought a couple of houses and stuff. But that's not creative and that's not your passion to talk to you know what I'm saying that's. You need your own peers and if you don't respect them, then you live alone, and it--you know so, it's been difficult, you know. And that's what I'm saying to you, you know find people that share your passion. One of the stories from [Steven] Spielberg and--and [George] Lucas and all these people and Motown, they had a nucleus you know they had a nucleus that regenerated itself. The--the Philadelphia Sound they had their own, you know they had their own nucleus. You went to Chicago [Illinois], Leonard Chess and them they had their own little group. And Vee-Jay [Records, Gary, Indiana] with--with [Ewart] Abner, one of my main men--my [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler who I loved, man. And all those guys you know. And then you go to New Orleans [Louisiana] and they have their sound you know and Muscle Shoals [Alabama]. What it is, it's a group that kind of they love each other and they come together and they reinforce each other. I mean I--I've had the pleasure of playing congas with Wes Montgomery, I've had the pleasure with sitting in with Jimmy Reed, (singing) but anyways, so I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So things gotten better with your children over the-- Speaker 2: Slowly, it's getting better. You know time heals all wounds. But it's a--I don't know, it's--you know you get burned out you know. I mean I do more for people, I love to help, I'm still giving you know. I think the good Lord, says sow and ye shall reap, you know I've been blessed. You know I've been up and down, and blessed and continue getting blessed. Story_ID: 277042 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done so far as an artist and as an activist, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I would like to say that--that I made a difference in terms of the two businesses that I loved, which was the record business. I think I started something, I think I created some jobs. I think I got brothers positions, I got disappointed because they kind of like let me down after a while, but you know that's human beings, man you know? I'm glad that I was in the forefront of the business. I was glad that for example, that in the early--in the '60s [1960s], when I went to ARMADA [American Record Merchants and Distributors' Association] which you don't know you know it as NARM. And when [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy and I stood up and said that, we're not going to join in with you in terms of the free goods because you guys have thousands of dollars for promotion, we're just two small companies. We don't have any, so we need that free goods to help us to promote. And that was our ARMADA, people don't know there was ARMADA there was the Association for Manufacturers and whatever. Then eventually that crumbled and became NARM. And I mean it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What does NARM stand for? Speaker 2: National Association Record Manufacturers. And when you sit at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York] and you see Jackie Wilson coming back after he was shot and he's struggling to get the crowd up on their feet, you know what I'm saying? And finally--finally one young lady jumped on stage and instead of him pushing her away, he grabbed on to her and then everything broke loose. Yeah, but that's the struggle of struggling of seeing survival. And running with Sam Cooke when we were in Hawaii together and wondering how great a man he should've been and could've been and continued. And hanging with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], watching CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations] follow us. And I'm telling him, that hey man (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you travel around a great deal with Stokely? Speaker 2: I used to, and I saying to Stokely, Stokely you could be a vice president one of these days, man. And he said well what do you mean, I said I just need five billion dollars to create a new African American village somewhere, get us some land. And all I want to do is to create corn beef; he said what the hell you talking about? I said yeah, create corn beef. He said what does that mean? I said well, I'll bring everybody who wants to come out to this spread and say look man, ain't no welfare here, you gonna work, I'm a take your kids like the Jews and put them in kibbutzs from six in the morning until seven o'clock, you gonna learn a trade, you gonna be paid. We gonna make corn beef, it's not gonna compete against America, okay great. We need farmers, we need cows, we need grass, we need to make the thing, we need cannery. Then we get all this--this corn beef, then we need planes to fly it and we say made in the USA and we'll just drop it in all these foreign countries, man that need. And it's the greatest propaganda in the world, and what we're doing is that we're teaching African Americans, man how to become--every job that's available in creating this industry, and we didn't need no handouts, man. And if you don't wanna come, I said look brother, I'm sorry man, but if you don't want to, that's up to you, but if you come along, you learn a trade and you got something--you got something, your kids are taken care of. We're giving them great education, we have our own economy. He said you know Aki [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong], that sounds great, I said all right. But he said man, I'm--I'm going to pan-Africanism, so then he met Miriam Makeba. He said man I wanna take this shit worldwide, I said okay, Stokely, you go, and--. But I still have this dream about creating, I don't say our own state, but actually it was. Give it somewhere, somewhere, man. Isn't that a beautiful thought? Imagine what that would've been thirty years, forty years ago? Speaker 1: It has been a dream for a long time? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: It's been a dream for a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Going back to the 1700s. Speaker 2: Yep, yeah. And one of the things I have to say about West Indians is that you now when Marcus Garvey talked about going back to Africa, he was Jamaican, and some of the prime movers were people like Sidney Poitier, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, Carmichael, they're West Indians. We kind of grew up differently, we saw things a little bit differently, we are crazy, and we are wild, we were all brothers in the same cloth of the Lord. And so it's just that I--just you know other than the forty pieces and a mule, right? But--but anyways, it's coming you know. We may never see black reparations (laughter) but--but at least we're gonna get a piece of the pie. Story_ID: 277043 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That I came to this earth with nothing, I hope I left something, and I can't take anything back, you know. All I wanted to do was to make this a better place. Summation, the name of my company is called Mustard Seed Productions [Mustard Seed Media Group] and it all begins with a little seed that grows and grows and grows. And if we water it properly, it will grow. And all I ask is that you water us properly so that we can grow and become part of the universe. You know we came into this world with nothing and we'll go out with nothing. There's one thing I learned, and it's kind of a strange phenomenon but I think of Native Americans and I think that kind of a strange philosophy for me. But I believe this that the refrigerator was the greatest destruction creation of man, the refrigerator. And the reason I say that is because we teach man to kill and to hoard it and freeze it, that's the mentality. Native Americans kill and they eat as much as they need, they preserve their land and they move on. It's not a matter of how much trophy or how many food we got, the refrigerator mentality, the refrigerator mentality of this country and of this world is terrible. Because what we're doing is that we're trying to amass food, money clothing, cars, wealth and where's it gonna take you? And at the expense of other people who don't have any. So why not share it, I mean why not share it? We're all here together. This mentality is--is cruel, man it's--but this is what we have and it's--when--you know the flower power movement, you heard of that? Speaker 1: Yeah, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. All we wanted was to walk on Sunset Boulevard with wind in your hair and no shoes on and worry about the air that we breathe in. And the cops beat us over the head and tore down Pandora's Box, and we don't have that anymore. And now thirty years later, we still have problems with the air, and your kids and your grandchildren will be deeply affected. And it's a shame. Story_ID: 277044 Speaker 1: Starting on the left is my brother Joey [ph.] Gonsalves, next person is my sister Pearline [ph.] Gonsalves and then the next person is myself, and then next the person is my brother Korevius Lorik [ph.] okay? Speaker 2: Okay, that's myself and Richard Crenna. Speaker 1: Now what year is that? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: About what year was it? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, God, just hold it for a minute, I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: When '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Okay. Then this is in the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a picture with John Woo, the famous director and that was in 2002. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell us about this photo. Speaker 2: This is one of the characters when I was reoccurring character on 'Babylon 5' and that was in the late '90s [1990s]. This is--ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of myself and Pat Morita, this was done in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a picture of myself and Nancy Kwan who has starred in 'Flower Drum Song' and many, many movies, and this was done 2001. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a still shot from 'Farewell to the King' in which I played the last Japanese commander on the island of Borneo and this was shot in the '90s [sic. 1989]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of Sandra Oh, who was named the--who won the Academy Award [sic.] for Best Actress in Canada and who was just nominated for the film 'Sideways' for the picture 'Sideways.' And this is an episode we did for 'Kung Fu[: The Legend Continues].' Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself and Mako [Iwamatsu] who has--who was nominated for supporting [actor] Academy Award [Oscar] and has done hundreds and hundreds of shows. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Jesus, I forgot the young boy's name--Shabba Doo [Adolfo "Shabba-Doo" Quinones] and--okay, okay. This is ready? This is a picture of me and my main man Shabba Doo and his sidekick [Michael "Boogaloo Shrimp" Chambers]. And they, were of course the stars of Break Dance one and two [sic. 'Breakin' and 'Breakin 2: Electric Boogaloo']. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself and Ed Asner, he was president of SAG and I was a national board member of Screen Actors Guild [Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)]. And also we just finished--and we just finished starring in a movie called 'Missing Brendan'--'Missing Brennan' [sic.]. Speaker 1: Ah, there he is Mr. David Carradine, star of 'Kung Fu' ripped off from Bruce Lee and to myself (laughter). Very interesting photograph, I am sitting on cliff contemplating how to reach my son by a wireless communication (laughter) Ready? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: This is picture of me at playing small role called Charlie Chan, and young man, number one son his name is Steve Lee. I got him to play grandson in regular series called 'General Hospital,' with him and Tia Carrere. I can't see that, what's it say on the back? Speaker 2: It says Power Rangers. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, ready? Speaker 1: Okay. This is myself and one of the Power Rangers. It was fun doing that show ['Power Rangers Wild Force'] and he was an African American kid that got a break playing a Power Ranger. Story_ID: 277045 Speaker 1: (Speaking in Japanese) Me Japanese, businessman. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Very good. Speaker 1: I'm crazy. Speaker 2: Yes, but that's good (laughter) though. Speaker 1: Yo, brother what it is? Man this is me and my crew, my posse yeah. We are kind of like--this is a young group that I discovered and--you notice me in my dashiki, man? Yo, that was back in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Well, here I am in Hawaii with a--with a movie called 'A.P.O. 923' and I'm the star of the show, and I being feted by all these beautiful Hawaiians. But I don't see any girls, so anyways (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, wrong Hawaiians. Speaker 1: Here's Walter Brennan. Speaker 2: Ah, that is Mr. Walter Brennan. This was--I had the lead role in a TV show called 'The Millionaire' [sic. 'The Tycoon']. And he played the millionaire and what a cantankerous old man he was. Speaker 1: Was he? Speaker 2: This is myself and Shirley Yamaguchi [Yoshiko Yamaguchi]; she was the leading Japanese actress in the '50s [1950s] starring 'House of Bamboo.' And this was a show done written by Pearl [S.] Buck, who won the Nobel Peace Prize [sic. Nobel Prize in Literature], was written especially for 'Robert Montgomery Presents' called 'The Enemy.' Speaker 1: Try to explain this one. Speaker 2: Ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: Wooo (laughter) how, how, how, how. This was a small role I did in a western movie, me Kemosabe (laughter). Well what can I say? On the right is Tommy Noonan who was the vice president of Motown [Records] and of many companies including PolyGram [Records]. Of course in the middle is my main man, Get Down Mr. [James] Brown, 'Get Down On The Good Foot,' [sic. 'Get on the Good Foot'] and yours truly with long hair. Just like James, man we used to hand out together. That's a great picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good God. Speaker 2: Good God (laughter) yeah, hit it one more time. Here we are in the studio on the right is your truly. You know they talk today about all the hip guys in their jumpsuits and stuff. I mean this is back in the '80s [1980s] here. And here I am in my jumpsuit, right and my chains. And then the two engineers and to the left is Norman Connors. We're recording an album there, we did 'You Are My Starship' and I think this was Pharoah Sanders. This was the session with Pharoah, we're both in the studio and Pharoah was inside the studio. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This is the Mack [ph.] isn't it (laughter). Speaker 2: Good, good God Almighty what a pimp. Jesus I'm a pimp daddy with slanted eyes (laughter) with me and my dashiki running around. Well anyways, actually it's not a dashiki it's an Indian collar. Speaker 1: Nehru collar. Speaker 2: Nehru collar, yeah anyways. Anyways this is me, my, okay let me do that over. Yo, this is me man, with my Nehru collar and my flower power movement with my chains you know, trying to just fit into--into the flower power movement. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Seventies [1970s], late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Oh God. Well, this is back in the day in the '60s [1960s] when I had the number one record in Los Angeles [California] called 'Trade Winds' ['Trade Winds, Trade Winds']. To the extreme left the white dude is Huggy Boy [Dick Hugg] who was the Dick Clark of Los Angeles and that was his show and I. The guy in the middle was the promotion guy and I don't remember his name. But it was a lot of fun back then. Here am I, this is my office; I'm an executive at Polydor Records. As you can see, I mean I'm there dressed up in a suit. I mean you know, trying to be cool (laughter) got a record in my hand; kind of staged you know what I'm saying? What it is. Oh, god, back in the day. The guy sitting down is the promotion director, I don't remember his name. That's me standing behind him, and I decided to do a promotional thing, so we had a crazy lunatic in the guy to the extreme left over here is like the body guard. So we're trying to make an impression to get the record played, and you do crazy things, so one of crazy things, yeah. Oh, boy, well, this is just a headshot that I used an awful lot to get work. Course I wish I looked like that, but unfortunately, we all age, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 2: This is Jean-Claude Van Damme and it's from the movie 'The Quest' and which I'm co-starring with him and Sir Roger Moore. Speaker 1: You know how he holds his leg up like that I mean (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a dancer; he's a dancer, yeah. Speaker 1: I can't do it (laughter). Speaker 2: Ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm ready. Speaker 2: This is the famous Chuck Norris; I starred in '[Braddock:] Missing [in] Action 3' with him. I was the evil guy and then the general and then also in 'Walker, Texas Ranger.' Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let's come down. Speaker 2: This is Pat Morita and a guest and myself, Mr. [Kesuke] Miyagi, wax on, wax off, (laughter). Okay I--this is Mr. [Jason] Priestly from 'Beverly Hills, 90210.' I starred on the show; I played a duplicate of Mr. Ferdinand Marcos (laughter). Speaker 1: A Filipino. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, a Filipino, yeah. Which one you gonna go to? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The one to the right? Speaker 2: The one to the right? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's from--what's his name from 'Rocky'? Speaker 1: Carl Weathers? Speaker 2: Carl Weathers, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, no key, let me do Carl Weathers then, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. This is yours truly with my long hair; I was reoccurring character on 'Street Justice' with Carl Weathers. We shot several shows up in Toronto [Ontario, Canada]. Yeah, that's Carl Weathers. Speaker 1: I couldn't recognize him upside down. Speaker 2: Yeah. This is the main man here, Mr. Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.]. We were presenters at the first minority academy award film awards that we were trying to get off and unfortunately we couldn't get it off the ground. This is Sir Roger Moore, James Bond; he was one of the evil guys with me in 'The Quest.' And this other little guy right here is Christian Slater, he's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Star of 'The Name of the Rose.' Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, yeah. This here is--this is Christian Slater, I was co-starring in a movie called 'Kuffs,' K-U-F-F-S, and it was a lot of fun working with Christian. Yeah, and finally, finally this is Jason Scott Lee and myself. Jason was starring in 'Dragon: The Life of Bruce Lee,' [sic. 'Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story'] Jason Scott, 'Dragon: The Life of Bruce Lee' and myself. And one more, yeah, that is 'Farewell to the King' with my man, Nick Nolte and yours truly to the right and this was my stand-in to the left. And we were shooting this in Borneo, somewhere in the jungles. You see that long house up there? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, funny thing about that is that the Americans built it and it fell down. So they did not know to build over there, the natives had to build it and it stood up on stilts. So how do you like that, right? Nick Nolte. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Now you going to do this? Speaker 2: Oh, finally you know what that is? You see me in there? Speaker 1: 'Saturday Night Fever.' Speaker 2: There you go, 'Saturday Night Fever,' yeah, there it is. Speaker 1: Is that actually 'Saturday Night Fever'? Speaker 2: No, no, no, but that's one of the--see me dancing my white stuff man, hanging out? You ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well anyways, here I am performing singing and dancing, my hit record of 'Trade Winds' ['Trade Winds, Trade Winds'] you see the white tropical grove going you know and, that's it man. So thank you very much. Trade winds take me home to the land where I belong (singing). Speaker 1: Ah, this is one of America's finest actors-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tom Skerritt, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, what a great actor, yeah. Tom Skerritt, I did a show ['Picket Fences'] with him and Efrem Zimbalist [Jr.]. I'm playing an eighty year old man and Efrem is playing another ninety year old man and it was Tom Skerritt's show, he's a great actor. Speaker 2: Efrem Zimbalist from 'The F.B.I.'. Speaker 1: This is Steve Collins [Stephen Collins] and Steve of course starting in '7th Heaven,' and he's a great actor from New York [New York]. And we were palling together and, I just think he's a great human being. Speaker 2: This is another. Speaker 1: Yeah. If there is a picture that shows how I feel, it's asking the Lord for forgiveness and blessing us all and this was from a very small play that I did in New York in the '80s [1980s] before I came out to Los Angeles once more. And thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: God bless all of you--..