 Story_ID: 627196 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name is Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Jefferson, J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N, Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Jr. [HistoryMaker T.J. Anderson]. I'm named after a famous man, my father [T.J. Anderson, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And is there--now in terms of the Thomas Jefferson Anderson, is there a story behind the Thomas Jefferson? Speaker 2: No, everybody asks that question. In our family we have no relation that I know of to [President] Thomas Jefferson. But we do have a relationship with a family whose daughter [Nancy Langhorne Astor] went to England and became a Nazi. And the patriarch of that family had a black family, which were mixed with African American, Indian [Native American] blood. Speaker 1: What's the name of that family? Speaker 2: Now this is where I have to call my wife [Lois Fields Anderson] (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, we'll hold that, we'll just keep rolling and we'll just--but that's interesting. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, but--but she knows--she knows and when-- Speaker 1: We'll ask her during the break about it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 17th, 1928. Speaker 1: All right, and where? Speaker 2: In Coatesville, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, Coatesville, Pennsylvania. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a composer. Speaker 1: Aren't you also a retired professor? Speaker 2: I'm also a professor. Yes, uh-huh, administrator, lecturer, conductor, orchestrator. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: February the eight--18th I believe. I can't see it. Speaker 1: Oh, I think it's the 19th. Speaker 2: Nineteenth, okay, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And the year is? Speaker 2: Two thousand and twelve [2012]. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're in my home in Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Story_ID: 627197 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Surely. Speaker 1: They only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Brazil. Speaker 1: All right. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It's a phrase my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] taught me, happiness is a gift you give yourself and you give it every day. Story_ID: 627198 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [T.J. Anderson, Sr.] side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Anita, A-N-I-T-A, Turpeau, T-U-R-P-E-A-U, Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N [Anita Turpeau Anderson]. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know, my wife knows it, but she-- Speaker 1: About what year would you say, was she--she born in the--around the turn of the century? Speaker 2: Yes, around the turn of the century. Speaker 1: Around 1900 or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in, I think, Washington, D.C., I'm not sure about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your mother's family, how--how far back can you trace them and what did they do for a living? Speaker 2: I can start with her father, which was my great-grandfather [sic.]. He came to this country through Louisiana from South America. And the--the legend in the family is that his--he was a guide to Tennyson [sic. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow] in Louisiana when Tennyson wrote the line, "This is the forest primeval" ['Evangeline, A Tale of Acadie'], which is a famous line of poetry. He was his guide then. He--my grandfather was a Methodist minister and he had eight children. And all, all--four boys and four girls, all were successful. Two of them turned out to be ministers. One was a minister DeWitt [David D. Turpeau, Jr.], the oldest boy in California and the youngest girl, Leontine Kelly [Leontine Turpeau Kelly], turned out to be a bishop in the Methodist church. We all thought the son would be the bishop, of course we were sexist then, but she turns out to be the bishop in the Methodist church. Speaker 1: Okay, now these are your-- Speaker 2: My mother's-- Speaker 1: --mother's siblings? Speaker 2: --sister, brothers and sisters, yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: David D. Turpeau [David D. Turpeau, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Now is this your great-grandfather or your grandfather? Speaker 2: This is my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, grandfather, David-- Speaker 2: D--Dewitt Turpeau. And he was a member of the Ohio state legislature. He was in the House of Representatives [Ohio House of Representatives]. And he was also the pastor of a very large church, Calvary Methodist Church in Cincinnati [Ohio]. And Calvary turns out to be the home of the Underground Railroad in Cincinnati. So they had an underground passage in that church where slaves used to be hidden. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us your great-grandfather's name too, the one that was the guide to Tennyson? Speaker 2: I don't know--I don't know his name. It was Turpeaux spelled with an X, T-U-R-P-E-A-U-X, I know that, but I--I don't know any more than that. Speaker 1: So is this story about Tennyson like a story passed down in the family? Speaker 2: Yes, it's a story from the family, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, that's one of--somebody might wanna research it or something and, you know, and read about it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't know any other source. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's just a story. Story_ID: 627199 Speaker 1: Calvary Methodist Church in Cincinnati [Ohio] has an Underground Railroad (unclear). Did--is it associated with your family, the Underground Railroad in Cincinnati or did he come afterwards? Speaker 2: No, the--the Underground Railroad wasn't a railroad at all, it was just a passageway. And my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] talks about when--they lived in that--in that building, that church. The kids used to play in the underground hiding places. So they knew--they knew about the history of the Underground Railroad, but they didn't participate in it of course, slavery had been abolished by then. Speaker 1: All right, so I take it that they--they reached Cincinnati from somewhere else, from? Speaker 2: Well he [Anderson's maternal grandfather, David D. Turpeau, Sr.] pastored in a number of churches. He was in Washington, D.C., he was also in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], he was in Wheeling, West Virginia. You know how Methodist ministers travel around. He got to be district superintendent in the--in the denomination, so he continued to travel around, but not--but his home base was Cincinnati. Speaker 1: Yeah they get assigned different churches, right? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Bishops. So he was--was he Methodist Episcopal church? Speaker 2: Yeah, Methodist Episcopal, yeah. Speaker 1: He wasn't A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or the A.M.E. church, okay? Speaker 2: No. In fact my grandmother [Ila Marshall Turpeau] often jokes of when--when she got a pension it was very small from the A.M.E. But--but once they integrated the Methodist churches, her check went up (laughter), she got big bucks then. Speaker 1: Also, they were M.E.--A.M.E. at first and then became-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it--it integrated. It just integrated with the Methodist. So they just became Methodist, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, but before they were A.M.E.? Speaker 2: A.M.E., yeah, then--then M.E. and then Methodist, you know. Story_ID: 627200 Speaker 1: Is there any stories around his [Anderson's maternal grandfather, David D. Turpeau, Sr.] running for office, getting elected to the house [Ohio House of Representatives]? Speaker 2: Well he was close to the Taft's family politically. He was against drinking, although my uncles drank, he was against drinking (laughter). But I remember him well because I was a problem child. And when I was--I was an outstanding student 'til I got to the seventh grade. The six grade I had a teacher named Mrs. Ducket [ph.]. Oh she was marvelous and I was really a bright student. Then I went to seventh grade and all of it fell apart (laughter). And so I failed seventh grade, really. And the family decided to send me to Cincinnati [Ohio] to live with my grandmother. And of course my grandmother having political cro- clout, decided to keep putting me in this--in the--in the next grade since I had failed, and my sister [Ilanita Anderson Prince] was one year behind me. So rather than have me competing with my sister in the same grade, my grandmother told me at the time, she said, "Son I'm gonna tell you, I don't want--I don't want your sister to ever catch you in school." So she used to tease me when I got a Ph.D. [from the University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa]. She said, "I guess she won't catch you," you know (laughter). But that--that was--that was her legacy, putting me in--in--in the eighth grade. So I went to--went to Stowe school [Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, Cincinnati, Ohio] in eighth grade where I had an Uncle Rossman [Rossman Turpeau, Sr.] who was on the faculty there. And of course at that time I was interested in jazz. And my problem in Washington [D.C.] was that I used to stay out all night listening to jazz groups and how it did. I mean that was a part of my--my music education. And when I got to living with my grandmother, she didn't have any problems with my staying out. So I asked her one day, I said, "My mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] used to raise Cain about me staying out late at night and you--you just let me go and do it." She said, "I want to tell you--wanna tell you something." Say, "I know everybody in the street and I asked the man, I said-he [sic.] said, 'What is my grandson doing up there at the Cotton Club [Cincinnati, Ohio] in the middle of the night?' And they said, 'Sister Turpeau [Ila Marshall Turpeau], you don't have to worry, he sits in front of that band and that's all he does.'" And so--which was true, I mean I was interested in the music, I wasn't interested in the lifestyle at all. But she allowed me to stay in--and of course that saved my life, I mean in terms of my musical development and my musical experience and background. So I've--I've had--I've been fortunate that I've had sort of two tracks, one was a jazz track and the other was a classical track when I was a child. Story_ID: 627201 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, so did your mother, was she raised in Cincinnati [Ohio] or? Speaker 2: No, she was raised in Washington, D.C. And she went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] along with her sister Angella [Angella Turpeau Hayes], they both went to Howard. Speaker 1: Now, what did she major in? Speaker 2: English I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she use it, did--did she teach after she graduated? Speaker 2: Yes, she taught was--everywhere my father went she taught, yes. She was an English teacher, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any other--now this is quite a--a family here in terms of their, you know, they're quite a public family involved in a lot of things. What about your grandmother on your mother's side [Ila Marshall Turpeau]? Speaker 2: My grandmother never worked in her life. She was--it was an arranged marriage. In fact my Aunt Angella was telling us just the other day, she's ninety-nine years old. She was telling us that my grandfather [David D. Turpeau, Sr.] met her at the Union Station in Washington and since she looked like she was white he told her to go in front and get the cab and he would be carrying the bags so they didn't want any trouble (laughter). So that's what they did and then they went on off and got married. Speaker 1: So you're saying an arranged marriage, I mean what? Speaker 2: Hi--his sister--and my grandfather's sister knew her and she was--she was from--from Texas and my grandfather was from Louisiana basically. And when--the first time he saw her was when my--his sister did wh- in this--arranged wedding. Because he had a church in--in New York--in New York State in Mount Kisco, New York. And he--he thought it would be best if he'd be married, because (laughter) it was getting complicated in the church, as of, so he decided to get married. And when he decided to get married he asked the family and the family said all right we got a bride for you, you know, and that--that's the way that happened. And they were married for years, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She lived to be 102 I think, yeah, my grandmother. Story_ID: 627202 Speaker 1: Let me get your father's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: My father's full name was Thomas Jefferson Anderson [T.J. Anderson, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know, I can get all that stuff for you. Lo- Lois [Anderson's wife, Lois Fields Anderson] has all this. Speaker 1: Okay, was he born about the same time 1900s or was he older than your grandmother [sic. mother, Anita Turpeau Anderson]? Speaker 2: He's older, he was older than she was. But it was--I don't think it was before 1900, I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but he's around the turn of the century. Now, was--is he from Coatesville [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: No, he was from Lynchburg, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, Lynchburg, Virginia. Now, what do--what can you tell us about his side of the family from Lynchburg? Speaker 2: His father was the caretaker for the cemetery in Lynchburg. In fact recently when my son [T.J. Anderson III] went to teach at Hollins College [Hollins University, Roanoke, Virginia] he got interested in the family history. So he went to Lynchburg and while he was there, the woman that--that--that's in charge of the cemetery told him that we are honoring your fa- your grandfather--your great-grandfather. And--because he cared for the cemetery, he had contacts with both black and whites. He also had a store, so he was financially successful and he was also the first black elected to the city council in Lynchburg. Speaker 1: Now what was--what is his name? Speaker 2: Tom Anderson. Thomas Anderson. Speaker 1: So he wasn't Thomas Jefferson? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Just Tom Anderson. Okay. Can you go back any further than him? Speaker 2: No I can't. Going back to, to the family legend is that--is that we were related to Lady Astor [Nancy Langhorne Astor] and this Lady Astor was from Danville, Virginia and her father [Chiswell Dabney Langhorne] was a white Scotchman. He had this family, of course, would be black and--and Indian [Native American]. And Lady Astor turned out in the second--in the Second World War to go to England and support Hitler [Adolf Hitler]. The fam- the family rumor is that we were re- related to that part of the white Virginia and not [President] Thomas Jefferson. Speaker 1: So Lady Astor actually went to England to support Hitler, this is prior to the war I guess-- Speaker 2: Yeah World War II [WWII]. Speaker 1: --when Hitler was a--was negotiating with Neville Chamberlain and all? Speaker 2: Yeah that's right. She, she--I think she married someone [Waldorf Astor] then and that's how she went. But, but basically a Nazi, yeah. Speaker 1: Now this is something that in those days I guess there are other examples of Americans who supported the Nazis (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah. Some of them living today (laughter), still support (laughter). Story_ID: 627203 Speaker 1: Now your father [T.J. Anderson, Sr.], did he grow up in Lynchburg [Virginia]? Speaker 2: He went to high school--he went to elementary and junior high there, and when he got to high school, my father [sic. grandfather, Thomas Anderson] sent him to Phillips Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire]. Speaker 1: Now this is extraordinary isn't it? Speaker 2: Extraordinary because he realized the importance of education. And of course my whole family realized it, my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] and father's side, realized the importance of education as a way. Speaker 1: And your grandfather paid for this? Speaker 2: My--yeah he--he paid--he paid for it and my father often told me, he used to press clothes and things to make--make ends meet when he was a student at Exeter. He was a--he was a good athlete too. So that probably why they got interested in him, I don't know that to be a fact, but he did go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and he was captain of the track team. And he was also president of the student council. And my mother was a member of the student council while they were at Howard together. If you look at The Hilltop graduation book of their year, I guess it's in the '20s [1920s], I'd say about '24 [1924], something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah and the photo that us showed me of him on the track team as captain was 1924. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that would be in that, yeah, yeah. Yeah, so they--they had their pictures in and their participation in groups and stuff, so there's a record of that. Speaker 1: So what did your father study at Howard? Speaker 2: I have no idea. He was an educator, so I'd say education. Speaker 1: Education, okay. Speaker 2: Education, yeah. He went on from there to be principal of a school in Pennsylvania, Coatesville, that's where I was born. Then he went back to Howard as a member of the faculty. And then he went back to Coatesville. So I was--so I lived in both Coatesville, Washington, D.C. for a number of years, and then back to Coatesville for my high school education [at S. Horace Scott Senior High School] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 627204 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' talents, their dispositions, their personalities, their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I have the disposition of my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson], the temperament of my father [T.J. Anderson, Sr.]. I wish I had their both intellect (laughter), I don't have that, but they were both very bright, very bright. And I think that--that--that insistence on education is the thing that helped--helped us all to survive, I mean my, my sisters [Ilanita Anderson Prince and Jean Anderson White] and I both. Story_ID: 627205 Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have two sisters. Speaker 1: Two sisters? Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my--one--the one that's the young--the youngest, Ilanita [Ilanita Anderson Prince], she and I both went to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. Do you want me to tell you the story about how we got to West Virginia State (laughter)? Speaker 1: Well not yet now, we've gotta get you grown up, we gotta get through grade school and high school first. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Well that--that's an interesting story, it's a real interesting story. Speaker 1: Well I'll ask about that. Speaker 2: And then Ila married Thomas Prince, who she met in college. We met in college. And her husband became a member of the [U.S.] Foreign Service in the state department [U.S. Department of State]. That's a story you wanna ask about too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then my sister Jean [Jean Anderson White] married a Donald White [ph.] who was a graduate of Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], a veterinarian medicine graduate of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and a public health degree from John Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland], and worked for the state department--not state department, agricultural department, [U.S.] Department of Agriculture-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for years, retired there. Story_ID: 627206 Speaker 1: We always ask this question can--I know you grew up in two different places, but can you describe where you grew up and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: What do you wanna go back to elementary school in Washington, D.C., all the way back to there? Speaker 1: All the way back to childhood, yeah? Speaker 2: Okay. Washington, I remember we lived on Irving Street, 707 Irving Street. And I remember it was a black neighborhood, middle class. In those days everybody looked after everybody else. So if I got in trouble in school, when I got home I got a whipping (laughter). Which was the second one, you know. And the community was very much interested in the youth. I remember that very clearly. Monroe--James Monroe Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] was the school that I attended. My mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] has a picture when I entered kindergarten, me conducting the--what we would call a rhythm orchestra. And all they could was bang, you know, basically young kid--little kids. And a woman who was in charge of music in the public schools, I can't think of her name. Anyway, she, she basically ended, ended up in Canada. I knew her years later. But she predicted that--that I'll be a musician, just by what I was doing, pretending to conduct (laughter). Story_ID: 627207 Speaker 1: So you started young then? Speaker 2: Oh I did, I did, I did. Fortunately, this was when I--when, when all around me was classical music. My mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] remembers--remembers taking me to see an, an opera at the Watergate [Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.]. This is where the boat when it comes up the Potomac River and the audience is free. And we were sitting there and I asked my mother in front of all these white people sitting around us, "Is that what they wore when Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] wrote his 'Minuet in G'?" And she said the people looked astounded (laughter) that I would know, know that Mozart wrote, wrote minuets, you know. But, but she played minuets, she played Mozart, she played Haydn [Joseph Haydn]. She played mostly hymns and she was a good pianist. She never played jazz, she never played jazz. And I don't know for--well for her generation jazz was sort of the devil's music, but it wasn't for mine. And middle class blacks had aspirations and of course their dreams were set with Marian Anderson, Paul Robeson, Roland Hayes, these people that I--that I looked up to personally all through my life. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were exposed to their music early on then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite of that group? Speaker 2: No, I--I didn't. I started studying violin when I was about twelve maybe, maybe younger, much younger yeah. Speaker 1: Was that--okay. Speaker 2: This was Louis von Jones. He w- he was on the faculty at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. He--his name was Louis Jones and he went to Berlin [Germany] to study, so he came back Louis von Jones. And of course he had no chance of a career whatsoever in--as a violinist--as a black violinist in America. I mean, Will Marion Cook, the famous black composer who influenced Duke Ellington, he was same thing. In fact, there's a story about Will Marion Cook, you may wanna ask me about the violin later. Speaker 1: Well, what time should we ask it? Is it a good time now to talk--say it--tell it? Speaker 2: Well, what happened was that Will Marion Cook came back from Berlin and he gave a recital. And the reviewer said he was an outstanding violinist, the best Negro violinist in America. So he found--tracked the reviewer down and he said, "You wrote that I was the best Negro violinist in America." He said, "Yes I believe that." He took his violin out of the case, smashed it and said, "The best violinist in America," and walked away. They say he never touched the violin after that. This is just one of those stories, yeah I mean, I don't know, but. Certainly Duke Ellington is indebted to, to Will Marion Cook because he was a composer. And, and his family was disappointed that he wrote coon songs, this was a popular song of the turn of the century. And Will Marion Cook was, was committed to folk music, whereas they thought he would come back as a classical musician. Speaker 1: Right, I know he collaborated with Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] on occasion (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: I think it was the 'Origin of the Clorindy' [sic. 'Clorindy, or the Origin of the Cakewalk']. That was the collaboration, yeah. Speaker 1: 'The Cakewalk,' right. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Cakewalk,' yeah, um-hm. Story_ID: 627208 Speaker 1: As a little kid you listened to classical music and you (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, very much so. I listened to--in fact that's about all we had in our home, classical music. I mean I, I--and when I say classical music I'm talking about the classical music of Paul Robeson, I'm talking about the classical music of Philippa Schuyler, I'm talking about the classical music of people like James Weldon Johnson, Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, I'm talking about the classical music of William Grant Still, William Dawson [William Levi Dawson]. I, I mean there's a whole litany of people that--that were represented in my--who I consider myself a descendant of. In other words, I'm a descendant of this tradition. So, that's the way I fit in. Speaker 1: And was the violin your first instrument in terms of? Speaker 2: The violin and then the piano, and then trumpet, then saxophone, then bassoon, I mean that's the order that they, they came. Speaker 1: So when did you say you started playing the violin? Speaker 2: About six years old, six or seven, yeah seven. Speaker 1: You're about six--seven, okay. Now, this is both--you were living both in the Coatesville [Pennsylvania] area, right? Speaker 2: No, this is Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: D.C., okay. Then you moved to Coatesville? Speaker 2: I moved to Coatesville when I failed seventh grade (unclear). Speaker 1: Right, you--okay. Well what happened during that seventh grade period? Speaker 2: I discovered jazz (laughter). Speaker 1: That's basically it? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's basically it. And, and of course that's where my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] and I parted, you know. And I can understand what she wanted, but what she wanted wasn't what I wanted inf- and as it turned out it ben- it saved my life, really. I mean in other words, I'd have been just another classical composer, I mean and that's not what I lucked up on. I lucked up on finding the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.]. I lucked up on hearing Jimmie Lunceford, Duke Ellington, Earl Hines [Earl "Fatha" Hines]. I mean just all the big bands that came through there with package shows, I heard. And so when I went to Cincinnati [Ohio] and went to the Cotton Club I, I was prepared for, for, for the bands that I would hear there, and they were traveling bands and, and that was a great movement. In fact, I--I've written a piece called 'What Ever Happened to the Big Bands?' [T.J. Anderson]. It's for trumpet, saxophone and trombone, and it's a tribute too. It's published in Berlin [Germany], but it's a tribute to that music, I mean. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite band? Speaker 2: No, they were all different. Lunceford's band was a show band and Lunceford's band had great arrangements. Sy Oliver was the arranger of that band. And they could swing just about any piece, classical pieces, spirituals and everything. And it was a very interesting band. But the band for soloists was Duke Ellington, because he had Cootie Williams and the trombone player Brown, Lawrence Brown. Just, just a lot of outstanding, you know, players in--in his band. The alto saxophone player, Johnny Hodges was with him. And so that when I--when I thought, thought about soloists, although they were playing Duke Ellington tunes, the soloist really was the things I was fascinated by. In other words, that's improvisation. I just became in love with improvisation, and to this day I'm fascinated by improvisation. Speaker 1: Okay. So your favorite--was Johnny Hodges one of your favorite? Speaker 2: Oh Hodges, Ben Webster was in the band. So I mean there're a lot of people, there wasn't any one favorite. It was--I think that's, that's one of the things I try to avoid is having one favorite of anything. I think there's too much richness out there to settle in on one. And I think you can like two or three people for different reasons and all of them can be good. So I've learned, I learned at an early age not to settle in on one thing, you know, so. Story_ID: 627209 Speaker 1: Now what about high school, now where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to high school in Coatesville, Pennsylvania, when we went back, that's where I went to high school. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of the? Speaker 2: Scott--Horace Scott High School [S. Horace Scott Senior High School, Coatesville, Pennsylvania]. This was after I went to--with my [maternal] grandmother [Ila Marshall Turpeau] through junior high [Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], I went back to Coatesville to high school. Speaker 1: Okay in Coatesville. Now was this an integrated high school? Speaker 2: Integrated yes. Can I tell you another story about my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson]? My mother, speaking of integration, my mother was the first black to teach at the school. And of course we take great pride in integration, but, but nobody talks about the cost of integration to the black family. When she went to teach--and this was--I'd been away from Coatesville for years when she--when school was integrated. What happened was that they got in a class of the worst boys they could find and put them all in one class and gave them to her. Speaker 1: Okay so this is--they're trying to make it highly likely that she'll fail or so? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, of course she was very successful (laughter). I mean, that--that--I mean--I mean that--that's--as Tolson would say, that's the artistry of circumstance, you know. Speaker 1: I have to write that down, the artistry of circumstance? Speaker 2: The artistry of circumstance, M.B. Tolson [Melvin B. Tolson]. I'll quote him a lot, I guess, during the--our interview. Speaker 1: So, all right, so. At Horace Scott High School was your mother still there when you were going there? Speaker 2: No, no, this was years later when they were integrated. See I finished there in '47 [1947], something like that, it was '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: The student population when you were there was integrated? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: The student population was integrated? Speaker 2: That's right, there was no black high school. There was a black elementary school and, and junior high, but the high school was integrated, totally integrated. Speaker 1: Yeah, but the teachers? No black teachers(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No black teachers. Speaker 1: --until later on when your mother? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and I'd been--I'd been thr- I, I was out of college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] when they decided to integrate it and so it was years later. Story_ID: 627210 Speaker 1: Were you in the band in high school [S. Horace Scott Senior High School, Coatesville, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Oh I was a star in high school (laughter) in music, because of my background. I mean I was in the band, my sister played violin in the orchestra. I played trumpet in the orchestra. I had a little--little jazz band which was no good, but we imitated Louis Jordon and that was extremely popular. And of course at that time I was listening to Count Basie quite a bit. He played at our senior high school prom with Lester Young I might add. Yeah it was--it was memorable. I knew who was there, Jo Jones was on drums, and I mean it's just--I mean these are the experiences that you--that I take with me as a composer. I don't write like that at all, I mean I write my own music, but I mean that's a part--that's that one track in terms of the black experience that I'm--that I'm, I'm a part of and continue to be a part of. Speaker 1: It was Philly Joe Jones on drums (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Philly Joe Jones was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and he played--at the end of his life I think he played with Coltrane [John Coltrane]. Speaker 1: He's another one, right? Speaker 2: No this was much later, yeah, yeah, yeah. The drummer in Philadelphia was a guy called Coatesville Harris. He played with a lot of bands around there, but that was the drummer ahead of Philly Joe Jones, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So in high school did you run for class office or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, no. I ran track. I was pretty good at that. The second best runner (laughter). The best runner was a guy named Weldon Williams [ph.]. He was marvelous, but I was the second best (laughter). Story_ID: 627211 Speaker 1: Now were there any special teachers or mentors in high school [S. Horace Scott Senior High School, Coatesville, Pennsylvania] that you remember? Speaker 2: I remember Charles Keys in--in--in junior high school. He was the music director at Stowe school [Harriet Beecher Junior High School, Cincinnati, Ohio]. He was--he was marvelous. And then when I got to high school, there was a man named Mr. Zimmerman [ph.] was in charge of music and he was very supportive. Speaker 1: Mr. Zimmerman, okay. Speaker 2: Boy I come up with these names, hadn't thought about him in years. Speaker 1: Do you remember his first name? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: It wasn't George was it? Speaker 2: No. See I didn't know and I--he would always be Mr. Zimmerman to me, so I mean. Speaker 1: Did he have a long mustache? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. I know a Mr. Zimmerman. He was a music teacher too. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh. May be related, I don't know. This was in--this was in the late '40s [1940s], '46 [1946] to '50 [1950] something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: So, let's see, so when you were in high school you--did you plan on becoming a professional musician? You knew you were going--? Speaker 2: I knew I would be in music, I didn't know what, but I'd be in music. On the se- at my last concert I played the 'Carnival of Venice' [Jean-Baptiste Arban] which is a standard trumpet solo that everybody plays. I played it poorly, but everybody loved it though (laughter). Story_ID: 627212 Speaker 1: Well how did you come to go to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]? Speaker 2: John W. Davis, the president of West Virginia State was driving through Wheeling, West Virginia late one night and he stopped to get his gas at a station. My Uncle Rossman [Anderson's maternal uncle, Rossman Turpeau, Sr.] came out to wait on him and he said, "Boy why aren't you in college?" And Rossman told him, he said, "I've gone, I went to Clark College [Clark Atlanta University] in Atlanta [Georgia], but I just dropped out. I didn't have any money." So he said, "You come this fall to West Virginia State." So John W. Davis left and went on. And my uncle decided he would go to West Virginia State in the fall as the president suggested. When my Uncle Rossman was in line and coming up to the registrar, he had a Wheeling, West Virginia address because he was just there working in that gas station that summer. And he said, "I'm from Wheeling, West Virginia," and the registrar looked at him and said, "Boy you're not from Wheeling, West Virginia." And John W. Davis just happened to be walking by and he said, "Wheeling, West Virginia." And of course the registrar put him down from Wheeling, West Virginia which made it possible for him to pay a state fee. My uncle and his wife finished West Virginia State, my Aunt Tinnie [Leontine Turpeau Kelly] and Gloster Current [Gloster B. Current], her husband, finished West Virginia State. My sister-- Speaker 1: The famous Gloster Current who was from the New York NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: NAACP, that's right. The NAACP, that's right. My sister [Ilanita Anderson Prince] and I finished West Virginia State. I have loads of cousins that graduated from West Virginia State. So that set up a family tradition in terms of the Turpeaus and Andersons going to West Virginia State, and it served us well. In fact I have two degrees, I have an earned degree and an honorary doctorate from West Virginia State, which I, I feel honored to have. That was my second honorary degree. My first honorary degree came from Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts] and that was with Joe DiMaggio. You can ask me about that (laughter). Speaker 1: Well we can get to that later on too, but all right. So West Virginia State, now I've heard a lot about West Virginia State and what's going on there. Did you know a fellow named Gene Barth [sic. HistoryMaker Gene Barge] there? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Gene Barth [sic. HistoryMaker Gene Barge]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Saxophone player, played tenor sax. He may have been there after you. Speaker 2: Wa- wait, I, I knew from, from, from, from Norfolk [Virginia], yeah. James, yeah, Chess Records. He's my friend. Speaker 1: Yes, right, exactly (laughter). Speaker 2: I know him, he could play, he could play. Speaker 1: We interviewed him a month ago. Speaker 2: Oh you did, where is he? Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: No kidding. Oh yeah, oh yeah, he could play, he could play. Yeah, he was a friend of mine, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah he was telling us a story of Norfolk, his experiences with Gary U.S. Bonds, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh he--he was right up with Chess Records, I mean, he--I mean he--a marvelous musical instinct and a marvelous person, yeah. Yeah, I knew him well, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So he was just telling me all this stuff about West Virginia State. So you entered West--you graduated from high school [S. Horace Scott Senior High School, Coatesville, Pennsylvania] what year? Speaker 2: Fifty, no, no '46 [1946], no, yeah, '50 [1950], it must've been '50 [1950] I guess, yeah. Speaker 1: Let's see 19-- Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946]. Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946], yeah '46 [1946]. You enrolled at West Virginia State at '46 [1946]. Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946], yeah, okay. And then I finished in '50 [1950], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so. All right, 1946 West Virginia State. Now had anyone--okay, there were people in your family who were already there, right? Speaker 2: Well I only, I had an Uncle Mickey there and his wife. He turned out--he was a lawyer for the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] in Washington [D.C.]. And he taught law at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]. And he was there my, my first year--no, he had graduated, I'm sorry. No, no other relatives were there. I'm sorry, I'm wrong on that, I don't remember anybody. Speaker 1: Yeah, what's your Uncle Mickey's last name, was he a Turpeau? Speaker 2: Turpeau, Turpeau (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Turpeau, Turpeau. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Michele Turpeau. Story_ID: 627213 Speaker 1: Well, how did you like West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]? Speaker 2: Oh I loved it, I loved it. I was--there were two teachers, Ahmed Williams [Prince Ahmed Williams], Dr. Ahmed Williams and Edward C. Lewis, both became very influential. Ahmed had the men's glee club. I never sung in the men's glee club, but he, he was a--quite a supporter of me in the music department. And Ed Lewis was my mentor, because Ed Lewis went, after he left West Virginia State, he went to Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], got a Ph.D. then he took over the music department at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. So after I left Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma], I went to Tennessee State to join him. Speaker 1: Who were some of the students that were with you at West Virginia State that you? Speaker 2: The first black that played basketball-- Speaker 1: We interviewed him too (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh you did? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yes we did. I'm trying to think of his name now, but I'm coming-- Speaker 2: Earl, Earl-- Speaker 1: Earl Lloyd [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd]. Speaker 2: Earl Lloyd, yeah. I was in--in--in an airport once. Somebody came to pick me up off the ground and I just stood--I mean I was shocked, I mean I, I, I thought I was heavy, you know, but this--just picked me straight up off the ground. Turned around and there he was, you know, Earl Lloyd, yeah. Marvelous person, very, very nice person, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was Judge Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] there, I mean Damon Keith or? Speaker 2: No, I know who he is, no. Speaker 1: He's a little bit before you I think wasn't he? Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought he was after me, I don't know. Speaker 1: After you, maybe, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think it was after me, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, anybody else that you remember that? Speaker 2: Everett McDonald [ph.]. He--he turned out to be an M.D. and he's living in Arizona now, but he was a saxophone player. Edward Greer [ph.] was a professional arranger when he came to West Virginia State. He had arranged for Bobby Byrne, which was a famous white band. And he was a student at the time that I was a student there. And as I say, Ed Lewis had the jazz band. So we had--I, I wrote arrangements for the band. Most of my arrangements were really taken off, off the charts of Dizzy Gillespie's big band. So they weren't original charts at all. But I--my first arrangement came on, on--it was a piece called 'I'll Delight' [ph.]. And when I heard it on the radio the other day, my wife [Lois Fields Anderson] and I were driving, and I was telling her that was the first piece I arranged for the big band, yeah. 'Cause I, I enjoyed arranging, but, but that was not my calling. And I didn't know it then, but I was--I didn't know it until I got in graduate school [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], just took a course as an elective as a composer. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is--you're there like just at the end of the war. So a lot of the older guys like Gene Barth [sic. HistoryMaker Gene Barge] and some of the others, you know, were coming out of the war to school. So was it--do you think it changed the environment of the school to have these? Speaker 2: Oh we matured fast because they came back with great experiences from the war. And of course what happened was that a lot of, of these soldiers had an influence on, on the younger generation. And they--a lot of our soldiers were just common for, for members of our class to take ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. And of course a lot of them got killed in Korea. And I mean, I wasn't interested in the service at all. I mean, my son [T.J. Anderson III] was in the service in the [U.S.] Air Force, but I mean I, I just had no interest in, in, in military life at all. Story_ID: 627214 Speaker 1: Were you involved in fraternities or? Speaker 2: Well, I, I was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]. And of course I tell everybody the only reason I joined the Alphas was because my father [T.J. Anderson, Sr.] was an Alpha. That's the only reason I joined. But I, I, I don't think, I, I, I wasn't active. I haven't been active in that for years. I mean there are other ways I can serve in the black community I think are far more effective. I remember when I was in teaching in High Point [North Carolina], one of my first jobs. I mean I was active in the Alphas and the whole tenor of the fraternity was for a ball that they had and they exchanged invitations with other fraternities and so forth. But I mean, that--that was not my interest at all, not my interest at all. I mean I think the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] have done a better job of all the fraternities and sororities in terms of, of reaching back. But I mean we didn't--there was no reaching back that I knew of in Alphas or, or Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] or Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], any other fraternities. So I just--I just didn't have too much interest there. But, but historically the Alphas because of Paul Robeson and others having been Alphas, my father, that had a great influence on me to join. And of course my Uncle Mickey [Anderson's maternal uncle, Michele Turpeau] was mem- was an Alpha too, so that meant it was a family tradition. So I was tied into that. But I don't have any regrets by joining. My wife [Lois Fields Anderson] was an Alpha Sweetheart, she's an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], but this was at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], so this wasn't at West Virginia [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. But as I said I--fraternities ran short with me early, so I'll put it that way. Story_ID: 627215 Speaker 1: Did you ever have a chance to hear Robeson live on stage in person? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yeah. In fact--in fact my father [T.J. Anderson, Sr.] was a friend of Paul Robeson. We had a picture of Robeson in the house. And one of the things I remember clearly, my sister and I were talking about it the other day, that Robeson was supporting Henry Wallace [Henry A. Wallace] for president and came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And my father had rented a bus for the black community to go down to Philadelphia. And the black community heard that he was a Communist and all that kind of foolishness, and most of the people cancelled. My father took us, he said, "We'll go there if it's just--just the five of us in the family." And we went. We went backstage and greeted him. And Paul Robeson, in fact I'm right now working on an opera about Paul Robeson which is commissioned by a small opera company in Newark [New Jersey]. This is I can't think of the name of it now, but, but they want an opera on Robeson and I'm very much interested in doing it. So I've consented to do it, yeah. I think he's one of the great Americans, without a doubt, he's one of the great Americans. Story_ID: 627216 Speaker 1: Was there a great deal of trepidation around whether you were or were not a Communist in those days? Speaker 2: Well, well, well the word Communist never scared me. I remember when, my friendship with Tolson [Melvin B. Tolson], I learned a lot from Tolson. And Tolson used to talk about, about Chicago [Illinois]. And in Chicago, Richard Wright was there and he said that the time Richard Wright was there, that--that the Communists were the only ones you could have an intellectual conversation with. You couldn't talk to Republicans or Democrats about anything. They're so worried about who you're dating. I mean Communists didn't care about who you're dating. They would talk intellectually to him. So, so that a lot of people of, of Robeson and, and Richard Wright's generation, Langston Hughes, Be- I mean they had these intellectual con- conversations in Communist circles. And they weren't, to my knowledge, a lot of them weren't Communists. Some of them were, but I'm saying that if you wanted to talk about something serious, I mean you couldn't have it with a white person, I mean you forget it talking to a Democrat or Republican. So this is where the intellectual life comes into the black community through communism, you know. Of course, the word--the word never frightened me at all, you know. I believe--I believe--I believe in freedom, I believe in freedom of choice, I believe that any--if, if, if you're a democratic country, a Communist party is just like any other party, you know, I mean it's just it, you know. I believe that, you know, so I mean not that I would vote Communist any more than I would vote Republican now (laughter). I mean, just--but I believe I should have the choice to do it, I certainly believe I should have the choice. Speaker 1: But your father [T.J. Anderson, Sr.], would you characterize your parents as activists in terms? Speaker 2: Oh yes, they were definitely activists, yes. They were active in the community. One of the things my father had is a community school. He believed in--in Thomas Dewey that the school should be a resource for the community. The James Adams School [Coatesville, Pennsylvania] was a community school in which they had adult education classes. They had a sports league. They had a clothing and food bank where people could come in and get, get things. They had--the school opened as much in day and night for the--for the African American community. In fact, if there were a study made, I don't know whether there was or not, and I don't know if it's in Jeanita's [Jeanita W. Richardson] book ['The Full-Service Community School Movement: lessons from the James Adams School'] about my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] and father, but they sent a lot of kids off to college. Lots of kids went to college after. It was a steel mill town and nobody was going to college in large numbers, very few from the black community, but large numbers of kids went off to college from my father's administration at James Adams School. Speaker 1: In Coatesville [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: In Coatesville, yes, um-hm. Story_ID: 627217 Speaker 1: Now did you get a--have a chance to hear Roland Hayes? Speaker 2: Oh yes. In fact one of my last experience with Roland Hayes, Roland Hayes was in Boston [Massachusetts] and he--there was a reception for him at the--at the New England Conservatory [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts]. I knew his daughter Afrika Hayes [Afrika Hayes Lambe], I knew her. And I knew him, but not well. I didn't know him well. I heard him speak in one--he spoke at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] years ago. And, and one thing he said that really impressed me is that in the Negro spirituals there's not one line of vengeance. That's always stuck with me, not one line of vengeance exist in Negro spirituals. And when I saw him at, at this affair in his honor at New England Conservatory, I never will forget, I went--I shook his hand. He had my hand and he just held on to it. He didn't say anything, just had my hand and just squeezed it and held on to it. And I just felt so honored that--that there was some kind of vibrations going on, I don't know. I'm not a religious person, but some people say that's the Lord acting, but I don't know, I don't know. But I know he held onto my hand and I was deeply appreciative of him. I mean he's certainly been a legend in--in my lifetime. Speaker 1: Now how old were you when this incident took place? Speaker 2: Oh I was teaching at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] when that happened. Speaker 1: All right, but did you have a chance to see him when you were younger at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] or? Speaker 2: I--I saw him at Fisk and I heard a recital he had given in Washington [D.C.]. So I'd heard, heard him sing. And I, I read his book about the growing up in South Carolina. And he was--he was a small man and a gentle man, and the sense of dignity that he had, it was just so impressive--so impressive. I think that--that's, that's what I remember about him. His voice was a light voice, it wasn't a heavy tenor voice. And he sang German arias and art songs. He sang spirituals, he sang everything. And his diction was flawless. He, he had great interest in the race. I mean he was what Leon Forrest would call a race man. He was definitely a race man. Speaker 1: Okay. That means someone that's? Speaker 2: A race man is someone that--that has the destiny of the race at heart. And you--everything you do or can do is in support of the achievement of blacks in general. And I think--I think, at least I try to be, I try to talk to kids into going to college. I try to talk to everybody. I talk to kids nowadays, I meet junior professors and I try to tell them the, the traps that lie ahead of them to get tenure. I mean one of them just invited my wife [Lois Fields Anderson] and I up the street the other day. It is about being in a university setting and what are the traps as a black professor. Unfortunately, there are so few now. I, I came along and everybody admits this, we came along in the boom years. The country had more money and blacks had more opportunities. Now everything is being extracted, you know, attack on the poor to poor. I mean it's just--it's just--it's not the America that we, we thought we would have. Speaker 1: Okay now, was it in '46 [1946] that Marian Anderson did the concert at the-- Speaker 2: I don't know whether it was that year or not, but I was--I remember when she did it. Speaker 1: She gave the concert, was it at the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.] or was it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she, she sang at Constitutional Hall [sic. Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Constitution, okay. Speaker 2: --and, and the Daughters of the American Revolution blocked her, so she gave the concert in--at Memorial--Lincoln Memorial. And she started off singing, "My country, tis of thee, oh sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing." I'll tell you it was just--I mean it'll bring tears to your eyes. I mean I remember when my brother-in-law died, this is another story, you want me to save this for later or what? Story_ID: 627218 Speaker 1: So, at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] did they bring--when you were there did they bring a lot of people on campus to expose you to? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they brought--they brought a lot of people to, to lecture and so forth, yeah. One of the persons that used to teach there is a composer named Clarence Cameron White. He was a violinist and composer, and I remember him coming. And he wrote an opera with, with one of--with a French professor named Matthews [ph.], I don't know the first name. But anyway, he came to lecture and that was inspirational and of course we had other inspirational people come. Speaker 1: Now at this time just as a checkpoint here, do you remember when you were in college did you know that Scott--about Scott Joplin? Speaker 2: No. I, I, I knew about the name Scott Joplin, but the music I didn't know, no I didn't know that. Speaker 1: Did you even know about his stride piano? Speaker 2: I, I, I knew about ragtime, but that--that's all. I mean I knew Scott Joplin was a ragtime composer and famous, but I didn't know about it until much later. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted-- Speaker 2: The details, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to make sure, like I said. I know when I first heard about him they, you know, when they talk about that they said it was almost like a new discovery about him. (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, rag- if you--if you were into jazz you knew ragtime and you knew--you knew--you knew boogie woogie, you knew big band jazz and you knew contemporary. I mean, bebop, you knew that. Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm wrong, but I think I read that Willie "The Lion" Smith was a bridge between ragtime and jazz--modern jazz? Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't say you're wrong, but Will--Willie "The Lion" Smith was one of a number of famous pianists. And of course this was the time of Duke Ellington as a pianist. And there was James Ammons, that's the Gene Ammons' uncle I think. There was also Albert Ammons, Gene Ammons' uncle [sic. father], James P. Johnson I meant to say, Willie "The Lion" Smith. There were a number of stride pianists that played and this was mostly in Harlem [New York, New York] I might add. And str- what, what happened was that in ragtime it was note chord, note chord, and this is a German influence on, on, on American music. German marches, note, chord, note, chord, they called it oompah stop oom chord, pom--that's, that's. But the ragtime was left--was the right hand, this is African American, (makes sounds), all accent off the beat. Now to understand that accent--we've had American presidents, see (claps hands) [President] George Washington, George Washington, [President] Abraham Lincoln, Abraham Lincoln, Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman], Harry Truman everything going to beat. William Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], William Clinton, everything going to beat just like march, bom, bom, bom, same thing. But then you get Bush (claps hands), no, no, no beat, no beat to it. Yeah, but then you get Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and this is where it really gets interesting. Obama and Mandela [Nelson Mandela], Obama, Obama, the accents over here, Obama, Obama, Mandela, Mandela, the river in Africa, Zambezi [Zambezi River], Zambezi, B, you know, the accent is over here. So all of a sudden the African influence of syncopation is becoming--we--we've had it, but now we see it in language in Obama. And of course this is--this is--this is really the importance of, of, of enculturation that occurs so that the influence on language is very important. Story_ID: 627219 Speaker 1: When you were at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] how would you describe the course of music. Did they focus on at all African American music as a part of the curriculum or was that something that just was ancillary to? Speaker 2: No, they never foc- focused on it. Most, most schools, African American schools in particular, were interested in gettin- getting you into graduate school, and that was their goal. There wasn't any question about that, that was their goal. I mean, that's why I admire a school like Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I mean Benjamin Mays is a genius at that, you know. And they knew that they were gonna ask you about African American music, which they never did, I never did see a question on African American music. And you don't get that until the '50s [1950s] when--when we put pressure on schools to address the issue of, of truth really, basically the issue of truth in American music and African music in the world. Speaker 1: Okay. So I take then there were no courses about on jazz or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: --Negro spirituals? Speaker 2: In fact--in fact--in fact--in fact they didn't allow--we didn't play. We had a jazz band, but we didn't put too much emphasis, that was extra. And I mean we played concertos with the band, but the Gray concerto [ph.]. Our pianist was the head of the music department, Ted Phillips. But I mean we played--we played classical music. And, and I think that, that, that, that really sustained us, because that was their training, I mean in other words we just grew, we knew what they knew. And, and of course they didn't come--they didn't come--they weren't jazz musicians, so I mean we knew about as much about jazz as they did. So when we went there. So, so that wasn't, wasn't a part of the curriculum. Now everybody teaches jazz and courses in African American music everywhere, and so that--that's, that's, that's, that's a recent phenomenon. I'd say after 1950 it began to start and then it blossomed out since then. Speaker 1: Now, did you all as students in those days, did you ever have discussions about the legitimacy of African and African American music as a course of study in the school? Speaker 2: No, no we never discussed it. We, we, we knew the legitimacy of it and our teachers knew the legitimacy of it so it wasn't anything that they were against jazz, but they allowed jazz to exist because they knew that's what we were interested in and of course they, they were interested in their agenda too, so we had to do--had to do both, you know, so. Story_ID: 627220 Speaker 1: When you're on the verge of graduation then--then had you plotted out in grad school, where you were gonna go to grad school? Speaker 2: Oh I went to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] mainly because I was--I was from Pennsylvania. I went there and of course that changed my life because I met--the university organist was my composition teacher, his name was George Ceiga, C-E-I-G-A. And I just took the course as an elective, I really wasn't paying too much attention and I wrote a terrible piece called, it was a tone poem of a steel mill. Since I had worked in the steel mills to make money for college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], you know at that time. And he encouraged me to go on in, in, in to composition. So after I graduated-- Speaker 1: Now what was his last name again? Speaker 2: Ceiga, C-E-I-G-A, George Ceiga. Speaker 1: C-E-I-G-A, Ceiga, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, he was the university organist. And he was very supportive of me, very encouraging. He thought I should go on in music and I wasn't quite sure. So I decided to go to the University of Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati College - Conservatory of Music, Cincinnati, Ohio] one summer. I was working for Beau Brummell Tie Company and I, I worked at the tie company at night and went, went to school and--to study with T. Scott Huston [sic. Scott S. Huston]. Speaker 1: Let me just back up a little bit, but-- Speaker 2: Surely. Speaker 1: --what--it seems to me, I mean we breezed kind of past it, but Penn State wasn't very good for your--I mean it didn't--it wasn't good for you, I mean in terms of your own self-concept about being a musician? Speaker 2: Oh Penn State was an excellent place to be. Speaker 1: Okay, so why did the professor have to encourage you to--that it was okay to stay in music? Speaker 2: Well it was my doubt. It wasn't, wasn't his, it wasn't his doubt, I mean. Speaker 1: But the doubt wasn't caused by any experiences (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well Penn State was primarily a music education school. And so they were interested in teachers and I was talking about being a composer, that's not teaching. I mean, that--that's doing something else. You, you are a teacher, but you teach at a university, you know. So, but--but Ceiga thought I had the ability to be a composer. And in the process, I, I went to Cincinnati conservatory to get the second opinion, and Scotty Huston said go for it, and I wrote a letter to the head of the music department was P.G. Clapp, C-L-A-P-P. And P.G. Clapp wrote--I, I just wrote a postcard and said I'm thinking about coming to the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] for a doctorate and I wanted your advice on it. He wrote me back a typewritten letter and I guess it was three or four pages. And I'm sorry I don't have that letter, because he was very supportive and encouraged me to come to the University of Iowa. And I decided then I would go to Iowa--to the Iowa that following the fall. And what happened was that he died that summer. And--but I had already committed myself, so I, I went on to the University of Iowa and got a great education I might add. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is where you finish your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958], I think. Story_ID: 627221 Speaker 1: So you finish it at the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa]-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And what was your--and Philip Greeley Clapp was your-- Speaker 2: Yeah, P.G. Clapp. Speaker 1: P.G. Clapp, all right that's the gentleman we were just talking about. So, what did you--what was your dissertation about in music? Speaker 2: It was composition. Speaker 1: Composition. Speaker 2: In fact, it was one--it was the only school that had a--you could write a piece and--later, later other scho- other schools came but it was the first school that would recognize a composition as a dissertation. So I did a tone--I did a piece for orchestra and a string quartet. I take--I take those two things. 'Pyknon Overture' [T.J. Anderson] and then a string quartet I did for my dissertation. Both of them are terrible pieces I mean (laughter). I'm looking back now, I mean I've learned a lot since then, but as I said. Speaker 1: Were they worthy of a Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Oh anything is worthy, 'cause you never know who's gonna turn out wh- to be what you know, I mean. A guy could write a tremendous Ph.D. in his thesis, and not be a good composer, you know, so I'm saying. You, you saw in, in teaching music you, you, you--it's a leap by faith on the creative ability and the talent of your student. And nobody knows, I mean you can't judge that, I mean when, when I was at Iowa, the whole time I was at Iowa they had symposiums with Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and India- with Michigan, Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. I never had a piece placed. All these other composers getting their piece played, I never was played. Yet, when they get to the fiftieth ann- with the hundredth anniversary, who do they find the commission is me. So I'm saying it, it, it, I mean you never know, you never know. Story_ID: 627222 Speaker 1: Can you guide us through the process of coming up with a composition, a good composition? Is there any way to do that? Speaker 2: Back to Tolson's [Melvin B. Tolson] artistry of circumstance, you never know. I mean, I, I--in other words what I'm saying, I'll tell you as much as I know, but there's so much I don't know that happens by instinct. In other words, when I--when I'm gonna write a piece, say if I'm gonna write a piece. I just wrote a piece for accordion. I had to study the instrument, I had to look at the literature. I had to hear the sounds, I got an accordion to play for me 'cause he played for me so I could conceive the piece here. In other words, you have to conceive what you're writing in your ear. And once I conceived the piece I was able to put down what I wanted it to do. In any piece, that--that process is the process I use practically all the time. If I'm writing a piece for any combination of instruments, I usually go to the literature and look and I say oh I wouldn't do it that way. But I mean I look at the literature to see what--what's been done and I just go off on my own and do what I know out of my own experiences. And I try not to repeat myself. I mean I have a style, people say I have a style. My wife [Lois Fields Anderson] said I have a style, but I'm not--I'm not conscious of trying to reproduce another piece like the last piece I wrote. Every piece I want it to be is a new venture for me. So I try to do that, I try to create something that's different, you know. Not, not in a sense that I want to create something different, I mean not in that sense. I mean I could write a piece that's different that nobody could play (laughter), you know, but that's different, you know. But I'm saying I don't--I don't believe in that. I believe in--in trying to get to your instincts and write what you feel and what you know to be what you want, want it to be. Speaker 1: Now is your music easy to play? Speaker 2: No. Very difficult, very difficult. And--'cause that's one of the reasons I don't get as many performances as if I wrote easy music. But at the same time, what you have to do, you have to express yourself. And I mean I make no concessions to, to writing easy or hard music, I only make concessions to what I know is playable. Now if I write something that's not playable, then that's my fault, it's inexcusable for me as a composer to write something, say off the range of the accordion and accordion can't do down that far, you know, or off the range of any instrument. But I mean it's more to knowing just the range, you have to know the quality of sound within each register. So you have to know what--and you have to not only know it, you have to hear it in combination with other instruments. So when you write it you, you hear the piece as you write it, you hear it, yeah. Speaker 1: Now do you remember, or can you maybe hum a little bit of that composition that you wrote for your Ph.D. [from the University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa]? Speaker 2: No. No I've forgotten it. Once I write it, that's it, you know. And, and of course if I remembered it, I'd put it in the next piece. In other words--in other words, there's a deliberate divorce with what I've already done because I've done it. So I don't--I don't try to remember, remember, I remember the piece if I heard it, I'd say oh that's my piece, I mean I'd know that. But in terms of humming it back to you no, no, no. Story_ID: 627223 Speaker 1: I wondered, you know, how that, you know, if you are a composer what--how you would relate to your own work. So at any rate, so upon graduation, when you achieved your Ph.D. [from the University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa], this is 1958? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were your--how did your parents feel about you? Speaker 2: Oh my father [T.J. Anderson, Sr.] was very proud. He, he worked on a Ph.D. and never got one from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], so he was very proud. And my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] was proud, and I guess I was proud and my wife [Lois Fields Anderson] was proud (laughter). Story_ID: 627224 Speaker 1: Oh, tell us about meeting your wife, now. This has something to do with you going to Cincinnati to conservatory [University of Cincinnati College - Conservatory of Music, Cincinnati, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. My wife said she was thirteen when she met me and of course, I was thirty--well I was twenty-nine when we got married, so a lot happened in between there. And I met her through my [maternal] grandmother [Ila Marshall Turpeau]. She was in a Girl Scout competition to identify trees and stuff, and she won, she knew that. And she lived in Cincinnati [Ohio]. My best friend, Chester Pierce [Chester Middlebrook Pierce] is a psychiatrist at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Chester was at the University--at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] after he had finished Harvard and his medical school. And he lived right across the street from Lois [Lois Fields Anderson]. So Lois and Chester's wife became good friends, and we became good friends, and we were together in--in Cincinnati, Oklahoma much years later, many years later, and then in New England together when he was at Harvard and I was Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts]. And we still together, we see each other all the time. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got married before you got your Ph.D., before your Ph.D. was finished? Speaker 2: Yeah, she went--she went with me to Iowa my second year [at the University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa], yeah. Story_ID: 627225 Speaker 1: Okay, Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma], so--? Speaker 2: That was my first job after, after teaching in the public schools in, in High Point [North Carolina] and then at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] as an instructor, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you were actually working before your Ph.D. had been granted [from the University of Iowa, Iowa City Iowa]? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Well tell us about Langston, how did you like Langston? Speaker 2: The biggest thing in my life at Langston was M.B. Tolson [Melvin B. Tolson]. People told me that Tolson was crazy. They said he's the mayor of the town (laughter). And he just has a lot to say, and I found what he had to say was quite significant. And I was--I just sort of became a member of his family. I admired him not only as a poet, I mean I admired him as family man. Tolson was a father of four kids, three boys and a girl. His wife [Ruth Southall Tolson] and the girl and one boy had hearing difficulties. And--and the daughter [Ruth Tolson] went on to get her master's degree and was a librarian at, at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. Tolson's wife got a master's degree and the son, Arthur [Arthur L. Tolson] got a Ph.D. And Arthur became a historian at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. M.B., Jr. [Melvin B. Tolson, Jr.] got his Ph.D. in tort at University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] and I understand there's a building named after him. And the other, Wiley [Wiley Wilson Tolson], went--went into--went to science and he was at John, I think, he's at John Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] now, I'm not sure of that, but he went into science. So all there of the sons got doctorates and Tolson, I really admired as a family man. I mean I just thought he was just an unusual as, as a father, he was unusual as a husband, he was also unusual as a speaker. He wrote a big play for--about Walter White and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. It lasted like two or three hours (laughter) but they played it, they did it at one of the convention, Tolson drama. He was--he was--he was a dramatist from his heart. In fact, the story goes that he was coaching a guy playing and, and, and it was a love scene between this guy and a woman. So Tolson took the part of the woman--the woman and he said, "You go up to him and you kiss him like this," (laughter) and he kissed the guy. I mean, I mean that's M.B. Tolson, I mean anybody that knows Tolson knows he's not--it's a sense he wasn't gay, I mean that the furthest thing from anybody's mind that Tolson, but Tolson was a dramatist. Everything was dramatic to him. And I remember one other story about Tolson, Tolson told me when he came to, to Langston he came from Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] to Langston. Wiley is where he had his great debate teams. But anyway, he came to--came to Langston-- Speaker 1: We should point that he's portrayed by Denzel Washington in the movie 'The Great Debaters.' Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Great Debaters' is based on his debate team at Wiley College. Speaker 1: And I suppose his--the name of his last son Wiley has something to do with Wiley College? Speaker 2: Yes, he was named after the college, that's correct, yes. Well anyway, Tolson was, as he said, you know I first came, said I went to teach and there was no, no chalk on the board--on the blackboard. He said, "Now the average person would write and request to the chairman of the department, 'I want--,' and it would go to the dean and the purchasing agent, and--," (laughter) he said, "I knew that wouldn't take me there--it would take too long and they wouldn't get it. So what I did, I jumped up on the table, there's no chalk in this room, there's no chalk in this room, and the people are saying, 'What's wrong with him, what's wrong?'" Said, "Next thing I knew I had a box of chalk. I never go into that room without chalk being on--," (laughter). He said--he said, "You have to be dramatic to get what you want. You just don't ask for things, you have to be dramatic." I never was dramatic, but I--but I learned the lesson from that, you just don't ask and expect people to give you what you need, you know, I learned a great lesson from him. Story_ID: 627226 Speaker 1: So he trained these outstanding debate teams- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and was he still doing that when you met him? Speaker 2: No, he didn't have debate teams when I got there. He still had--he had a little drama group occasionally, but he didn't do it. Most of his time was devoted to writing his poetry. He was really--he was really in--course he realized it was--this was towards the end of his life and he had to get it down on paper and he did the ode to the libretto of Liberia ['Libretto for the Republic of Liberia,' Melvin B. Tolson]. He'd won a--a prize with the 'Dark Symphony' [Melvin B. Tolson] and he moved away from that to abstract writing and a marvelous poet. In fact--in fact one of the interesting things is that there's a great debate going on now between Rita Dove [HistoryMaker Rita Frances Dove] and the professor at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in--in literature and criticism. Oh I can't think of her name now, but anyway, she, she criticized Rita Dove's anthology of American poets. And in that, she criticized the fact that she had fourteen pages devoted to Tolson, to M.B. Tolson [Melvin B. Tolson]. Now, what, what she doesn't realize is, is that Tolson has been ignored for, for a number of years and yet, yet he certainly, to, to my way of thinking, one of the greatest poets in this country. And I know there're a lot of poets that don't feel that way about him. I, I, I did a piece about Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and this was with the Poet Laureate Robert Pinsky. And Pinsky is not a--not a Tolson fan. So there are a lot of people that aren't fans of Tolson, but, but what, what I saw in Tolson was the first poet that, that united literature globally. And when I say that, people don't realize that Tolson was trained in Greek and, and Latin, that--that was the tradition of preachers in, in those days in terms of reading the Bible and that. And Tolson's writings have references to the--to the Bible, to history, Africa, everything is there. I mean it's complex--it's complex because you have to have this global understanding that he had to understand the poetry. And so I remember Tolson told me once that he was talking about Langston, 'cause he and Langston went to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] together and-- Speaker 1: Langston Hughes? Speaker 2: Langston Hughes, and, and he would say Langston wouldn't--didn't know the difference between a good line and a bad line of poetry. And Tolson said, would say--would say in one of his poems, he said, "It matters not a tinker's dam--how many rivers you cross" ['Delta,' Melvin B. Tolson]. And that was ref- to reference (laughter), until you cross the Rubicon, you know. You know (laughter), so, so Tolson--Tolson was in a world all by himself and the closest thing to it was the poet laureate from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], Robert Hayden who went from Fisk to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and became poet laureate at the Library of Congress and, and he's in that category too. But Tolson has never got the credit he deserved. But now, it's--I mean the, the pendulum is swinging back and they're picking him up for his poetry. He was--he was a radical and as I said, I mean he knew--he knew the experiences of Richard Wright and he knew the experiences of bo- most African Americans, and he was a race man. And then he would never back down on anything. He was mayor of the City of Langston [Oklahoma] and never had a driver's license and would drive everywhere (laughter). Where--he could talk his way out of everything, you know. And was a fascinating man, had a tremendous influence on my life when I went Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma]. I--as I said, I was like a member of the family so I felt very close. One of my first pieces I wrote after Tolson was a setting I did called, the Tolson, and it's, it's from, from the ode, it's called 'Variations on a Theme by M.B. Tolson' [T.J. Anderson]. It's a piece that's been performed at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] and it was recorded by Jan DeGaetani and the contemporary music ensemble [Contemporary Chamber Ensemble]. And this piece uses Tolson text and the text I think is a marvelous piece, out of print now, I mean the music is out of print, but Tolson's poetry still lives, yeah. Speaker 1: Now you said before we started, you were saying that his debate team actually, you know, they didn't debate Harvard in the--not like in the movie, but they actually defeated Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] and that was his biggest? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Oxford or Cambridge [University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England], I'm pretty sure it is one or the other. Speaker 1: Or Cambridge? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. They came through touring and they, they defeated them. And Tolson took great pride in that, he wasn't excited by--he beat Harvard too, but I'm saying, he wasn't excited about, about the American competition, he was interested in them because that's the citadel of language, of English language. So when you beat them, now you beat the best, you know, so they--very down to earth, as I said, a marvelous professor, a good teacher, excellent teacher, very demanding on students and they loved him, you know, he was really quite, quite honored. Story_ID: 627227 Speaker 1: So at Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma], you, so you were teaching? Speaker 2: I was chairman. I went there as chairman of the music department, yes. I think I stayed five or six years, I can't remember now. And then I left for Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything that happened there other than meeting Melvin Tolson [Melvin B. Tolson] and (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I had a good department. It was a pretty good music department. It was--had a big band. We had a large band led by William Sims, he was a good band director. An average choir. I don't remember that much about it in terms of music. I remember I had good students and a lot of them went on to graduate school. My, my best student was a student named Maurice Spears. Oh this kid was brilliant. And he ended up playing with Ray Charles. I wanted him to go on, but he, he wanted to play with Ray Charles and every time I would see him, he'd say, "Prof, I'm just doing this 'cause we got a European tour and I wanna see Europe." And every time I see the kid, "We're going to India now, we--." It was always some reason why he played bass trombone in the band, I think. And he was a marvelous musician and never reached his potential. Speaker 1: He played with Ray Charles? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Story_ID: 627228 Speaker 1: Now Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], tell us about Tennessee State? Speaker 2: I went to Tennessee State because the chairman of the music department was Ed C. Lewis [Edward C. Lewis], my teacher from West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. And Ed had a marvelous music school there because what he did is that he focused in on becoming a member of National Association of Schools of Music. And eventually it became a reviewer for the--for the national association and shepherded a lot of black schools into that organization. He was a, a marvelous pianist. He had--had a, I think it was his left hand or right hand, I can't remember, that had a paralysis, but he loved to play Rachmaninoff [Sergei Rachmaninoff]. In fact, he used to talk to us about seeing Rachmaninoff in Washington [D.C.] at Constitution Hall. He said this man struggled to get--came on real slow and sat at the piano, but once he started to play it just was in rapture. I mean, he, he just--so he had played a lot of Rachmaninoff. Speaker 1: That's the stor- his music teacher took him to see that concert? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Is that the story where his music teacher took him to the concert when he was a kid to see him? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Go ahead (laughter). Speaker 2: No, but that--that's why I went to West Virginia State because of him. At West Virginia State I had a reduced teaching load and he allowed me to write my compositions. He was a great supporter of my working on 'Treemonisha' [Scott Joplin]. He also was a great supporter of my having performances by the Nashville Symphony [Nashville, Tennessee] under Thor Johnson, I had a number of pieces played then. And he generally was a facilitator of my being at Tennessee State. Story_ID: 627229 Speaker 1: Now I take it was at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] that you began to focus on 'Treemonisha.' Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And heard about Scott Joplin(simultaneous Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And tell us how that happened, how did that happen? Speaker 2: I heard about--about it through Bill Bolcom [William Bolcom], the distinguished American composer taught at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] for years. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: B-A-L-C-O-M-E [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, so Bill Bolcom turned you on to the work of-- Speaker 2: Well he turned me on to 'Treemonisha.' I knew about Joplin, but I didn't know, know about 'Treemonisha.' And he thought we should do it. And what happened was that he did most of the editing and editing was just taking out sections and writing small transitions. And, and I looked over his shoulder while he did that and, and so we both edited it. Story_ID: 627230 Speaker 1: Tell people what 'Treemonisha' is? Speaker 2: 'Treemonisha' is--Joplin [Scott Joplin] wrote two operas. The first was 'A Guest of Honor' [Scott Joplin], and I think it was 1908 [sic. 1903]. And that opera was totally lost. We've had sheets that showed what was performed and one would suspect that it was very much influenced by minstrelsy. But Joplin was witnessing the death of ragtime about the turn of the century. And he decided that he--that writing rags wasn't gonna be the future and he decided to turn to serious music. And so he decided to write 'The Guest of Honor,' and then 'Treemonisha.' 'Treemonisha' is the story of woman named Monisha and her husband Ned that find a baby under a tree, so the baby becomes Treemonisha. And Treemonisha is taken into this home and they send her away to be educated by whites and she comes back into the community. And the community is a typical black community of the time, before the Civil War and--no just after the Civil War I should say, and the community is ridden with superstition and ignorance, and witchcraft. And Treemonisha takes on the conjurers and anyway it's that constant struggle between enlightenment and, and ignorance. And in the end, Treemonisha is kidnapped by the villains and they--she's rescued by her lover, a tenor. And the story ends with Treemonisha forgiving the villains and everybody's happy and she's elected as the leader. That's basically the story. It's an unusual story which Joplin wrote himself about, about a woman that's the hero, that's the first thing unusual about it. And it, it takes--it takes this--its, its historical thrust from, from the general tenor of blacks. Now Joplin was educated at nor- at Smith--at Smith College for Negros [George R. Smith College] in--in Sedalia, Missouri. And, and his teachers were white. So that meant he knew--he knew German music and he also knew opera. And as an itinerant musician, Jop- Joplin traveled all though Louisiana and the South and North, so he had a chance to see opera. And he just envision--he envisioned an opera which would take advantage of American music, a story about the aspirations of black people, uplifting and of, of course an all-black cast. Though this was Joplin's dream. He had a reading for philanthropists or people with money and nobody would back it because they couldn't visualize an opera written by a black composer and, and, and an opera of this extent. It turns out to be--it turns out to make Joplin really the father of American music. By that I mean there, there were operas written before Joplin. The first opera was in Emmett, I can't think of his last name, but I think Emmett Butler [ph.], I think it's 1792, he came to this country from, from England. And in 1794 he wrote the first American opera, it's called 'Tammany' [sic. 'The Songs of Tammany, or, The Indian Chief: A Serious Opera,' Ann Julia Hatton]. And of course from that date on to 1911, Joplin in 1909 [sic. 1901] I think he started and finished '11 [sic. 1903]. From that date on, all the operas were basically imitation of American--of, of European operas, because that's all the composers knew. But Joplin thought that there was in the American soil there was music of worth and therefore, he wrote it and, and, and when I--when we--when we premiered the opera, up until that time when you--when you see anything that had reference to Joplin it would be, Joplin wrote a ragtime opera, 'Treemonisha,' that's all they would say. That's the furthest thing from the truth, it's influenced by ragtime, but it's not a ragtime opera. It has all the things that rag- that operas have, it has recitatives, arias, an overture to start with, a prelude to the second act. So, I'm saying--I'm saying Joplin had an idea--well Joplin knew exactly what opera was and he put it in this context of America, and so it turns out to be the first indigenous opera, and this was before 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], that's 1935, around, around there. Story_ID: 627231 Speaker 1: But Joplin [Scott Joplin] had the advantage of, of knowing American music. What he didn't have the advantage of that Gershwin [George Gershwin] had the advantage of was knowing jazz. See 'cause--because after you get through Joplin and you get into the early '20s [1920s], you begin to get blues and blues leads to jazz. So you, you have this transition in terms of jazz, the development of jazz. So Gershwin had the advantage by the time you get to '35 [1935], Gershwin had the advantage of hearing and knowing jazz. Joplin didn't have that as a reference--he had the advantage of knowing ragtime and, and traditional American music. So, so that's why the operas are different. But also the operas are different in terms of attitude toward--towards black life. Gershwin takes the low road in drinking. In fact, they're so embarrassed by the opera ['Porgy and Bess,' George Gershwin] they, they want to create a new version of it. I don't--I don't advocate that at all. I, I can live with Gershwin as he is and I love Gershwin. And I think the opera should be, be, be as Gershwin wrote it because that--that's the truth, I mean. Joplin took the high road in terms of nobility of black life. So those are the two differences that exist between those two major works. Speaker 2: Okay. But both were informed by African American music. Speaker 1: Oh both were definitely informed by--yeah, in other words you couldn't conceive either work without African American music, yes. Story_ID: 627232 Speaker 1: So, when you found out about 'Treemonisha' [Scott Joplin], did you autom- I mean how long was it before you decided--or what made you wanna change it? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Joplin, Joplin [Scott Joplin], the reason the work lived is Joplin paid to have it published, nobody would, would pay to publish it. So he paid himself to publish it and I think he published something like five hundred copies. So this is the piano version. In the piano version sometimes he would say, clarinet, there was a little note in terms of what instrument would be there, what he was thinking. So I had that. Also I had--we had Rudi Blesh wrote the book 'They All Played Ragtime.' A very important figure. Rudi Blesh advised us in terms of what Joplin would hear in pit orchestras. So I had an idea what the pit orchestra would be. So I set it in terms of what he thought it would be. So my orchestration would be authentic in terms of what the Joplin pit orchestra would be. Speaker 1: Okay, so a pit orchestra then-- Speaker 2: Is the orchestra that accompanies the, the opera, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And this--so there's a certain mix of instruments in the pit orchestra, it's constant that he would be writing for? Speaker 2: Yeah, it would be--it would be a classical orchestra, but smaller. Speaker 1: So if you refer to a pit orchestra you're talking about a smaller version of an orchestra (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Violins, cellos, violas, regular strings and trumpets, trombones, horns, clarinets, flutes, you know, same instrument. I used a piano in it because that was Joplin's instrument, that's the only liberty I took, but everything else is authentic, yes. Story_ID: 627233 Speaker 1: Can you hum a little bit of it for us, I mean of a good part (laughter)? Speaker 2: A good part? Speaker 1: Just because this is audio, it's about music. Speaker 2: (Sings musical notes) This is the overture, (sings musical notes). I mean it goes on like that yeah, I mean that's the overture. And then there's some marvelous arias, (singing), "Marching onward, marching onward, listening to that happy tune--." That's the--that's the last over--that's the last song. And, and the interesting thing about that is that Joplin [Scott Joplin] wrote dance steps in the score [of 'Treemonisha']. There're a lot of things Joplin did that nobody did. I mean people had done that before in French--in French opera they, they write dance steps in the score. That had been done before, but Joplin wrote drag--real slow drag, he wrote the dance steps, light right foot slides, left foot glides, and all of this, that's written in the score. Another thing that Joplin did, Joplin tried to capture the singing he heard in black churches and that was when he wrote--he wrote notes with stems, just stems only and no note--no note heads, in other words jus- just the stems of the notes and no note heads. And there are sections where they go, "Oh," you know, that type of singing. The cross between singing and speaking, and of course Schoenberg [Arnold Schoenberg] developed about the same time Sprechstimme, a cross between singing and speaking. So both of these men were thinking about the same kinds of problems to be solved in composition. I mean he was a genius, Joplin was a genius, no question about it. And the father of American opera (laughter), I'm back to that again. And I can say that wi- with, with confidence because I've talked it over with Edith Borroff who wrote the book 'The History of American Music--,' 'Music in America and Music in Europe' [sic. 'Music in Europe and the United States: A History']. It's a very famous history book on, on American music, mainly because most mus- music books up until that time don't have one line about Indian [Native American] music. I mean Americans, we, we dis- we discovered Indians when we got here. They taught us how to survive, yet we don't wanna acknowledge their music, the fact that they taught us how to live, they taught us how to plant corn, they taught us everything and we don't--we don't wanna acknowledge their existence. But she acknowledges that and she also acknowledges the black contribution to music too, which you don't see in most books. Story_ID: 627234 Speaker 1: Were you able to--you were able to stage the opera right? Speaker 2: Oh we staged it, yeah. We got a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to stage it. And we had Wendell Whalum who was chairman of the music department and we decided we wanted to do more than just the opera, we wanted to call attention to black contributions. So we had--we had a week celebration, which we had a session on Paul Robeson, we had Benjamin Mays give a speech, we had--we also had [HistoryMaker] Richard Long, the three of us, Richard Long came to assist us. Speaker 1: The art critic from Atlanta [Georgia] or the (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Richard Long was on the faculty for many years at, at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], and a brilliant person. And, and he taught at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] when I was a student. He, Wendell and I, we had sessions on gospel music. I never will forget, a gospel group of women sang in--in the chapel, and the woman, that was the leader of the group, said, "I've always wanted to go to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and this is my chance." And she really sang her heart out that night. I mean we had panels on ragtime, Eubie Blake was a part of this. And we just used it as an opportunity to gather a lot of people interested in--in ragtime to come to Atlanta for the performance of, of 'Treemonisha' [Scott Joplin]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what year is this when all this happened? Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], I think, yeah, '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], okay. All right, 1972. Speaker 2: We had marvelous singers because we had Robert Shaw to conduct and Wendell t- trained the chorus, and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham trained the dancers. So we had, I mean, it was--it was a superb production, it was first rate. And as a result of that, we got rave reviews. Speaker 1: So you start--let me get this straight now. You started working on this, on 'Treemonisha' at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: That's right. I was working on the orchestration, what I did, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and the actual-- Speaker 2: Performance took place in Atlanta in '72 [1972], yeah. Speaker 1: Was it difficult to get, you know, the backing of people, like Benjamin Mays and-- Speaker 2: No, no Mays, Mays was fantastic. Mays, Mays was a ver- well Mays was an unusual man and, and in fact, when I got my honorary degree from Bates [Bates College, Lewiston, Maine] which was made possible by, well the minister at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Peter Gomes [Peter J. Gomes]. There's a Benjamin Mays building, I took great pride in that because my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] studied with Mays when he was dean of the school of religion at Howard [Howard University, Washington D.C.]. So it, it's amazing how these small circles turn out, you know, that--that was really an honor for Mays to give us total support and we just--we just had total support from the music community. Because everybody realized what we were dealing with, I think. We didn't know at the time its importance in American operatic history, we didn't know that. We just knew it was a good opera ['Treemonisha,' Scott Joplin] and we just wanted to give it justice as something that Joplin never lived to see. Speaker 1: Tell us about the involvement of [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham? Speaker 2: Katherine Dunham was, was a legend by this time and I had met her before. My sister was a dancer so she knew her, and she was--she had a school in East St. Louis [Katherine Dunham Centers for Arts and Humanities, East St. Louis, Illinois] which was where she had her dances and costumes and things. And she was marvelous to work with because she, she, she was trained as an anthropologist, so she knew the roots of everything, you know, so she was very good, she's very good. When-- Speaker 1: So she looked at is with an eye for authenticity in terms of what the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, wh- what Joplin [Scott Joplin] would've, would've wanted, yes, yes. She knew the dances that were popular at that time, so, so it was authentic, you know. Wasn't anything somebody just made up, we do this, you know. No. Speaker 1: Did she recognize the dance notes as being, you know, the dance as indicated in the dance notes or were they original? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she would recognize that, slow drag, she knew the slow drag, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now did she have--now this is--I just thought of this here, before we move on from her. Did she recognize the--any of the rituals in the--? Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah, yeah. You mean the voodoo rituals, yeah, oh yeah, she would know. You know, she lived in Haiti too, so she knows all--she would know all of that, yes. Story_ID: 627235 Speaker 1: Did she have any objection to the depiction of the- Speaker 2: No, oh no, what (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) context of the rituals in the? Speaker 2: No, no, wh- wh- wh- what any artist should do in any--in any production, is to be faithful to the intent of the composer. And I mean, we back to Gershwin [George Gershwin], you know, how you wanna change, no, no, no. Gershwin is Gershwin and this is what Gershwin wrote. I heard a performance of the Los Angeles Philharmonic with Dudamel [Gustavo Dudamel] and this was with the pianist that's coming here, I can't think, he wrote 'Watermelon Man.' Speaker 1: Oh, [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis? Speaker 2: No, no, Herbie Hancock. Speaker 1: Hancock, okay. Speaker 2: Hancock played a performance of, of Gershwin's 'Rhapsody in Blue.' Now that performance was totally different than any performance I'd heard, and yet he played the same music that Gershwin wrote. Now what the difference is that he understood what Gershwin would've wanted. And so he never changed the notes, he changed the rhythm. And he being a jazz musician, would play the rhythms different than a classical musician playing 'Rhapsody in Blue.' And this--this is one of the things that people in classical music have to move to. This is off the topic, but--but it's--but it's a point that I wanna make. I wrote for, for the hundredth anniversary of the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] they commissioned me to write a piece. I, I wrote a--I wrote a piano concerto and it was written with no notes written for the piano, it was totally improvised. And I had a student, Donal Fox, who's a marvelous composer and pianist, come to do the premier of the piece. Now jazz is predominantly improvisation. In other words, the most exciting thing is when they get away from the music and they do what they feel like doing, you know. And, and when, when I wrote this piece I--the pianist is totally free, yet he knows exactly what the orchestra is gonna do. That, that-that's--it's never been done before. But I mean that--and it was very successful I might add, this University of Iowa's hundredth anniversary, yeah. Story_ID: 627236 Speaker 1: In 1972, also, you take an appointment Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now is this after the 'Treemonisha' [Scott Joplin]? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was after the 'Treemonisha.' I go, in the fall, I went to Tufts as chairman of the department then. That was arranged by a good friend of mine. We were together in Nashville [Tennessee]. Name is Jack Zarker [John Zarker]. He was head of the classics department at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] and at, at--he went to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and then he went to Tufts, and when he was at Tufts and they had a vacancy in the music department. Our children were close friends in Nashville, and he and his wife [Katherine Lambeth Zarker] were close friends for life. He recently died and she still lives here in Chapel Hill [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay now, did--was it tough to leave Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Was it tough to what? Speaker 1: Was it difficult to leave Tennessee State at the time? Speaker 2: Oh no, no it wasn't. I mean, you go where opportunity calls. I mean, you know, I mean I had a good time at Tennessee State, but I, I was with the orchestra then, I was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] then, and it wasn't easy--I mean it wasn't difficult to leave Morehouse. Speaker 1: So when did you go--I'm sorry, I missed when you went to Morehouse, I guess? Speaker 2: I went to Morehouse when I went to--Morehouse was dur- see I was with the orchestra for two years and I was also teaching at Morehouse, teaching one course at Morehouse. But then at the third year I became, this is in '72 [1972], when I became a Danforth professor at Morehouse and that's when, when we did the orchestra, 'Treemonisha.' Speaker 1: So did you get to Morehouse in '68 [1968] then? Speaker 2: No, it was-- Speaker 1: You were there three years. Speaker 2: It was '69 [1969], something like that, something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, Morehouse College, all right. Speaker 2: 'Cause I was with the orchestra for two years. The first year, the Rockefeller Foundation paid for me to be resident with the orchestra. One of the first blacks to be registered with--reg- a composer in residence. Then the following year, Robert Shaw put up his own personal money for me to stay that second year, and the third year I went to Morehouse as a Danforth professor, which was three years in Atlanta [Georgia]. Story_ID: 627237 Speaker 1: Well tell us about Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] now, what? Speaker 2: Oh Tufts was, it was interesting. I enjoyed Tufts and they were very good to me. They recognized me, my major interest in composition. So, the department was, was an average department, but what I did as chairman of the music department, I put great emphasis on, on global music, which, which fit right in because we had The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts which was co-sponsored by Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Tufts, and that changed a lot of diplomats. So, so when I was talking about international music, I mean that was right down their alley, so we began to expand the department in terms of getting an ethnomusicologist, getting somebody who specializes in African music. And in, in the end, I think, by the time I left we could cove- cover the globe, you know, in terms of music of Asia, practically everything, we had--not just classical music. Most, most, most departments in the United States had been trapped by German musicology, and that's European music and that's all they wanted to teach and that's all the conservatories would teach. And now, I mean we've all--we all--its globalism everywhere now. But I mean this is what we, we struck out and did this early. Speaker 1: So did you ever bring in international faculty members? Speaker 2: No, I, I brought in Americans that were trained all over the world, yeah. So we had--our teacher of African music was trained in Africa. And the thing I like about--name is David Locke, is that he not only brought Africans here to perform to continue the tradition, he go--his students went--went back to Africa. So I mean, David Locke was marvelous, and his wife [Cathleen B. Read] was a specialist in, in, in I think music of Japan. She played the koto, and she'd give recitals. So we had the Japanese music. And we had in our department a guy by the name of Jeff Titon [Jeff Todd Titon]. Jeff was a specialist in--in the blues. And Jeff--I'd have to tell you the story with Jeff. Jeff went to interview Reverend C.L. Franklin, Aretha Franklin's father. And when Jeff called him up, he said, "You meet me at my church [New Bethel Baptist Church]." This was in Detroit [Michigan]. "You meet me at my church at eleven o'clock and we'll have people there waiting for you." So Jeff came and Jeff said the first thing they did, they put him on the front row of the choir. So here was the white person on--surrounded by all these black people (laughter). And Jeff said the first thing he knew the choir jumped up and started singing, so Jeff said he had to jump up and he started faking the tune. Jeff said he suddenly realized that was a test. If Jeff had not jumped up he never could've interviewed Franklin. Jeff wanted to put him in a black context--I mean Franklin wanted to put Jeff Titon in a black context to see what he would do, and he did the right thing. So he interviewed Franklin and he's written on Franklin, and the blues and everything else. He's at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] now. Speaker 1: So you were at Tufts until, you know, for the (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For the rest of my career, yeah. Speaker 1: What were the milestones at Tufts? Speaker 2: Well, I considered it--I can only talk about when I was there. The people I brought in, I brought in Jane Bernstein in musicology, and she turns out to be a marvelous musicologist and president of American Musicological Society. I brought in one of my best friends, Mark DeVoto who was a great theorist and, and a composer and also a musicologist. He came in under, under my guidance. David Locke, the African drummer and has African Ameri- African groups. He came in under, under my leadership. So I don't think there was any one milestone, there were just a collection of a group of people with skills. Story_ID: 627238 Speaker 1: Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts], so you were just mentioning some of the people that you helped? Speaker 2: Brought into the department? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And of course we developed a reputation of being probably one of the best-- Speaker 1: Ah, oh you lost your mic, lost your mic. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: The experience at Tufts was interesting because I think it's safe to say that we developed one of the best liberal arts programs in the country. And, and that's not just with me, I'm talking about after I left, the department continued to improve, so, I can't take all credit for that at all. But at least we were on the road to recognizing global music and other schools had--had recognized global music to some extent, but not to the extent that we had. And it was easy because I think Tufts was a place that--with the--with the school of international diplomacy [The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Medford, Massachusetts], we were globally aware before most schools were. Story_ID: 627239 Speaker 1: Now you started receiving these honorary doctorate degrees in the, in the early '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Well, my, my first one was due to a professor who was in the chemistry department [sic. physics], Kathy--Kay McCarthy [Kathryn McCarthy]. And she was the one that made the degree from Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts] possible. That was very interesting because it was my first and, and I had a chance to spend all day with Joe DiMaggio. That was really interesting because he had turned down honorary degrees all along. And finally, the owner of the Baltimore baseball team [Baltimore Orioles] convinced him he should get the honorary degree from Tufts--I mean from Holy Cross. And when he got the citation from Father Brooks [John E. Brooks], Father Brooks said that his father was a fisher of men and he talked about character, things of that nature. And he just cried, he just cried, and it was so interesting. I was sitting next to him and the students would all come up and ask, they knew him as Mr. Coffee, 'cause he advertised coffee. They didn't know anything about his baseball career. Speaker 1: That's right, he did the Mr. Coffee commercial on television, Joe DiMaggio? Speaker 2: Commercials, and he was--he was known for Mr. Coffee. So they'd say, "Mr. Coffee can we get your autograph?" So he autographed this, and he told me about his career with the Yankees [New York Yankees]. He talked about hitting the wall. He also talked about how hi- his hands were manicured and he really looked good. I mean and he told me, said his body was a wreck. He told me that the question he gets all the time is how much money would he be worth (laughter)--and of course he couldn't answer that. I mean, the latest thing I heard is that--that they talking about fifty-five million [dollars] a year for, for a football player, the guy with--the quarterback of the Colts [Indianapolis Colts]. So I mean, I mean it's just insane now. I mean he couldn't--he couldn't even begin to talk about what he could get. But he enjoyed career. And unlike most people, whenever we get an honorary degree, it's just--tradition is just take the hood and go on. But he, he walked out of that place with everything on, he wouldn't take a thing off, he said no (laughter). He wanted the hood, the cap and gown and everything, and he wanted everything to go with it, you know, and he had a good time. He invited me to California to see him, he was living in San Francisco, but I never got there, and then he's since moved to Florida, but I lost tr- track with him. But a very interesting man, I found him very interesting. I never asked him about Marilyn Monroe. I never, I just let him talk. I mean, I never--I never, never--'cause I knew he had a hundred questions all his life, you know, so I wasn't interested in--interested in imposing on him in any way. Speaker 1: But that's pretty lofty company to be in, (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I enjoyed it, I don't know (laughter). But that--that was my first and Kay McCarthy was responsible because she was on the board, our physics professor. Story_ID: 627240 Speaker 1: You received another one from West Virginia State [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]? Speaker 2: Now, Ahmed Williams [Prince Ahmed Williams] was responsible for that, that was my teacher. And I think the fact that I was a chair at, at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] had a lot to do with that. So they just wanted--they wanted to honor themselves I think. So they, they (laughter) picked me. Speaker 1: Now in '84 [1984], you served as scholar in residence paid for by the Rockefeller Foundation, that's their Bellagio Center, Bellagio, Italy? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we, we--my wife [Lois Fields Anderson] and I went there twice. We, that's a sort of a think tank and a place for artists and writers, and they have international conferences while you're there, and that's sort of like living like you're rich. When they greet you, they greet you at the airport and you hold--they hold up a sign, you find the chauffeur and the chauffeur drives you to this gate and they push a button, and by the time the thing weaves all up the hill to the top and, and it's really a castle, really it's a beautiful place, sits on the top of a hill in Bellagio, Italy. The Rockefeller Foundation had all the servants lined up so when you come there you meet the servants, you get meals, if you want anything you pull a string in your bedroom, say, "I want a cup of coffee." This I never did, but I mean (laughter) you could do it, you know. And in the evening you had to put on a coat and tie for dinner. And my wife learned Italian and she and another friend, they would go off in the day while I worked and come back at night and we'd have a good time. Speaker 1: Okay, so while you were there you worked on compositions or? Speaker 2: I don't remember what I worked on, but I, I was working on something, yes, uh-huh. Story_ID: 627241 Speaker 1: What are your favorite compositions? Speaker 2: I don't have any favorites. Like children, what are your favorite children. I think some pieces are more successful than others and I wouldn't know which ones they are. History has a way of sorting out whatever it does, you know, and I'm willing to let history do that, so I don't know--I don't know. Speaker 1: Is there a musical theme that characterizes your work? Speaker 2: Eclectic that's what everybody says, eclectic, yeah. That means it can't--I don't have a category (laughter). Speaker 1: You've got a lot of different elements that feed into (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah, yeah. Since my life has been disparate, I mean in terms of what I've heard and listened to. I mean my--this piece I did for orchestra called 'Squares' ['Squares, an Essay for Orchestra,' T.J. Anderson] is influenced by country music. I use open strings that I heard, heard in Nashville [Tennessee], you know, so I'm saying, but nobody would say that's, that's country music. I mean, so, so I mean, it--things come in just, just flashes like that, but they're there, you know, so. I'm aware that they're there. Speaker 1: So what has been the most successful composition in terms of people performing it and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I had a piece for trombone, for solo trombone and it was published in Berlin [Germany] and it's called 'Minstrel Man' [T.J. Anderson] and it's a piece where the player plays the bass drum and symbols with the feet, and he plays trombone by himself. And it's influenced my minstrelsy. And it ends with--with a line from 'St. Louis Blues,' "I hate to see the evening sun go down." 'Cause minstrelsy is very important to development of blacks on stage because it was--it was first venue to put blacks on stage. And in fact, most of the famous minstrel composers, James Bland [James A. Bland] who wrote 'Carry Me Back to Old Virginny,' the guy that wrote the fight song for Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] 'Boola Boola', that's a minstrel piece. Speaker 1: Is that really? Speaker 2: A black man [Bob Cole and Billy Johnson] wrote that yeah. There's just loads of music. When blacks came into minstrelsy it went on a higher level because of musicality. And of course we remember blackface, but we don't remember the music, but, but I'm talking about the music now. The music took off to another level because it was predominantly a white form imitation of blacks, but then blacks took it over and it became something else, so, very important. So that this piece--back to this trombone piece it has--it has the influence of John Coltrane, it has the influence of a, a minstrel piece--a band piece called 'Lassus Trombone' it's in it. I mean it just, just--it's a lot of references to a lot of things, but people don't recognize it, but it's all there. That has been performed, that's probably my most. And the next piece would be a piece--a piano piece called 'Watermelon' [T.J. Anderson] based on a huckster song I heard as a child in Washington [D.C.] (singing), "It's watermelon, I got it red to the rind, sweet like honey, just off the vine." A guy used to come around with a watermelon truck and sell watermelons. So I built a piece on that. So that has been performed quite a bit for solo piano. Story_ID: 627242 Speaker 1: Tell us about the Guggenheim Foundation fellowship? Speaker 2: I got a Guggenheim and it was for a half a year. I didn't seek a grant and I don't remember what I did, but I worked on music I know probably at home. Speaker 1: Okay. So you've been honored at--there's a whole bunch of honors that we have here, everybody from St. Augustine's College [St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah those honorary degrees. Speaker 1: Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know. Speaker 2: Harvard Musical Association. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, when you look back on your career, what would you--you were a guest conductor for the Boston Pops, you know? Speaker 2: I think I was the only, I've done that three times, I think, yes. Speaker 1: When you look back on-- Speaker 2: But those are--those are Tufts Night [Tufts Night at Pops] that I was guest, I wasn't guest conductor by itself. In other words, Tufts Night, every night is j- a different school, Harvard and then, so forth, Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], so, but on the Tufts Night I conducted and usually conduct the Tufts song and then another classical piece, and then a march at the end. The last time I did, I did 'The Stars and Stripes' ['The Stars and Stripes Forever'], that's their famous piece where the balloons come all down. I remember--I remember Arthur Fiedler, we were on--Arthur Fiedler was for many years the conductor of the Boston Pops and he made it famous. And we were on, on a plane together. He was sitting in first class though. When the plane took off he told me come on up and sit next to him. So I came up and he was thumbing through a magazine and he was looking, there was a commercial of Boston Pops, and there was his picture. He was (laughter), he was showing me his picture, a nice man, a very nice man, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 627243 Speaker 1: Who are some of the other people you--'cause-I think before we started you had a list of people that you (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I-- Speaker 1: --we can't ask about all of them, but who are some of the people in music that have--you found to be, I guess, influential, rewarding in terms of meeting them and sharing with them? Speaker 2: Well I mentioned William Grant Still and William Dawson [William Levi Dawson]. Speaker 1: William Grant Still, let's take him first this time? Speaker 2: Well he was the first successful black composer and also the first to conduct an orchestra in the United States. And my William Grant Still story is, is a meeting we had during the height of black power, and this was at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana]. I was chairman of the Black Music Center's advisory committee. Leonard Bernstein and others were on this committee, but anyway. We had this meeting and it was sponsored by a very famous musicologist, Dominique-Rene de Lerma and David Baker who was on the faculty. Speaker 1: Yeah, David Baker I've met, yeah. Speaker 2: Well David was important in this. And this--this turned out in a book, a book was published by the events that took place at this meeting. And I remember William Grant Still spoke and the whole time he used the word colored, and not once did, did anybody, I mean I never had a bush, but all the kids had the Afro bush and the dashikis on, I never wore, I didn't have a dashiki. But anyway, all of--all of this--this radicalism was done away with out of respect of who William Grant Still was. I, I, I just sat there worried about somebody getting up and hollering, you know, "Use the term black" 'cause he used the term colored every time. And out of respect to Still and what he went through and who he was, everybody sat there and listened and paid great homage to this man who had gone through a lot in his lifetime. I thought it was a beautiful experience, beautiful experience. Story_ID: 627244 Speaker 1: Still [William Grant Still] composed for-- Speaker 2: Still composed for every conceivable ensemble. He wrote a lot of chamber music, orchestra music, and choral music. He's written songs, every- everything conceivable. He also wrote for the television shows and, and commercial music. He was--he played in the--in the pit orchestra for 'Shuffle Along.' And that was with Eubie Blake. So I mean there--there's a long history there. And was a very quiet man. He was a close friend of my teacher, Ted Phillips, who finished Oberlin [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] and was at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] chairman of the music department, and they were very close, 'cause both of them lived in California at this time when Ted retired. So, so I had that contact. When he died he had my picture on his--on his piano. And we weren't--we weren't friends, I mean we weren't friends like that, but we knew each other well, I'll put it that way. And I admired, admired his tenacity and his insistence on what he wanted as a composer. Dawson was totally different, William Dawson [William Levi Dawson]. Dawson had the Tuskegee Choir [Tuskegee Institute Choir] and great interest in Africa. I think Dawson's interest was far deeper than--than Still's. And Dawson--since Dawson came from the folk tradition and Still came from the classical tradition, although he played jazz and knew classical music, I mean Dawson was really rooted in--in the folk tradition of African Americans. And I enjoyed him. The last time I saw him, we were going through Tuskegee [Alabama] taking my sister to Florida to teach. And it was early one morning about eight o'clock or something like that and we knocked on his door. And I never will forget, Dawson came down in his suspenders and a pressed shirt and we had a great time talking to him. Dawson was a--was extremely, extremely formal. I had a friend that, Floyd L. Anderson, my best man when I got married [to Lois Fields Anderson]. Floyd L. Anderson tells a story of, of Dawson. Dawson used to be temperamental when he was--had the choir in Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. So they got a new president and usually the routine that Dawson would do is that Dawson would just storm out the chapel in the middle of the service and get on the train and ride up to Chicago [Illinois]. The president would come up there and beg and go, "Professor Dawson." So he did it once and the president got up and went up to Chicago and begged him. So he did it once again. Got up to Chicago, waited, the president never did show up (laughter). So when he came back to Tuskegee they had the, the whole music department was reorganized without Dawson. And of course they welcomed him back, but you know, I mean, they--that's the last time he stormed out of the chapel, you know. But he was a very interesting man. I remember I saw him rehearsing his symphony with the Nashville Symphony and they ran out of time and Dawson wanted to work on some rhythmic figures that he wanted in the orchestra. And he said "I'll pay ya--I'll pay ya," no--of course the union, when the union speaks, everybody listens. You know, the union they went off the stage, you know. But, but he was--he was so insistent on a perfect performance that he was willing to do that. I was very much impressed and touched by that. My music is not influenced by any of them. I mean I'm of another generation, another, another heritage musically, you know, so I have other mentors in music. And I think the closest thing that comes to an influence of my music would be Ulysses Kay whom I knew very well and was a marvelous composer and lived in New York [New York] and was a great mentor to both Hale Smith and I. Story_ID: 627245 Speaker 1: Anybody else, now you met Eubie Blake too, now he's not a classical musician (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I met Eubie, Eu- Eubie, Eubie spent a lot of time with me when we came--when he came to the performance of 'Treemonisha' [Scott Joplin], I had known him before. But I mean, he spent a lot of time with me. And Eubie loved to play the piano and played at my house. And my mother [Anita Turpeau Anderson] was with us at the time, just staying with us for the performance of 'Treemonisha.' And Eubie would play 'Love Will Find the Way' and my mother was ju- like a teenager, I was embarrassed (laughter). You know, Eubie would play this "Love Will Find a Way" and she just loved it, and so forth. And Eubie, Eubie never flew, he'd always go by train. And one thing about Eubie, he always wear a three piece suit, always dressed up, coat and tie. That generation was really, and, and Mays [Benjamin Mays] was that way. Mays always wore a coat and tie, a suit, never a sports coat. And Morehouse men to this day wear suits, they don't wear sport coats, they wear suits, the teachers do, and I found that fascinating, you know. Speaker 1: Now what about women, were there any significant black women composers that you met along the way? Speaker 2: No, the most famous would be Florence Price. And one of my students had just did an orchestration of her piano concerto and that has just been performed by the Center for Black Music Research [Chicago, Illinois]. They commissioned him to do it. This is Trevor Weston who now teaches at Drew, he's chairman of the music department at Drew University in New Jersey [Madison, New Jersey]. Marvelous musician. Story_ID: 627246 Speaker 1: Can you tell us how the Center for Black Music Research [sic. Black Music Center] at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] got started. Indiana doesn't necessarily have the reputation of being the most liberal of states, and how did this happen? Speaker 2: That happened because of Dominique de Lerma [Dominique-Rene de Lerma] and David Baker. They made it possible for that center to be built. And of course, it was important in the day--in those days because nobody was doing it. Nobody was doing it and if Indiana says it's important, and it's one of the biggest music schools in the world, said it's important, then it's important. So then you get--you get spin offs with other Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] schools like Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] followed suit, I mean so did--Iowa [University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa] never did follow suit, but I mean it had an interest in black music, but they never followed suit like the other school made commiss- commitments. And of course it's not only the Big Ten schools, you also had it in the Ivy League schools because you begin to get black professors being hired. And these are black students, just like I got to Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] because black students raised Cain about there being no black professors. So when you come, your loyalty is to the black students, not to the university, your loyalty is to the students that got you there. And we were able to get in more black faculty and we insisted on that and got, and the blacks that Tufts hired when I was there were stellar. I mean in fact my dean who's an African American before I got there he was there. And he went on to be president of City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], you know, Bernard Harleston. So, so that it's a matter of, of, of us--all of trying to lift the boat in terms of race, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, I know you knew [HistoryMaker] Samuel Floyd too? Speaker 2: Well Samuel Floyd is rep- responsible. He's had a black music center at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], but he had no, no, no financial support to do the kind of things he wanted to do so he went to Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago] and-- Speaker 1: That's in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: --the president at Columbia College was at one time a bodyguard for Paul Robeson. The world is small. And this guy had a commitment to black music. So when Sam said he wanted to start a Center for Black Music Research, I mean he just fell right in and gave Sam the full authority and money support. And Sam has built really a major place for the collection of black music. They're a lot of people giving their archives to the Center for Black Music Research. They have a journal which is very respected. Sam had several publications, one is an international dictionary of black composers, two volumes that he put out so that he has done yeomen's work, I think, in terms of documenting, he and Dominique de Lerma, who was there with him at one time. They have done a marvelous job in terms of writing about these contributions that have constantly been ignored by white society. I'll give you another example. Now this spring, the Society for American Music is having a national meeting. They are having the meeting in Charlotte [North Carolina]. They have a program of black composers, I mean--I mean we should be way past that. I mean, I go because, because they gonna play my music. But I'm saying we should be way past that in terms of our thinking, in terms of who we have in our music schools, but we aren't past it, we aren't past it. Locally, there's only one black professor in the music department at, at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], no two, one has a jazz band. But, but I don't count that because he's really--he has a jazz band, I mean he's not--he's an adjunct professor sort of thing. But then there's only one here at the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]. I mean this is disgraceful and I mean, I'm just talk--and I don't mean to single out these two universities. I could say the same thing about any university in the country, that there--there's no black presence of significance. Right now in classical music, the figures I hear--just heard the other day, less than 1 percent of what orchestras play are written by black composers. I mean, is the music that bad (laughter), I mean--I--you have to laugh because you know, you know its racism. I mean--I mean you can't reduce it to anything else but that. So I mean I know that this won't last forever, and I also know that they all fall by the wayside with this type of thinking and that orchestras will eventually have to integrate. I mean you don't have large numbers of blacks in any orchestra. Story_ID: 627247 Speaker 1: Are the pieces that are played, played by or put on agenda by black professors at these schools primarily? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, well some of them are and some--sometimes blacks just don't have the resources. If you don't have a black wo- black college [HBCU] with a major orchestra, I mean we don't have that. I mean and occasionally like Alvin Singleton right--is right now is writing a piece, he has been in residence with the Atlanta Symphony [Atlanta Symphony Orchestra] and he's writing a piece for them. But I mean that's rare, I mean that's very rare and we, we have the same problem that--that--that Ulysses Kay and, and William Grant Still faced and, and Dawson [William Levi Dawson] also. So I mean as far as I'm concerned I would say nothing has really changed. I mean the program that we have that we are usually performed on are program we do ourselves. And so we have gone on without, I mean we just can't sit back and wait for them to integrate. I mean since they don't wanna integrate, that's all right, we just go on and do it, like, like the generations before me. But it's very disheartening because we know that they are not recognizing truth. Now I'm not saying black composers are better than any other composers, but I'm saying black composers are as good. I would put [HistoryMaker] Olly Wilson up against any bl- any white composer they wanna name. And yet, Olly Wilson isn't, isn't performed, and a marvelous composer so that--those are the things we faced. Speaker 1: Now what about the students, are we getting young black students these days? Speaker 2: Oh yes, we're getting--we're getting young composers, I mean I'm not connected like I used to be, but, but there's a younger generation coming out and they're having the same problems we're having. They're finishing Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in composition and they're finishing other schools, Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and so forth, what I mean. They, they don't have access to good schools like we did. I mean we had access to good schools, I mean in terms of where we--where we--where we taught. I mean I'm talking about Oberlin [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio], Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] and you know, other schools, Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], I can name loads of schools that hired black professors, but, but now I mean the numbers are dwindling, the numbers are dwindling. Story_ID: 627248 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: One word, integration. I mean it--it's simple. If America is gonna survive it has to--it has to address the issues of racism and it has to address the integration, of not just black Americans but I'm talking about Hispanics, everybody into the pool. And I'll tell you why that's important. Is that--is that the society can't exist as a white society and compete in the global economy. That you have to have training for everybody that, that, that, that--that's available so that youth don't drop out of high school. I mean it's disgraceful our educational system in terms of what we have produced or lack to produce. To have the high dropout rates that we have, particularly in the African American community and the Hispanic community too. To have these high dropout rates when the geniuses are there and to assume that they are not going into crime and they're just gonna go somewhere and disappear is false. I mean you have to train young people to be the best that they can be. And the only way you can do that is opportunity, and the only way we can compete and, and you have to admit that we're not competing now. In other words the rise of China, the rise of Brazil, the rise of Russia, the rise of India, I mean everybody says there's--their economies will overtake us. So, so the question you have to ask yourself is how can we compete. And the only way you can compete is training your youth to be competitive. And, and to be competitive you have to have the intellectual tools and you can't do it if you're just gonna focus in--on a white society mainly because that's too small. I mean it's too small for the problem, you can't do it, you can't do it that way. Story_ID: 627249 Speaker 1: Tell me this, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: I, I think I've always based my life on doing the best I could with what I had. And I never look back. I, I take Satchel Paige's advice, "Never look back for something back there may be gaining on you" (laughter). So I--I've never looked. I've never--I've never felt that--I mean I would've loved to have been a better father, but my children turned out to be successful. Now when I say a better father, I don't know what I could've done. I mean I've given them all the resources, they--they're successful in life. I have a son [T.J. Anderson III] that's a college professor and his wife is a professor, they both have their Ph.D.'s. I have a daughter [Janet Anderson] that's the chief accountant for the, the police department in suburban Atlanta [Georgia]. I have another daughter [Anita Anderson Downing] that has her own company, Anderson Travel [Anderson Travel Advisors] in Atlanta and her husband is in investment and they're doing well. So, so I, I don't know what more I could've done as a parent, but as a parent I think I should've done more. I don't know what, what it would be, you know, so, yeah. What--what's the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] saying, hind- hindsight has a hundred fathers and defeat is an orphan (laughter), you know, it's, it's true--it's true--it's true. But I never--I never look back. I, I, I, I try to learn from my mistakes and I've made many mistakes in life and continue to make them, you know, but I mean I just don't, don't dwell on what, what, what didn't happen and what, what could've been and all of that, no. I mean you move on, and you move on as best you can with what, what you can do. Speaker 1: Now do you think as a musician you tend to be a perfectionist? Speaker 2: Oh I'm a profes- professional--perfectionist. I'm definitely a perfectionist because when I go into rehearsal I want everything to be exact in terms of how I've envisioned the piece. Because I know that, that I, I will eventually leave a legacy, whatever that legacy is will be my music, that--that's what it is. And I want people to say, "Oh when I played with him, he insisted that it go this way," so that I--the notes--the notes are just only a guide to what, what you're really thinking and nobody can put down everything. I mean you can't detail everything you think in a piece. Some of you jus- just--it's like all music, all music is just a guide to what, what Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] meant and what Rachmaninoff [Sergei Rachmaninoff] means, and what Stravinsky [Igor Stravinsky] means, you know. And people will say well Stravinsky told me that it should be this and I would hope someday that people that do play my music will say, "When I played this for T.J. [HistoryMaker T.J. Anderson], he said that this should be done this way," you know. So, that's what I would hope for. Story_ID: 627250 Speaker 1: Well would you consider that what you think your legacy should be, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I, I, I would hope that--I would hope that would be my legacy. And of course, what you--what you don't know, I mean I may not have a legacy. I mean I may not be important, I mean and that's, that's a possibility, I mean who knows, you know, I mean. There're loads of cases in, in history where composers were thought of being great and they turned out not to be great. I mean Aaron Copland now is not thought of as what Aaron Copland was say twenty years ago. I mean you tell everybody, they think greatest composer in America, but people don't say that now. I mean so, I mean a legacy is questionable and whether I have a legacy, I don't know or will I have any control over. But what I know I did--I did the best I could with what I had and that's all I can do, yeah. Speaker 1: Now tell us--you told us about your--some of your children, but you've got three children and (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I have a son [T.J. Anderson III] and two daughters [Janet Anderson and Anita Anderson Downing], yes. My wife [Lois Fields Anderson] and I have a son and two daughters (simultaneous). Story_ID: 627251 Speaker 1: What about your wife [Lois Fields Anderson], you guys (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my wife is, is, is the backbone of everything I have achieved. In fact, I wanted to walk away from the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], she convinced me to stay (laughter). In fact, I walked away from my Ph.D. exam and they--I walked out of it and it was so funny, that-I, I went home and when I walked in the door the advisor was calling her and asking, "Where's T.J. [HistoryMaker T.J. Anderson]?" She said, "T.J. gots--wait he's coming in the door now." He said--he said, "Well what happened?" I said, "I just got sick." And this was pressure, you know, I mean as a student, you know, so much riding on this. So he said, "Well do you--did the questions upset you?" I said, "No." He said, "Do you want us to change the question?" I said, "I don't care what you do to the questions, I'm going to bed." He said, "Okay we'll have it tomorrow, will you be ready tomorrow?" I said, "Yeah, I'll come back tomorrow." I came back the next day same questions. I didn't know any more than I knew the first day (laughter). But I've been fortunate that people have rescued me in my life when I've been foolish or had a chance to just--to just end my career just then there. But I've been fortunate that people sort of, I guess they thought I had a talent and they recognized something in me that they didn't see in others, you know. And I've been fortunate that--that for every person that has blocked me, I can name some person that picked me up and put me on the path again. So I say it's been even. So I have no complaints about my life, yeah. Speaker 1: And your wife has been one that's helped you? Speaker 2: Oh, oh she, she, she--as I said, she, she was a German major at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] and when we got married, she was the first black librarian in the--in the public--in the public libraries in Cincinnati [Ohio]. And she finished University of Cincinnati as a German major and then she got her library training in Western Reserve [Western Reserve University; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio]. And we made our home in Iowa, and we raised our kids [T.J. Anderson III, Janet Anderson and Anita Anderson Downing], and she--fortunately, she became a school librarian. She was a college librarian 'cause she was the librarian at Fisk [Fisk University] when we were in Nashville [Tennessee]. And the reason she became a school librarian in Lexington, Massachusetts is that we had the same vacations. So when I had summers off, the children had summers off, we could all do vacation. Now we go off to a colony or something, but she and the children would travel all over the country in the bus and do things together like that, and so, I was very fortunate that she took a lot of responsibility of, of raising the kids by herself and she also was totally supportive of whatever I wanted to do in music. I mean there was never any question, if I wanted to spend money for manuscript paper, we spent money for manuscript paper, and not the kids going with the expensive tennis shoes (laughter) or sneakers, you know. See I mean it was--it was very fortunate to have had that kind of support. And she wasn't, wasn't a musician, but she recognized that this is what I wanted to do and we did it as a team together, you know. And I don't think there's anything I don't discuss with her in terms of decision making. I mean all of our decisions are made together as a team. Speaker 1: Okay. I must point out this is the first time in a thousand interviews that anybody has asked to have their wife sit next to them while they do their interview. Speaker 2: Oh it is. Speaker 1: It's the very first time. Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I don't see myself as a--as a individual, I see myself and my wife as a team. And I think--I think I was raised in a family, I have a family and all the friends, and most of the friends I have, have families. And I think the insistence in the society about us, unwed mothers and going around having children and nobody, I mean the lack of respect for the family is, is just--I find it very offensive. I mean my wife and I have been married over fifty years. John Hope was married over sixty, I guess. And I just think that's something that the society is missing and it's--and it's criminal really because we have lots of successful love stories that we could tell about, about, about how we exist. And these things are important in terms of black lifestyle, very important I might add. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No (laughter). I can't think of anything, you've asked a lot of good ones, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 627252 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered, oh that's a difficult one because I'd like to be remembered as so many different things, because I am different things. Certainly as a--as a composer would be my first ambition, because that's--my life has been devoted to music. But I'd want to be remembered as a father. I'd want to be remembered as a teacher. I'd want to be remembered as a mentor. I'd want to be remembered as a race man. I'd want to be remembered as someone who, who tried to be honest, honest as possible. I don't succeed most of the time, but at least that's the goal, I recognize that's the goal, honesty is the goal and sometimes I succeed, sometimes I don't. And I think, I'm not a religious person, although I--I've been a member of the Unitarian church for a long time, many years. In fact, we started in a--inner city church, my wife [Lois Fields Anderson] and I, and I remember the local church too. So I've been active in Unitarian circles for years. But, but I tell my children that I don't care what re- what religion they believe in as long as you believe there's something greater than, than the human species. There's so--there's got to a force greater than us. I mean I don't care what it is, and my son [T.J. Anderson III] is Buddhist by the way, and my, my daughter Anita [Anita Anderson Downing], the one that has the travel agency [Anderson Travel Advisors, Atlanta, Georgia], she's--she and her husband both active in Unitarian circles. My daughter's [Janet Anderson] still searching for a church, and she had been active in the church. And what happened was that she got active in the support of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] groups and the church didn't believe it at that time, of course they believe in it now, but I mean she just fell out, you know, to that. So she's still trying to search or find her way back to church. But I don't insist that they go to church and none of that, but I do insist that they have, have a sense of, of something greater than the human, than mankind. I mean, my father [T.J. Anderson, Sr.] used to say, said the human species is flawed, but there're a lot of good people, you know, I mean and I believed that, I believe it. There are a lot of people that are flawed in this world, and not only that there're people in authority so you have wars, you just have constant poverty. I mean I can just give you loads of examples of this. But I mean you, you have to believe that's--and work, you just only believe, you have to work for a better way and a better society. And of course you do all you can do and after that, that's all. And you leave like everybody else leaves, (laughter) yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Oh thank you, thank you for coming. Story_ID: 627253 Speaker 1: T.J. [HistoryMaker T.J. Anderson], Lois [Anderson's wife, Lois Fields Anderson], T.J. III [T.J. Anderson III], and Pauline Kaldas in Cairo, Egypt. Speaker 2: In 1992? Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 2: This is '08 [2008]. Speaker 1: T.J., Andy Kirshner, and another T.J., and this is 2008 at my eightieth birthday concert at Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: T.J. and the composer Augusta Read Thomas at T.J.'s seventieth birthday at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: T.J. and Lois Anderson with their grandchildren. Yasmin [ph.], Nina [ph.], Salene [ph.], and Kali [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: The composer--I mean the poet Milton Kessler who was T.J.'s and Pauline's advisor at Binghamton, New York [State University of New York at Binghamton] where they both received their Ph.D.'s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1998] in Atlanta [Georgia]. Tania Leon, [HistoryMaker] Olly Wilson, Alvin Singleton and T.J. Anderson, composers all. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Olly Wilson and T.J. in Olly's studio in Berkeley, California. Speaker 2: Also that's '97 [1997]? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's '97 [1997] yeah, it's on it, yeah. Speaker 2: T.J. Anderson with George Walker, Olly Wilson and his wife. I'm with my wife of course. Speaker 1: T.J. and Lois with [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin. Speaker 2: T.J. and George Walker, the first Pulitzer Prize winner of classical music. Speaker 1: T.J. and I forgot his name. Speaker 2: Michael Eric Dyson. Speaker 1: Michael Eric Dyson, oh sorry. What year was that, five, 2005. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Steve Jaffe [Stephen Jaffe], T.J., and Tom Warburton at T.J.'s seventieth birthday Duke University. Speaker 2: Dr. Ed Lewis, 1980. Speaker 1: T.J.'s orchestration teacher Dr. Edward C. Lewis, Jr. [Edward C. Lewis]. Speaker 2: Melvin B. Tolson, '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966], Melvin B. Tolson. A major inspiration in my life. Speaker 2: Hale Smith. Speaker 1: My mentor Hale Smith, the New York composer. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Samuel Floyd. Speaker 1: Samuel Floyd the founder of black music research center [Center for Black Music Research] at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972], Eubie Blake. Speaker 1: Max Morath, T.J. and Eubie Blake at T.J.'s home 1972. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Sir Michael Tippett with T.J. on his visit to Tufts University. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh T.J. with young performers. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: T.J., his mother Anita Turpeau Anderson, Ilanita Anderson Prince and Jean White, Jean Anderson White. Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that Jean White on the far right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. That was the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Olly Wilson, T.J. and [HistoryMaker] Harry Elam at T.J.'s eightieth birthday party. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999], Roanoke. Speaker 2: The Roanoke cast of 'Treemonisha' [Scott Joplin] 1989, Roanoke, Virginia. Speaker 1: Alvin somebody. Speaker 2: Alvin Singleton--Alvin Singleton, George Walker, Olly Wilson, T.J. Anderson in Atlanta, I don't know what year that was, it's on there somewhere. Speaker 1: It's '98 [1998] I think. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is again the Duke birthday party. Scott Lindroth, T.J., Augusta Read Thomas, David Pittu and Alden Anderson [sic. Anderson Alden]. Speaker 2: This is '08 [2008]. Speaker 1: O-eight, 2008, this is the William Dawson festival at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia], T.J. Anderson and friends. Speaker 2: Paul Siskind. Speaker 1: Former student Paul Siskind-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): John McDonald. Speaker 1: John McDonald and Eleanor Eisenmenger and Lois. She's a patron of mine, she's commissioned a number of pieces. Speaker 2: That's with David Siskin--Paul Siskind and Paul--Paul teaches at one of the New York universities, former student. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt, '08 [2008]. Speaker 2: Richard Hunt, he and--and Chet Pierce [Chester Middlebrook Pierce] are about my best friends. Speaker 1: Eric McKeever. Speaker 2: This is T.J., Eric McKeever and Yusef Komunyakaa, the Pulitzer Prize winner and poet at Yusef's and T.J.'s opera 'Slipknot' Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Tim Breen [Timothy Breen]. Speaker 2: Tim Breen who conceived of 'Slipknot' at a paper presented at the National Humanities Center. Speaker 1: That's self-explanatory. A plaque on Richard Hunt's sculpture. Speaker 2: The theorist and, and composer, musicologist Mark DeVoto with T.J. Speaker 1: Albert Murray. Speaker 2: T.J., Richard Hunt, Eloise [ph.] and Olly Wilson at Albert Murray's house in New York. Speaker 1: Tufts commencement in '07 [2007]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tufts commencement, '07 [2007]. Speaker 1: The only person you'd be interested in is Michael Bloomberg. Let's see, this is Bloomberg, no here he is right here. T.J. receiving an honorary degree with Michael Bloomberg from Tufts. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Michael Bloomberg is the first from the right, fifth from the left. Speaker 1: T.J. and Olly Wilson, 1980. Speaker 2: Oh, Dizzy Gillespie with T.J. on, on his receiving an honorary degree from Tufts. Speaker 1: Charles Darden. Speaker 2: Charles Darden, a young conductor at T.J.'s home in Winchester, Massachusetts, 1981. Speaker 1: Richard Hunt and T.J. in Richard's studio packing up a sculpture piece. I don't see a date on this, probably '80 [1980] something. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Bill Valente [William Valente] and T.J. I don't know where that was taken, I think that's in California, I'm almost sure it's in California. Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five [1985] it says here. Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985], yeah. Speaker 2: This is William Bolcom and T.J. with his wife Joan Morris. Eighty-five [1985], Winchester--we're at our home, yeah, at our home in Winchester, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: This is Jester Hairston, distinguished Tufts graduate with T.J. He always said, "With my nerve and your talent, we could go far," (laughter). Speaker 2: Rita Dove [HistoryMaker Rita Frances Dove], T.J. and Lois at the American academy 19-- Speaker 1: Twenty eleven [2011]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Lois with Alitash Kebede. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, that's MoMA [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] that's the--that's the showing of Richard Hunt's. She financed the, the video on Richard Hunt's life. Speaker 2: The fortieth anniversary of 'Treemonisha' with Roland Carter sponsor at the University of Tennessee, Chattanooga [University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Chattanooga, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: African American women at the White House [Washington, D.C.] sponsored by Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune. My mother is the third, what fourth from the right is my mother. Speaker 2: This is my father and his father, Tom Anderson [Thomas Anderson] and T.J. Anderson [T.J. Anderson, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Our track team-- Speaker 2: Our track team in '24 [1924]-- Speaker 1: Twenty-four [1924]. Speaker 2: T.J. Anderson captain of the team. Also student body president and my mother, Anita Anderson, was a member of the student council. Speaker 1: T.J. at Tufts, it's about '73 [1973]. Speaker 2: Family portrait. I don't remember, what's that. That's all of us. Speaker 1: T.J. and Ila, I don't see--yeah that's just T.J. and Ila. Me with my sister, yeah. Speaker 2: Way back when. Speaker 1: I was about four or five. Speaker 2: Stanley Badaya [ph.] and T.J. at the performance of 'Thomas Jefferson's Orbiting Minstrels' [T.J. Anderson] in Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois], 1988. Speaker 1: This is the performance at Northern? Speaker 2: Yeah that's the set. Okay, that's it...