 Story_ID: 571347 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Prince-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Leftridge [Prince Leftridge, II]. Speaker 1: --Leftridge, and ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Sure, my name is Martha, M-A-R-T-H-A, B-R-O-C-K, Brock [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge]. Speaker 1: No middle name? Speaker 2: Yeah I do have a middle, middle name, Martha Gean and it's spelled G-E-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any nicknames or anything or--? Speaker 2: They sometimes calls me, call me Gean or--I can't say the other names, it's not good (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is 9, 19th of 1958 [September 19, 1958], and it was dow-, I was born in a place called, Isola, I-S-O-L-A, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently my occupation is a business owner and public official. Speaker 1: And you're a photographer right? Speaker 2: Yes, business owner, I won my own photography studio [Martha Brock Photography] in the Village of Oak Park [Illinois] and that's been since 1992. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is S- (laughter), September 23rd, 24th, 2006. Speaker 1: Right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're pre-, you're presently inside of my studio at 45 Harrison Street in Oak Park, Illinois. Story_ID: 571348 Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled by management to ask (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes I do. My favorite food is greens. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I love greens. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, black. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, the fall like we're in September now, I am just gloating because, you know, the weather is nice, you don't get too hot. Everything is nice, you start to see the leaves fall, this is my favorite time, the fall. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oahu, Hawaii is a, really nice place. The island of Waikiki [Honolulu, Hawaii], I love that place. I've only b-, had a chance to go there twice in my whole life but I, I love it. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: You know, it has changed over the years, and I've started now to realize, now that I'm in government, one of the most important things to d-, in government now is when we talk in terms of what gets done in, in village government and I was offered the new phrase, the new phrase is what get measured gets done. So, you know, of, of course it's changed over the years. When I'm doing a lot of photography work I like to think of the work that I do as quality work so if you want the best quality then you need to hire the best photographer, so, you know, as I said, my--the phrases have changed over the years. Story_ID: 571349 Speaker 1: All right, well I wanna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. We'll, we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Dor-, Dorothy, that's D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, Amos, A-M-O-S [Dorothy Amos Brock]. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mom was born (laughter), this is so weird, 'cause I don't know her year, but I know it was October 29th and my dad, Herman Brock [Herman Brock, Sr.], B-R-O-C-K, H-E-R-M-A-N, B-R-O-C-K, and my dad was born, September the 8th, 1925. Speaker 1: Okay, were, were they close to the same age? Speaker 2: Pretty much, my father, right now, and he was born in '25 [1925], I think he's close to-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): He's eighty-one. Speaker 2: He's eighty-one and my mom, she would--she passed in '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, whatever that age is, I, I would have to check it for you to see the year. Speaker 1: Okay now, where was your mother born? Speaker 2: My mom, from what I was told, was born in a place called, it's, it's called Silent Shade [Mississippi], this is a little small town in Mississippi, and my dad was born in a place called Tchula [Mississippi], it's spelled, T-C-H-U-L-A. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of them. Okay, now, just, well on your mother's side what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family, how, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: This is the part of my life that I, I find to be so troubling 'cause as we grew up my parents, m-, as m-, my mom, I should say, my mom really never talked about her siblings. She told us that she was raised by this lady and this man, and his name was Moses Jones [ph.]. Apparently he took her in as a orphan, I believe that was the case, and at that time there were about five additional siblings that was--they were related to my mom only through the fact that my mom lived with this particular family. And throughout the years there was one lady, her name was Mozel-, Mozel-, Mozella [ph.], and Ms. Mozella would visit us all the time but we only learned when I was thirty that she was not my mom's sister. And it was more like my mom was this person who was just floating and she had no siblings that she could tie herself to. I later on learned--but she, she, she never told me, she never told me who her dad was, we never knew who her dad was. But I knew who her mom was; her mom was named Sarah Amos [ph.]--Sarah. And Sarah apparently had this good relationship with, with Moses and he brought my mom, she brought my mom into that whole family and it was sort of like a blended type of a family with the other siblings and I think there were about seven brothers and sisters from that side of the family, which I've never met except maybe one of her sisters. I'm told that there are a lot of those family members who would be my first cousins who lives in some parts of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Sacramento, California, in that area. But I do know the people who were, during that time who were in that close proximity with my mom through those blended families all of the family members, those siblings, they've all died out. There were two that lived in, I think it was Detroit [Michigan] and that was Sherry [ph.] that lived in Detroit but it's real, really, really, gray because she really, honestly never talked about it. And when I became, you know, when you get older, and you start to understand your history a lot more you start to inquire but I remember before my mom died, I visited her, I think it was in '92 [1992] and I really wanted her to tell me about a lot of things but she was getting ready to like really open up, but then all of a sudden she just shut down again so I never got to really know. And now my sister who was on that side, who is my oldest sister, who kind of like knew a little bit of the history at the time, she passed away this pa- par-, past March and it's like, you know, it's hard to find all that information as a, as a family. Story_ID: 571350 Speaker 1: Well did your mother [Dorothy Amos Brock] talk about growing up and what it was like or any--well, what did Moses Jones [ph.] do? Did he, was he a farmer or did he do something else or--? Speaker 2: What I've understood is that Moses Jones was this really well-off man who saw my mother's mother [Sarah Amos (ph.)] as a person that he wanted to have a relationship with and they had children, you know. He was a much older man, I think, if what I could understand from what was told, Moses was, I, I, you know, it's, it's, it's too gray, it's really too gray. But he was a person that, he took care of my mom and he took care of my grand mom. And, that's kind of like all I know, really. You know, no one ever talked about him, but, I heard one person who was on my mom's side of the family who I managed to contact about five years ago, and she tried to give me a description of who he was, but I can't remember him--my memory 'cause I didn't write everything down, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so did your mother go to school in--was, was she raised in-- Speaker 2: She was-- Speaker 1: --Silent Shade [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: --yeah, she was raised in Silent Shade and then she moved with my father [Herman Brock, Sr.] to a place called Caile [Mississippi]. Story_ID: 571351 Speaker 1: My sister that just passed, I believe she was born in '48 [1948] and du-, during that time she was, she was the only sibling and they would travel from that part of the country--it was all Delta [Mississippi Delta] area from there to places like Tchula [Mississippi], Caile [Mississippi], and then they set up in Caile. I was--we were born at that time when we were in Caile, 'cause I was born in '58 [1958] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How do you spell Caile? Speaker 1: Caile is spelled, C-A-I-L [sic.], I believe. I can look it up for you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's kind of like where we spent most of my childhood in, in this little small town. We, we lived on a, it was a, it was a really bad farm. But we didn't know any better, you know, we had to do all of the things that farmers do. We had to chop cotton we had a few little pigs. We, we did everything that was, you know, the white man's farm, you know, that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: So there were like--you were sharecropping basically (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we were-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --my parents [Dorothy Amos Brock and Herman Brock, Sr.] were sharecroppers and I remember my dad would go out and he would get on the tractors and he would come home maybe at six or seven that night, you know, that's what I remember as a young kid. And I think at that time it--I--I came from a large family of fifteen, but at that time during those years not all my family members were born yet, you know, 'cause we, I don't know we--it seemed that we lived there for a long, long time until the early '70s [1970s]. We were able to get a break from living on this farm; I believe my parents saved up enough money where we could move to another place. That's when we ended up in a place called Belzoni, Mississippi. Belzoni, we lived on a place called Deolent [ph.], and these were black farmers. We actually lived in a black farmer's house because in those times the farmer had the big house on the farm and they had all these other people who lived in their own--their farm houses as well. Well, our family was so big and the owners of this house, we stayed in that house because they had moved into what they called the progressive town area of Belzoni. So, I believe that was maybe a five or six room home, but it was, it was bigger than what we remembered when we lived at Caile, because in Caile we only had four rooms all together and I think at that time my--all of my siblings were born at that time except my brother who was, he was born in '75 [1975], so up to '75 [1975] all sixteen--fifteen--fourteen of us lived in the same house, you know, with these four rooms. But my, my youngest brother, he was born in the new house. He was the only one that was born in the new house and we kind of like lived that way for, I would say, roughly maybe for the next ten years maybe. And then my parents managed to buy a, a much nicer home inside of the semi- city lim-, right outside the city limits of Belzoni and that's where our family home is now at 105 Sterman Street in the town of Belzoni. My dad still lives in the home, my, I have a older brother who lives there with, with him who takes care of him, you know, because he, he's aging and everything. And that's kind of like the way my life, you know--during that time--and I can tell you a little bit more about how my life was when I grew up in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now I-- Speaker 1: --town. Speaker 2: --wanna get back to that-- Story_ID: 571352 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to your father's [Herman Brock, Sr.] side of the family, I'm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --gonna ask you what you--what do you know about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Well I know a lot more about my dad's side. My, my grandfather, I did get to meet him when we lived at Caile [Mississippi], he killed himself; his, his name was Cleveland, Cleveland Brock. He hung himself we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there any--he has any story as to how--why, or--? Speaker 2: Well, that's a story that they gave us but it turned out that he, my, he was like a part of--excuse me. Speaker 1: Take your time. Speaker 2: Oh boy. It turns out that he was a part of the South at the time, that there was a lot of stuff going on and we later learned that he didn't kill himself he didn't hang himself, he was hung. But, then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This, this is while you--when you were a little-- Speaker 2: Yeah, when we were little. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did get to meet him, I did get to meet him but I only met him one time in my whole life. And then I later learned from my dad, my dad--I remember, my dad was working the fields and he came in and he said that "Your, your, your, grandfather had killed himself," but he didn't kill himself, somebody hung him as we know hangings now, he, he would not have ever killed himself. He, 'cause of what my dad said. My father didn't grow up with a great education; he only went to the third grade in his education. My mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] she finished high school and she went to college for one year. And it, it was really hard times for my father because he, he had to raise us and I remember meeting my grandmother, who was the wife of my father [sic. grandfather] Cleveland and she was a really spiritual woman. I r-, see her, she would pray all the time and she would always read her Bible. Her name was Bunie, B-U-N-I-E, Brock [Bunie Brock]. And she would read the Bible all the time to us as little kids and she would just tell us how much, how important things were in life in terms of having a spiritual background. And, and I kind of like, you know, I, I, believe a lot of who we became was molded and shaped out of our grandmother because we were so close to her. When we did get that home in the inside of the town of Belzoni [Mississippi], she did stay with us for a long, you know, the latter pat-, part of her life. And I remember she would just sit at the table, she would always fix fresh food for us when we got off the bus, you know, to come from school. You know, I have some really great memories of her. I remember she had a house, when we lived on Deolent [ph.] in the, with the, as sharecroppers and she would always call me or my si-, my little, my young--my older sister who's one year ahead of me, and she would call--my dad had a nickname, they would call him, they would call him Little, Little O' Bad, B-A-D. Speaker 1: Little O' Bad? Speaker 2: Little O' Bad, and (laughter) it was so funny that she adopted that same name for my, my sister and she would always go to her back door and she would yell out of her back door, she'd say, "Little O' Bad, would you bring me a bucket of water?" Because at that time we had well water and she would want them to bring well water to her, to her house. And I just still see that so clearly even though our house where we lived was a distance from hers but it was at an angle where I could go outside of my front, on the front yard and we could hear her yelling across like it was a little ditch and I can still hear her saying (laughter) that, you know and we would just go down the road and take her tw-, two or three buckets of water, you know. But what she wanted us to do, not so much as bring the water from where we lived but to come in the back of her yard and pump the water and take it inside. So we did that a lon-, for a long time during those years with her. I think that my dad had a really great relationship with his mom, you know. He would take us to church and he, he, he, formed this little group of all of us together, you know, 'cause it was so many kids and we would sing at the local churches and things. We, we grew up in the Church of God in Christ in Mississippi and that was like our spiritual foundation for all of us as we, as we grew up as children. But those, those were great memories and I think when I was in the seventh or eighth grade my grandmother died and that was in the '70s [1970s]. She died like '71-ish [1971], '72 [1972], '74 [1974] and it was a real tragic time in our lives because my mom never really got close to my grandmother, I mean she was always in opposition with my dad, with my grandmother. She says, "I don't want Bunie over here." You know, but my dad, he was such a strong fighter, he always fought to have my grandmother be with us and she stayed around us for her latter days. Story_ID: 571353 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Dorothy Amos Brock] and father [Herman Brock, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: There probably is, and I would have to have my dad tell it. I, I don't know the story 'cause my mom, you know, she was really, she was a really wonderful person, and she didn't tell us a whole lot. You know, a lot of things we were left to find out on our own basically, or our older siblings would have to tell us and that's kind of like, that's the way our life has been. We've have to go sort of like unturn, you know, uncover all these sort of areas and learn about our family, learn about my mom and things like that. I remember when I first learned about my mom's life, about how she, somebody, one of the siblings from another state I was able to contact her in California and she said, "Do you know that your mom lived," she would, she, she would get on these planes every time she would get mad with my dad when my oldest sister, before she was born, she would get on these planes and she would just travel and go places just so my dad would get angry with her and she ended up in California one time, in, in Memphis [Tennessee], and I was told that my, my mom told me this story and I don't know how to put this story together I've really never checked it out. She said that she believed that my whole photography thing came through a relative that she had somewhere in Memphis named Buck [ph.], and I was like, who is this guy? It was a photographer, he was a, he was very well-known photographer back then, but she could never give me the rest of the picture that went with that, but that was a relative. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His name was Buck? Speaker 2: --it was, it was Buck and he had a studio somewhere in Memphis, Tennessee on some major street in Tennessee. But I could never find it I could never check it out. Uncle--she would say Uncle Buck, that's what she would say to me. And I, I was asking our sis, where does this talent come from and it, it, it was, I could never f-, I could never find it, you know, I could never find the connection there because none of the other family members that were in contact with us could ever substantiate what she said. I don't know if she said it just to make me feel good or what, but, she was saying that "I believe your talent come from your uncle." I says, "What is--who is the uncle?" She says (simultaneous)-- -- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know quite a f-- Speaker 2: --"Uncle Buck." Speaker 1: --there are quite a few good black photographers in Memphis, they, they had the Memphis Tri-State Defender [The Tri-State Defender] down there, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --it was headquartered in Chicago [Illinois] and there were lot of we--interviewed-- Speaker 2: Yes, one day I'll-- Speaker 1: --one of 'em Speaker 2: --check it out. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: One day I'll check it out, but, but that's what I remember about my mom, my dad, their relationship. You know, but also during those times it was very hard times for us because I remember the government cheese. I remember us lining up for, you know, these long slabs of cheese, you know, wrapped in white, I don't know, wax paper. That looks, it's so clear to me, with the blue and black writing on it. I just remember that so well because we didn't have a whole lot. Story_ID: 571354 Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Dorothy Amos Brock] or, or your father [Herman Brock, Sr.], and what were their personalities like and what--? Speaker 2: My mom's personality was strong and very assertive and can make you really mad in a second, and didn't mind. Very hard worker, my dad was just, he was a soft side of us, you know, he represents the soft side of all of us and I think he balanced out my mom because of his soft personality. But the times when he did speak, it was very meaningful. I mean it was very weighted in our family because if dad said something it was no question, we did it. But when mom said something we were the same way, but it was something about the weightiness of dad's, his tone because he, he didn't speak often, you know, he very seldom discipline us. In any area of discipline--I remember I went on this show, one of Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] shows in, in '84 [1984], and it was just a major uproar in my family because everybody thought I was going on the show to talk about, you know, me not going back home for five years after I had been out of college [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi]. I'd been out of college at the time five years and I did Oprah Winfrey's show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] in '86 [1986], it was '86 [1986], I apologize, and I tell you, it was a big uproar in my, in my hometown because when I did that show mom was thinking that I was gonna talk about the history of the family and everything. But I was talking about how I hated the South and how I suffered all the abuse of my cousin and my brother and it was like, I was like a disgrace for, for a minute. And it's just, all these little things that unfolded, you know, with mom. With her personality and her not wanting to really kind of like--she kind of like distanced herself for a minute from me, she says, "I don't know if I really wanna say that you're my child, you've just embarrassed me here in my tow-, in, in, in, Belzoni [Mississippi]," 'cause Belzoni's a small town. And I tried to apologize to her in a way in which I understood, but I didn't really understand because I was still grasping who I was as a person in terms of what I wanted to do in life and the things that was important to me and who I actually am and who I became and all of these things which is unfolding in me. And I remember calling my mom back and, and sharing with her that I was so sorry that I did those things but I thought they would help me to identify who I was because she was so tight in terms of explaining to us who we were as a pe-, as a, as a people, you know. Some families, when I look at history, people talk all about their heritage and the importance of certain things, those things didn't happen in our family. The things that we learned was through us reading ourselves and being assertive and I had some sisters and brothers who were very smart and they would just help us and my dad, he can't read. He didn't learn--he couldn't read at that time, he didn't learn how to read until I was out of college. My mom was an avid reader, she, she would read everything. The only thing I would see every day was the, the, the, Clair--The Clairton Legion [sic. The Clarion-Ledger], I believe, newspaper there. And she would--the Commercial Appeals [The Commercial Appeal], she would read all those newspapers and they would be everywhere. I mean she was up on ma-, every major issue. Story_ID: 571355 Speaker 1: Since you said it I've been thinking about it, you said, somebody told you that your mother [Dorothy Amos Brock] used to fly, she would get angry at your father [Herman Brock, Sr.] and fly out of the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She would get--somebody told me that she would take a flight, and I don't know how she would do it-- Speaker 1: But from where? I mean, I, I--that's what I'm thinking-- Speaker 2: She would take a flight-- Speaker 1: --from, you know-- Speaker 2: --from, I, I-- Speaker 1: --and there in-- Speaker 2: --it, it, could've been Jackson [Mississippi], no one would tell me where, but even my mom would--she, she substantiated this, she said, "When I was coming back from California on a plane," she said, "I was pregnant at the time with my--," which at the time would have been my older sister. And I says, "Really?" When she kind of like gave me that part, that she flew places, I'm like, how did--how did she get money to do that, in, in those days. But that's what she said, she took a plane and I don't know if this was her first time being on a plane or what, but she would-- Speaker 1: Well I know in the '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 2: --do this-- Speaker 1: --it was very unusual-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for any black people-- Speaker 2: She, she-- Speaker 1: --to fly anywhere, yeah-- Speaker 2: --would go on a plane, I have no idea how she would do it, an, and I thought, I even thought about that I said, how would my mom do this-- Speaker 1: Yeah, most people-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --in the '50s [1950s], weren't--even, even white people weren't flying, you know so I was wondering (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, watch this though-- Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: --here's another part to this that, that I, I, kind of like, I think what my mom had going back then was an imagination. I think my mom took a train or a bus, whatever, I don't think she flew, I really don't, and the reason I used to say that I didn't think she flew because she had an old song that she would sing and it went like this, "I wish I was married to Johnny D. Rockefeller [John D. Rockefeller]." And I--that stayed in my mind and as I grew up I said, "I gotta find out who this guy is." And it turns out, you know, the Rockefellers were the famous rich people at the time. Speaker 1: Do you remember the song? How does it go? Speaker 2: I, she says, (singing), "I wish I was married to Johnny D. Rockefeller." She would just go through the house singing that all the time and sh-, you know, she wouldn't have any more pieces to it, she would just start there, and she'd just, that hymn with the, (singing), "I wish I was married to John Lee--Johnny D. Rockefeller." She'd just say that all the time, all the time and I later learned what that actually meant is that she wanted to be very wealthy. So a lot of what she said when she flew, it could have been through an imagination, but she did take a bus and trains or whatever was available at that time because somebody said that when she came back to my father she was like eight or nine months pregnant with my, with my oldest sister, my dad, my dad's first child--their first child together. 'Cause she had stayed away from my dad like, six months, and it was, it was, I don't know. That's all I know, my other sisters (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now-- Speaker 2: --better than I do on how that unfolded. Speaker 1: Okay, now where do you fall in the rank of the fifteen, are you, are you number what? Speaker 2: I think I'm number si-, let me see, I think I'm number six coming from the top. Story_ID: 571356 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Let's see how far I can go back. Maybe in the--like '64 [1964], I was born in '58 [1958], I don't remember me growing up as a little baby. I do remember at one point my dad [Herman Brock, Sr.] was--would, would, carry around in his wallet these photographs I'm not sure if they were, I must have been about eight-ish and my sisters, 'cause we were wearing poor boys, you know the poor boy dresses? There, there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, what are those? Speaker 2: --was a dress called the poor boy, okay, the dress was made straight down and then as it got here in the waist area it would fan out more like an umbrella like. Those were called poor boys, we would wear dresses like that. That's the last time I saw a picture of me at a much earlier childhood. And now I, even when I go back and visit my parents those photos are not even in our photo albums any longer. That one photo my dad would carry around in--I don't know why he carried it around but it was my sister, Lorene [Lorene Brock Mahan], and myself and then maybe one other sibling on there, maybe one of my brothers, he would carry that around in his wallet. Story_ID: 571357 Speaker 1: And let's see, you know, it skips after that because I remember going into the first grade, my first grade teacher was Miss Nuell [ph.], and that was in a place called Inverness--Inverness, Mississippi because we lived in Caile [Mississippi] at the time, I remember my second grade teacher named Mrs. Anderson [ph.], she was very nice. I don't remember my third grade teacher, my fourth grade, fifth grade, and I think by the sixth, seventh and eighth grade we were at a place called Humphreys County High School [Belzoni, Mississippi], Humphreys County--no, McNair, it was called McNair at the time, but it was in Humphreys Country [Mississippi], which is in the town of, of Belzoni [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Is it McNair High School? Speaker 1: McNair, no McNair Elementary [O.M. McNair Elementary School, Belzoni, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Elementary School? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, it was, I, I, think that's the name of that school, McNair. Speaker 2: In, in Belz- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Belzoni. Speaker 2: Now Bel-, you pronounce it Belzoni, but I think it's pro-, spelled Belzoni isn't it? Speaker 1: B-E-L-Z-O-N-I. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I alwa-, I'm bad with that. Speaker 2: No, now it's just the way people-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --down, people down there pronounce it Belzoni I think. Speaker 1: Right, we do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it's--it's not that it's a--I mean it becomes whatever-- Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The local people say it is (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know? Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: But I remember when I was in the, I wanna say the fifth grade. When I was in the fifth grade at that school they thought I was slow. So they put me in these really special classes. Speaker 2: Now is this a, now this of course, in those days, we were talking about segregated school, right? Right, a small, I mean a all-black school-- Speaker 1: I gotta think. Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, this-- Speaker 2: 'Cause they hadn't-- Speaker 1: --was an all-black-- Speaker 2: --integrated the schools yet (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) school, because the high school and the elementary school was a combination. The whites had their s-, part of town, which was called Humphreys County; that was Humphreys County school. Humphreys County Elementary [Humphreys County Elementary School, Belzoni, Mississippi] and Humphreys County High School was a combination of both schools in the white part of town. McNair was for the black children. We were not integrated at that time. I don't know when integration happened, I, I just remember when I was in my seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, I was going to school with white kids. And it was real traumatic at that time because, you know, you would see whites in Mississippi, but you wouldn't dare go in white folks town because they--towns were really segregated at the time and they truly were called white folks town and black people town. I mean, it was, it was, y- if you went in white folks town you would need to be taken in there by somebody or you, you would have had to be somebody's maid or you were going for a reason that was already clearly defined, 'cause if you didn't go for that reason you would, you would be kicked out or somebody would say you're not welcome here. And that's the way that it was all through--I think things started to change maybe in seventy--I wanna say--'cause I came out of school in '76 [1976], high school. Maybe in '71 [1971], '71 [1971], '72 [1972], '73 [1973], '74 [1974], like '74 [1974], you start to see the changes. Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: During--during that time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) about '74 [1974]. Story_ID: 571358 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About '74 [1974] you start to see the changes where people were more, they were more welcoming to us being in different parts of the community. And then you start to see more people integrated with working at different stores that were normally just for whites only. They would get all the good jobs at places like Fred's Dollar Store [Belzoni, Mississippi], there was a place called Rexall drugstore [Turner's Rexall Drugs, Belzoni, Mississippi], these were all predominantly white venues that would come into the community, but we could never work there. In--I remember people start working there they start to be--become stock people. I remember also there was a little grocery store called Lin Yin's [Lin Yin Food Mart, Belzoni, Mississippi], it was the only minority, Asian minority type of a grocery store. We patronized that store like crazy; we also patronized a store called the Piggly Wiggly. That--all those kind of things and Mr. Quick's [ph.], all of these were places that we could actually go and not have problems. There was a little place I remember that was right off of the outskirts of Highway 49 [U.S. Route 49] that we wouldn't dare go in, but now when I went back home, you know, blacks and whites are hanging out there together. It's, it, it's amazing that times have changed. But I also saw when I went back this; this past time in July, I saw a lot of people still using the term, "Let's go hunt some coons." And this was in the middle of the day. So I remember what this, what it meant then, I'm not sure if it has the same meaning, I don't know if they mean animals or if they mean blacks, so that was really interesting. And I, I began to look out of this window where I sat and I saw all of these--you've seen these dirt bikes. Dirt biking in Mississippi is major, you know, in that, in that flat Delta [Mississippi Delta] area, and I saw a black dirt biker and he had his bike on there and that gave me hope because the other guys that were standing outside of this restaurant and McDonald's along with this service section--they have it all combined and when he said that, my memory went back to the guy, I said, you know what, maybe they're talking animals now because there's a brother, two brothers, they've got their dirt bike attached to the back of the truck and I knew they were all guess--dressed in the, in the fatigues, you know and maybe that's what they were doing but I didn't inquire enough but when I heard the guy say, "Let's go hunt some coons, we're going coon hunting," and I was like, hm, is that what they're doing? Story_ID: 571359 Speaker 1: Let me take you back to when you were growing up, we, we were talking off camera about farm work that you remember and that sort of thing, but, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I don't think I ate enough dir-, I mean I think I ate so much dirt and dust, oh God. I remember early mornings my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] would get us up like at five, five o' clock--no, 4:30 actually. My dad [Herman Brock, Sr.] would have already fixed breakfast or my [paternal] grandmother [Bunie Brock], whoever was in charge of breakfast. And the day-to-day rituals for the summer months right after high school [Humphreys County High School, Belzoni, Mississippi] , right after school was done, she would get this--there was a semi-truck that she would rent from one of the white farmers, farmers, and she would put us all on this truck and we would go from Indianola [Mississippi], Inverness [Mississippi], Isola [Mississippi], Caile [Mississippi], all the way back to where we lived in Belzoni [Mississippi] and we would just chop cotton from about six, when the sun came up until the sun went down that day. And I think at one time my mom had probably like two trucks loaded just full of people that she would--this was what my mom did before she became a member of the, the faculty, you know, at the, one of the local schools. And she did this for so many years, she was just, haul people to chop cotton and I remember at the end of the day-- Speaker 1: So she was like a foreman or something or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was like a foreman, for-, foreman, and she was getting about two dollars a head for every person she would bring. She would have in excess of like probably fifty people to a truck. And we would travel down Highway 49 [U.S. Route 49] every day and chop cotton. It was so amazing that none of us ever died because we didn't have seatbelts and you just imagine all those people standing in the back of a truck and just--all we had was just straw hats and, and our water and we would pack our little lunches and at the end of the day the white man would come and we would all line up for our pay. At that time it was five dollars a day. I remember it increased to ten dollars a day and before I left for, for college [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] it was, they had moved it up to twenty dollars a day, six A.M. until about 6:30 P.M. And I remember the sun would be so scorching that I would sometime-, I was real lazy in the fields, I would, I would just lay under some of the bushes, you know some of the cotton stalks, just get a little shade. I'll never forget that. And one time I remember I was trying to be, you know, so adventurous and go ahead of everybody, chop my rows and cut all the grass and just try to do--'cause most of the time when you chop cotton you could chop cotton a lot of different ways. You had to have a technique in terms of how you would weed out all the grass, but by the same token you would need to take some of the cotton stalks, and you would have to thin that out also because if the cotton was too bunched together the roots would choke off the next bunch, so it was the process of thinning out the cotton so that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's weeding-- Speaker 2: --the other one would not-- Speaker 1: --weeding and thinning? Speaker 2: Weeding and thinning-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that process. But people began to look at it, you know, when you would go out you would have to, you would have to say how many rows you would take, as in rows of cotton. And for the most part people would carry at least four of those rows, one person would position themselves between two rows here and two there and they would chop and the weeds from those. Some people would carry six rows, but by the end of the day if you would had a aerial view you could see all these people lined up in the fields and they were at different points based on how many weeds they had to cut and there were snakes that would come out as well, you know. That town we had a lot of moccasins. I, I don't ever re- remember seeing a moccasin, but I do remember seeing a garter snake, you know, snakes like that. You know, they would be down our rows and we would have to cut and you start running, you know, we very seldom killed snakes. I do remember one time somebody killed a snake but that, that happened very seldom. Story_ID: 571360 Speaker 1: What I--else I--there were other things I remember, when I was in Mississippi recently I brought back some cotton so that I could, you know, feel what it was like. I remember picking cotton as well and some of those same times during the picking cotton stages I remember we didn't always have enough cotton in the bags and because I had really small siblings at the time, my oldest brother he would put them in the bags so when it was time to weigh the bags he would make 'em stay really still and he would hang the cotton onto the scale and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) He'd put your brothers in the bag? Speaker 1: Yeah, to make it weigh more and--'cause they were paying us--at the time, they were paying us like ten cents a pound. And it was really neat because you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just explain that, just explain that again 'cause I-- Speaker 1: This is how it, this is how it worked-- Speaker 2: --(unclear), okay. Speaker 1: It was so many of us that were picking, so my brother, my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] would have the smaller kids come to the fields, kind of like at the end of the day, you know, when we would pick cotton kind of like close by our house. And they would come into the fields, we would kind of like hide 'em, we'd put 'em inside of the sacks and we'd put 'em in there long enough so that they could hang on the scale and not move and we would hold 'em real steady because what happened during that time, my mom would stand here, my brother would help out with the weighing and he would keep the sack real, real sturdy. At the end of the sack it had a little circular hole that you would have to loop that over something like a, almost like a rope on the end that went across our necks to hold the sack onto our bodies, well you would loop those inside of each other and there was a hook that was--they would put on the scale and when you looped that in there the sack would hang upside down. But it wouldn't hang upside down to the point where all the cotton would come out, it would be like middle ways, you know like bent in the middle. So the kids were in there, the-, my little nephew, not my little nephew, but my little brothers, they were in there and so when it was time my two brothers would take the sack at the end of weighing and they would swing it up onto the trailer to dump it out and they just dump 'em out. It was kind of fascinating at the time, we didn't know that we were cheating the white man, but we did what we needed to do, you know. We did what we needed to do to survive. And I remember at the end of that time--whether it was cotton picking or chopping, my mom would line us all up soon as we would get paid she would line us up and we had to put all the money in her hand. And I think my mom was making at that time two hundred dollars a day. And we didn't even know what that meant. But I remember because whe-, by the time we made twenty dollars she was getting paid like three dollars a head at that time, so she was making a nice little piece of money, you know. And she had two truckloads of people that she would take to the fields and then she found a way to put them on the back of pick-up trucks and she had all these people working for her. She was quite interesting as a woman. Speaker 2: I, I-- Speaker 1: Very interesting. Speaker 2: I think I read that Fannie Lou Hamer was doing something similar before she got involved in the Civil Rights Movement. I think she was taking the crew out to work (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --like that. She'd have to organize 'em. That's a--yeah, that's-- Speaker 1: And, and the people wanna know, "What was your dad [Herman Brock, Sr.] doing at the time?" Well he was, he was the one who was--be working the fields, he would be on the tractors, the combiners, the, the, the, what we call the cotton pickers at the time. He was, he was working those machines, and he was very skilled at working those machines and that's what he did. He did that for a lot of years. And then when we moved, you know, in side of Belzoni [Mississippi] he start to be trained as a masoner, brick masoner, he started doing that, building houses and stuff like that. He was very skilled with that so that's how he lived his life out, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 571361 Speaker 1: When did you encounter your first, or get your first camera, I mean is there a story behind that or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, when we lived in Belzoni [Mississippi] there was a guy named, I wanna say his name--James Wilson [ph.], he would, he would visit us from Chicago [Illinois], South Side, and he was a relative to one of the people who lived in one of the communities in that, in that area called Caile [Mississippi], remember I told you about that? Speaker 1: Uh-hm. Speaker 2: Well he would visit us, with him being a family member he was, he was a relative to that family, to the Wilsons and I, I can't remember the last names of that other family, but he was a relative to that family. And he would come every year and take these family pictures of us. And he would go back the next summer, he would go back that summer and then come back the following summer and show us all these dynamic photos. That was my first inroad to looking at a camera. I started taking photographs tha-, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About how old were you when you, when you-- Speaker 2: It's gotta be, 'cause I, I, I remember going back, that's gotta be, that was in the, maybe '70s [1970s]. I would say '71 [1971], it was way before I started college [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] in '76 [1976]. It was maybe like se- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were about twelve, thirteen or-- Speaker 2: I was really little, I mean in-- Speaker 1: Oh you were still-- Speaker 2: --terms of young, I was very young. And the first photo he had me take it was really weird, it was really weird. I'll never forget this, he had me hold up a, a, pistol and point it at my brother, that was the first photograph I ever took. And he reversed that photo, he--that was the first photo that I ever remember taking having someone take of me and then he reversed that and had me shoot him doing the same thing, holding the pistol on my brother. It was really weird (laughter), yeah it's really weird. Speaker 1: So did he shoot black and white or, or what was he shooting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was black and white I remember, I remember black and white-- Speaker 1: With a 35 or--? Speaker 2: It was a 35mm camera and if, you know I wanna say that was a Canon, it was a Canon, but it was a, it was a screw back or something on it. It, it was really weird, but I remember him loading in film, I do remember that. And, that's kind of like all I remember as far as photography part goes. I, I don't have any--i-, it's like a blank period from there to my inroad to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, you know, for some reason that stayed with me because my photography from that day laid the foundation for my photography life as I went to college. Story_ID: 571362 Speaker 1: So you went to McNair Elementary School [O.M. McNair Elementary School] in Belzoni [Mississippi], in Belzoni-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --then to--did, did you like school when you went to school? Speaker 2: I think I did. I, I got into a lot of fights. I was a bully, gotta tell you that. But I was not like the bully who would win, I was a bully who would get beat up all the time because I would go around and tell the people who I was gonna beat up and they would in turn get so scared that I think the adrenaline got them to the point where they could beat me, and they did. They beat me--I remember this one girl beat me so bad and it--we were--she--I--you know, she beat me on the swing and then she beat me out of the swing 'til I fell down in the mud and I was all muddy and everything. Her name was Amy Banks [ph.]; she beat the snot out of me. And I think that stopped me from really being a bully, and I got to the point where I was like a tomboy and from being a tomboy I kind of like evolved into like being a nicer person as I went into the high school [Humphreys County High School, Belzoni, Mississippi] because that was like my sixth, seventh and eighth grade, I was so mean. I was mean to all the kids. Speaker 1: What made you mean, is there, do you have any idea now? Speaker 2: I do, I, I know what happened with me, I was sexually abused by some relatives and I think what I was happening right then--this all came out with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], when I did her show in '86 [1986]. I think a lot of what I was dealing with at that time, the repeated abuse and just really not knowing who I was, you know. You don't know who you are at th-, at that age; you're just trying to find out who you are and just trying to establish a personality for me. I just lashed out at everybody. I wanted; I wanted to have everybody on my hit list basically. And I just wanted to beat 'em up, or just to say that I could beat 'em up and never went through with it really. I was a major bully in my, in my school. I just picked on kids for no reason; I don't think I've ever shared that with anyone (laughter). But I, I do remember being a bully, you know. I kind of see some of that going around, sometimes now, you know. But not in a major way, it's more in a control way, you know, sometimes I try to exert myself when I'm in the city council [Village Board, Oak Park, Illinois] or over my boyfriend or something like that in a, in a really nice way. He says, "Well, you're not gonna boss me." I say, "Oh, okay." It's cool you know. So, but I, I come in--to terms with my life in terms of how the abuse happened and, you know, my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock], she didn't know any better. She didn't, she didn't know how to get counseling for us, she, she did the best she knew how. And, I eventually shared that with her in a repeat back to Oprah's show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], it's, you know, it's hard but that was my life, along with some of my sisters. My sisters were able to come through the abuse really well, but I--it took me a while and even now in relationships, you know, I'm a lot more cautious you know, with the kind of men that come into my life and things like that. I still have a good relationship with, with the people who abused me. I don't think of them any longer as monsters because, you know, they were going through transitions as well and it's just one of those things that happens in life that you just have to kind of like watch all of your children. You just have to watch your cousins, you know, and my, my parents they just had too many of us to watch all of us, you know, they just--couldn't do it, they just couldn't do it. Story_ID: 571363 Speaker 1: As you were growing up, you know, the Civil Rights Movement hit Mississippi big in 1964, and do you remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would not have been conscious of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Except every time someone asks me that I have one memory that I know for sure. We were at Caile [Mississippi] and somebody had escaped from Parchman [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi], Parchman is a place where they--it's a prison. Speaker 1: Yeah, Parchman Farm (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, they had escaped from there and they were looking for this person and they stopped every single school bus, I will never forget this, every day that I live in this life I remember those men coming onto the bus and the bus, the blus--the bus driver at that time, his name was Mr. Bubba, Bubba Blaire [ph.], he says, "The Klans [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] are coming the Klans are coming, drop to the floor and lay your heads down, don't put your heads in the windows." 'Cause he didn't know, he didn't know if they were getting ready to shoot us or what 'cause those were really hard times. I remember the man coming onto the bus, he was in a regular uniform and he had a lot of people with him, they, they all had rifles (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was in a police officer's uniform? Speaker 2: He was in a police officer uniform and he had the, like a ranger's hat on and he says, "We looking for an escaped con." And he went through and he looked under the, every seat and we were, we were kids, we were only like, I, we were still living at Caile and I was still going to this school, in Inverness [Mississippi], called, I, my school I can't remember. I was still going to that school in Inverness and I remember the man coming onto the bus and I remember him leaving and us being so scared as kids. That, that's my understanding of what happened then. Then when we moved to Belzoni [Mississippi], there was this guy named Johnson [ph.], he was a, he was a, maybe, he would have been maybe like eighteen, he may have been seventeen, I remember him whistling at a white girl at that same place that I was telling you about earlier. And that place escapes me now, I can't think of what the name of that place but it was off limited to the blacks. Well he went in that place and he whistled at a white woman and the whole town came after him to lynch him. And I remember people hiding him so that they couldn't find him but what I was eventually told is that they eventually found him but they didn't kill him, they didn't kill him, but they beat him up really, really bad for whistling at her. And they eventually sent him to Parchman, he eventually served I think two or three years for whistling at her. There were a lot of instances of racial tension but we, in the South, we were more like timid people in Belzoni. We wouldn't stage fights against stuff. I remember my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] and dad [Herman Brock, Sr.] saying, "Yes sir" and "No ma'am" to whites and they were saying it to little white kids as well. And my uncle came from Chicago [Illinois] and he said to my mom and dad, "You don't say Mr. and Mrs. to these honkies." That was his tone, his name was Bob Coward [ph.], Bob died in maybe 2001, and I remember him trying to get my parents to take my brothers out of the South because my brother got in a lot of trouble, oh boy, and I remember when my brother got in trouble he went and stuck up this little convenience store with a cap pistol, he got four years at Parchman for that. And he--it was really weird 'cause my, my cousin when he came, he was so used to seeing my brother every summer and when he didn't see him this time he said to my dad, he said-- Speaker 1: He'd spend the summers in Chicago? Speaker 2: No here, he would-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --he would--he would--we would--he would come to there-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay. Speaker 2: --to Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he said, "Yeah, where's John [ph.]?" He says, "Well you know John he robbed a convenience store and we had to give him up." He said, "You what?" My brother, when he robbed the store he ran, he ran back to our house. We had all these state marshals surrounding our house, it was so scary. We thought they were gonna shoot in the house to kill us to get him. So my dad, he didn't know any better, he just did what he knew was right to do. He marched my s-, brother out and gave him over to the people. Story_ID: 571364 Speaker 1: There were some pretty tough times in, in there as, as you were coming up, you were saying-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --it's hard to escape (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're very tough--they were very tough. There were times when I didn't think that we would eat. I know if it had not been for my parents [Dorothy Amos Brock and Herman Brock, Sr.] really being farmers and being able to plant those crops we would not eat. Because I remember when, even when we moved to the, the, the town that I just told you, Belzoni [Mississippi], which was, we thought, was very progressive, right next to that my dad and my mom managed to buy another lot which is, you know, another parcel of property. And it was just flat land and we planted all of our crops there. We planted peas, butter beans, all the different types of beans we planted it and every, you know, time it was time to harvest dad would have us under the carport. And this would be considered a carport in the South is the same as a garage. It just got a cover on it and you put the car under there, so we would be under there, mosquitoes and all, shelling peas and butter beans. And th-, this, this was our life. And he managed to place like--the, the major thing was like watermelons, cucumbers where you know there were pl-, the fruits and vegetables that were grown from large vines and it need a lot more space to grow, he just did that on one of the farmers lands who one of the sharecroppers the owners of those different places, that's how we lived. We, we, pulled those watermelons out of the fields, my dad would go around and sell those, he would, he did a little fishing, he would cast nets into this little river on Deolent [ph.]. I mean my dad fished for a long period of time and he was fishing all the way up until my senior year in college [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] and when he would cast these nets he would be in this little boat, a little paddle boat, and the fish would be stuck to the net, he would just put 'em into the big tub and bring 'em home. Sometimes there'd be snakes in there too, so. My dad was, he was, he was very, very resourceful in making sure that we, we had as much food as we could possibly have and he just did so many different things to, to ensure that. Story_ID: 571365 Speaker 1: Now where'd you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to high school at Humphreys County High School, which is in Belzoni [Mississippi]. And that's the same school that during the time that I got there was already integrated. We were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: -- we were there with the whites. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And that was from '72 [1972], maybe '73 [1973], '72 [1972], '3 [1973], '4 [1974], '5 [1975], '6 [1976], I probably entered in the fall of '72 [1972]. And I came out in '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now what was high school like, now this is a freshly integrated situation, right and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes we were integrated. We took over the high school of the whites, and most of the whites what they did is they, they left the school, most of them, a few whites stayed and they went to Humphreys County Academy [Humphreys Academy, Belzoni, Mississippi], which was a predominantly white place. And that place is still there believe it or not. Speaker 1: Private school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Private school. Speaker 1: I know that lot of, in a lot of the major cities up north the same thing happened, they ca-, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they went into the private sector-- Speaker 1: They started Christian schools or they went to Catholic-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --schools or something like, you know, yeah-- Speaker 2: It's the same, same scenario, same thing, it di-, nothing about the South is different. We had a lot of white flight. We also had a lot of white flight in the communities. You would see a lot of people move from those communities because the school, Humphreys County, it was in the white part of town, what we called white folks town. So, you know, in order to get there you need to go through white folks town and they wasn't about to have some Negroes come to their town and take over, so what they decided to do, most of them, they just uprooted and left. And a lot of those places now they're owned, a lot of those homes are integrated homes. You'll find a white living here, a black there and things are, you know, things are progressing. You know, people have changed their ways about doing a lot of things but a lot of things has also stayed the same in the sense of, you know, people, you know, economically we still see a lot of challenges there economically. Speaker 1: The poorest people are still black and-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but there're a lot of progressive blacks as well. Story_ID: 571366 Speaker 1: Getting back to my high school [Humphreys County High School, Belzoni, Mississippi], I was sort of like--remember I told you I stopped being a bully by the time I got to that grade. I had a best friend in high school, her name was Patsy Woodard, we, we still remain friends. We, we tried to get involved in everything in high school. I had some really great teachers. One of my favorite teachers was my English teacher, Miss Rush, she's related, by the way, to Congressman Rush [HistoryMaker Bobby Rush], and she, you know she drilled stuff in us, you know. Her name was Ernestine Rush [ph.], I mean she, she really drilled stuff into us, how important it was for us to learn the English language right way even though we were southerners. She--her diction was very, very nice and she just instilled a lot of things about the English language. And these are the kind of things that we probably should have learned much early on, but I was sort of like in special classes, and I don't quite know what those meant back then, but I was in regular classes by the time I got to the eighth grade so it was a fascinating time for me. I think I really learned a lot, not so much in high school, but it was after high school where I started to really develop. But during those high school times I remember dissecting the frog in biology. I remember Miss Bromfield [ph.] being my biology teacher, she was a very fascinating woman, she was always so elegantly dressed, we, we tried to figure out why is she teaching biology because she's always looking so great. And she, I mean, she would just come into the classroom and she really made you think about the whole profession of being a teacher and what it actually meant. That everything that we think in terms of fashion right now she, she really exemplified that in those days and that was kind of like a model, you know, for our school. This great looking woman and great looking fashion but she was smart, she knew biology and she sort of like dispelled the concept that men weren't only ones that were supposed to be great in biology. So you--I started to see a lot of the kids get involved in, in science as a result of her teaching because her teaching was really hands-on and you learned a whole lot in that class. One of my favorite classes I think was business math. But I, you know, I had a really soft spoken teacher in business math and she taught us a lot of different concepts about business and that was kind of like my first inroad to kind of like the business sector itself and understanding business although all my life my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] was a good model for business, but I didn't have a concept of that until much later on in life. The kind of business that you know, her, her business concepts, which were great. I mean when I think back, two hundred dollars a day chopping cotton was a lot of money (laughter) in those days and that was like a good foundation in terms of business that, that I remembered. In high school I didn't participate in a lot of sports, I didn't go to really any sporting games because my parents were very strict they wouldn't allow us to do anything but homecomings--games or something like that 'cause you know they were kind of like the religious type you know. They didn't want us to hang out and do things like that. The only thing I remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did the Church of God in Christ have a, have a-- Speaker 1: Yeah, ch-, yeah, Church of God in Christ, we had to wear dresses and skirts everywhere, which I don't know what that means because you know, there gonna be some people with pants on and dresses to in hell so, I, I could never figure that concept out but that's how they brought us up, they brought us up with the philosophy that--it was all these traditions that you could--you had to do this and this, if you didn't you were a sinner and I, you know, I, I finally shook off all of that, you know, in terms of the (unclear)--the traditions of religion. I think I was thirty when that start to happen, and really understand and seek God for myself and understand the whole dynamic of who God was. But during that time I, I had a boy; I did have a boyfriend, secretively, my mom would, if I, if she had known she'd a killed me. His name was Obie Baker [ph.], he died, I think, seven or eight years after high school. I, you know, in my, in my high school yearbook it does show that I did participate in a lot of different groups. I, I have a lot of photos of that and we just finished our thirtieth year high school anniversary this month actually, and I was there to take that thirtieth year photograph. It was only like twenty-five of us, but it was so nice to be there with that twenty-five nu-, the number and just to talk to the other ones that couldn't make it, it was just so nice and I, I'll do it again in five years but we wanna do it this time in a, in a, in a, I think they wanna do a tour, a cruise or something of that sort. So I'll be ready for that, I'm looking forward to that. Story_ID: 571367 Speaker 1: Were you, you were a good student in high school [Humphreys County High School, Belzoni, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: I was okay, I, you know, my grades they lingered between a C and a B. I very seldom got an A in anything, I mean very seldom. It wasn't that I was dumb it's just that--nor was I lazy it's just that it took me a while to grasp things. I mean my attention span was like--poof. So when I got serious I was smart, I was really smart when I got serious. But it wasn't until I left high school that I got smart. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't really focus in high school so much on the, on-- Speaker 2: No, I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, I, I, I think I focused on the basics of getting through high school and getting the, diploma. That at the time was the only thing that was apparent to me to get out of high school. That's all I wanted. Speaker 1: Now did you focus on any aspect of visual art in high school at all? Speaker 2: The yearbook staff. I don't remember I did, not high school. We, you know, no, no, not at all. I'm telling you it was, remember I told you it was a blank period between that? From the time that the man [James Wilson (ph.)] came down and showed us the photographs and we used his camera was like a four year blank. Then all of a sudden college [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi], wow. Speaker 1: Now, now, how did you decide on--did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Major? Speaker 1: Well, well, first of all, did, did you always think you were gonna go to college when you were in, in high school? Speaker 2: I'll tell you to you this way, my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] said that we all needed to have a college degree, that's all we knew. And we then had to figure out from our other siblings how to do that. Story_ID: 571368 Speaker 1: So I had a sister [Catherine Brock Brown Norman] who had gone through nursing at that university, Mississippi Valley State University [Itta Bena, Mississippi], (laughter) and she said, "I'll show you how to get in college." That's what we knew, we followed her lead and we all went to college and we got our degrees. And, you know, I--you want me to start talking about college now? Is that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure-- Speaker 1: --okay? Speaker 2: --well how did you decide on--well your sister was at Miss-, had graduated from Mississippi Valley State? Speaker 1: Yeah my sister had paved the way in terms of going through college and she made it so that it wouldn't be something that we could look at in a, in a, very unobtainable way, or something very hard. With her paving the way for us, it was like really easy 'cause she kind of like showed us everything that we need to do. She walked us through the financial aid process and all of that. And it was really easy at that point. She--now here's the, here's the weird part though, in terms of majors. I had no idea what I was gonna major in other than the fact that my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] said, "You're gonna go to college and you're gonna get a degree and you're gonna become a lawyer and you're gonna do that because you're gonna have to keep your brothers out of jail." I never knew what that meant, I promise you. And it was 2000 and maybe, no, 2000 when that finally hit me what my mom meant. And I'll tell you more about that later, but I majored in criminal justice and everybody kept asking, "Why you majoring in criminal justice?" I said, "My--'cause my mom said I had to." (Laughter) That's all I knew, for four years I ma--I--everything in criminal justice, all my grades, A's and Bs and some Cs, some incompletes, some withdrawals, that's how I maneuvered my way. I maintained a 4.0 average my first two semesters then from there it tapered off to like a 3 point. And then sometime a 2.63 like that all throughout the college. But I did graduate from that university in 1980, May. Story_ID: 571369 Speaker 1: But during the time that I was there, my freshman year, this is so fascinating. I really reaffirmed my love for photography. I was taking my sc-, class photographs and I was standing in front of the photographer and he was telling me how I needed to take this photo and I began to pose and he said, "Oh, you're a natural." I said, "Really?" And, and you know we had this conversation; it was a great, great conversation his name was Floyd Bailey. He was the top photographer for the university [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] and he had been there for years. He s-, he made a statement to me, he says, I said, "You know I'm so." I said to him, I said, "I am so fascinated about photography and I just wanna learn a little bit more about photography." He said, "Oh really?" I says, "Yeah." And I was really serious but I never knew he would take me up on the offer. He said, "Okay, come back tomorrow after your last period is done," or whatever, "and we can go through some things." He took me through the whole mechanics at that time of the camera, he was using a Canon. His Canon was a Canon 101 [ph.] and he began to take me through the mechanics of how to change the rolls of film. How to change the flash and how to synchronize the lights and how to make sure that the light is reflected off of a person's body, face and all of that while they were taking their pictures and I took the photographs for the sophomore class as he told me that. I stood behind his camera and as the students would come in I would snap their school day picture. That's how I started photography. And I did that for all of my years at the university. From my freshman year they made me the co-editor of college yearbook and from that time on I was the editor of the--of, of my class and my last two years at the university I was the editor-in-chief of the college yearbook. He put a camera on my neck and just told me to start taking photographs. And I took those photographs and I would take them back at the end of that session and we would go into the dark room and I would develop them myself, with his teaching. This happened for four years while I was in college and that's how I did photography. That's how I got into the full-fledge of photography. And I was looking back at some of my yearbooks and I started to look at the staff, I had a little staff, the yearbook staff that I worked with. And I had to do my, you know, you have to do your editor-in-chief's message at the end of each year and I would--I told them that I thought that the governor need to enact an ordinance to make sure that the people were paid for this position (laughter). But I, you know, I didn't know any better at that time, you know, it was a school thing and you don't get paid to be a editor-in-chief, but I didn't know. Story_ID: 571370 Speaker 1: But that--I had some really good years in college [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi], you know. I, I did as much as I could I got involved with everything, city, city c-, I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Student gov- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Student council, I was just doing every--I did everything. I remember running for the pageant of, it was this--Miss, Miss Calendar Girl [Miss Calendar Girl Scholarship Pageant] where you, you, I'm sure you, in college everybody know what Miss Calendar Girl was. I, I, you know I, I was too afraid, I was still not comfortable with my body yet so you could, you had a choice you could wear a bathing suit or you could wear a pair of shorts with a cute little top. So I wore shorts and a cute little top 'cause I was still having trouble with my body, understanding my body. Which I know now at the time I was kind of like ashamed of my body in the sense of, you know, who I was 'cause I didn't have that identity clear yet on my body itself. Speaker 2: You had just came out of the church experience when you were (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah because we didn't expose our bodies, you know, we, I mean when I was in shorts that was like a stretch, you know. You don't wear no shorts. And I had little hip-hugger shorts on, you know, and people were like, "Whew, look at that." (Laughter) So, it was, it was quite a, quite a experience for me to walk across stage and, you know, have people, you know they--some booed, and some said, "Yeah." That was quite different. And I moved from that point to just coming, in, involved with everything. I didn't join a fraternity while I was there, I mean a sorority while I was there. And the reason I didn't because I thought at the time the reason why people join was more or less to affirm who they are and to kind of like understand who they were and I almost thought I knew, you know, at some point. I, I said, oh no I don't need them to tell me who I am. I don't need anyone to identify with, who--in terms of who I am. And I know a lot of people that helped a lot of people. But I didn't understand the aspect of all the great things that they did in communities and things like that because my mind structure was not in that area it was in a totally different era. But I got involved with village--I wanna say city, but student, the student council and I became so active, you know. I want to speak out on things that were good for people. I, I, just wanted to do some good things in that, in that whole setting. Story_ID: 571371 Speaker 1: I remember one time, I was at the university [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi], I got raped, you know, at the university, you know, it's, you know. I remember I could go on and on with all these different things and--. I remember the parents of the kid who raped me, they pleaded to me, they said, "Please, please don't have him sent up on charges because it'll ruin his life." And I convinced myself, without my parents' [Dorothy Amos Brock and Herman Brock, Sr.] help to drop the charges, you know. But, you, you get to a place that you think to yourself some of the things that happen in life they happen as a result of choices that you make and I know the choice that I made that day. I went into the male's dorm, which I should not have done, and I don't know what I could have expected, you know, as I look at it today. But that still did not give him a right to rape me, but-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but it is what it is, you know. Speaker 2: Do you regret not pressing charges now or-- Speaker 1: No, I don't regret it. I'll tell you why I don't regret it because I think that I had to take a responsibility for what action happened that day as well as that gentleman. We were very young and it could have been consensual, but I did remember saying, "No." But, I don't think my life right now, I would be where I am now if I had gone through with that because you can really hurt other people and I, when I talked to his parents, his parents was, you know, it, it could have gone any, any way. It could, it could have been that I could've agreed just by going into the room. It's just so many ways that you can look at it you know. And I know back in that day, you know, rape, rape is rape no matter what. But I do not remember saying to him, "Let's go to the next step." But I did go into his dorm, so a lot of that weighted on that, you know, in my decision. And when I dropped those chor-, charges, those charges being dropped was weighted on the fact that I could mess up his life and maybe mess up my life as well. So I weighed it on that and we both live good lives now, you know. I, I, went on to graduate from college, he graduated from college, he lives a prosperous life. But you know those things would not be there for him. I remember going to the c-, the jail in Greenwood [Mississippi] and seeing him behind bars, you know, that, that left a mark on me because I, I look at it now and look at how the systems are set up, you know, it, it's gotta always be a place where we can come and meet and say, you know what, I made a mistake, you made a mistake. And I think at that time I wasn't smart enough, but something inside of me was smart enough for me to recognize that I did not wanna mess up his life because a mis-, a mistake that the two of us had made. So when I moved from that point to there--and I later on went on to, to date a professor (laughter) at the university so, it's, you know, I, I had a really good life as, you know, as a, as a, as a student at the university. Story_ID: 571372 Speaker 1: I was very popular. I remember winning this contest from the student body, from my class body, my junior year, as the most popular student on the university campus [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi]. It wasn't because I was loose or anything, it's just that everybody wanted to know, you know, what was happening and the way they did it they had to come through people that was in the known and I was one of those people that was in the know. And I remember I set this thing up it was so funny, I called all my friends, I says, "Listen, I'm gonna have this contest where everybody can wear these outfits and they can get their photos taken and we're gonna have a little fashion show, but guess what, I'm gonna put it in the yearbook." They said, "Oh my God, we gonna do that?" I says, "Yeah, I'm the editor-in-chief; I can do all of those things." So I--when I made the decision I had all of these friends who dressed up and they came out and they were in the yearbook and, you know, my friends the, the next year they go like, "Wow, we're just gonna be--how we gonna live this down?" I says, "I don't know." But what I learned about that experience when I look back at the book now it's all about when you're in a position of leadership and you take that leadership to the next level, but I took it to a level where I included my friends in something that was important to me, that I knew in life it would probably be important to them at some point. They may not have been able to grasp it at that point but somewhere in life they would be able to grasp it and I think they grasp it now 'cause when whenever we look back at the book I go like, "What were we thinking." But we had all of that control of what went into the, into our yearbooks, into the local papers and things like that. That's a lot of power to have back in the '70s [1970s]. And those are the kind of things that I think people gravitated towards me because of the things that I knew and the connection that I had while I was a part of that student, that whole student body. They--if you want to be in the know you had to take to the people that were in the know. And I was the one because I mold and shaped how all those yearbooks in that historic part of that whole community surrounding our university for those years that I was there. Kind of fascinating, when I look back, only when I look back I'm like, I never even thought of it like that. But that's historic; you know taking of the photographs and what I do now, how that laid the great foundation for what I do in life now. Story_ID: 571373 Speaker 1: By the time you were a senior you, you were still intending to go into criminal justice-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as a career? Speaker 2: --I didn't change my major, (laughter) I did not change my major [at Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Benna, Mississippi]. I got a minor in sociology and, I, I think the social part is where I really should have spent a lot of my time when I look back now. Because that's my strongest, that's my strength right now. When I, when I was in my sociology classes I got so involved in those. I mean I was just so engaged in what was happening with all the different theories. I, I, I was--I, I loved Charles Darwin, I, I, I just got involved with things that, that happened in biology the things that happened with the different ways in which people survived. I just, I knew about a lot of stuff back then but because the concentration what my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] had put in my head was criminal justice, I could not give it the fullness of what the sociology part would bring, you know. But that's what I find myself doing now mostly counseling people in situations where when I look at it I go like--they--people ask me all the time they says, "I don't know what it is when I have this conversation with you I just feel like I'm worth something." I said, "I, it, that's not my intent." I'm not just laying it out so that they can feel something; it's just part of who I am and what's inside of me it just comes out in a natural way. And, and the same in village government, it's the same way. I try to look for the better part of everything that exists in a person and I believe that every person has a, a, a, a viable part that needs to be put to that puzzle. And I don't think the puzzle is complete until they do it. Story_ID: 571374 Speaker 1: Now who were some of your major influences in Mississippi Valley State [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi], were there any teachers or community people that really-- Speaker 2: Dr. Curtis, who was--he headed up the criminal justice department. He was a major influence, his name was Joseph Curtis. There was another man who really--I can't say enough about this guy, Frank Thomas [ph.]. Frank, oh man, Coach Thomas, Coach Thomas. He was a real go getter. I mean he heads--headed up--no he was a teacher in the physical ed [physical education] department but he was, he was the kind of person who had his head on straight but by the same token you could reach him, you know what I mean? There's some people that have their master's [degree], you can't reach 'em. You know they talk all over you, but he really came to your level, and it didn't matter, you never knew that he had those degrees until you start teaching he was very smart. He was a major influence. I didn't have a whole lot of women influences around me. My major influence as a woman in my life was my sister, Catherine [Catherine Brock Brown Norman]. She was majorly influ-, I mean, everything we did, everything we, how we moved and went through life was, it was centered around the things that she helped to shape us to become, you know, Catherine. Speaker 1: Uh-hm, was she the one that was the first black college-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean she was the first (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First-- Speaker 1: --college graduate in your-- Speaker 2: --in, in our family-- Speaker 1: --in your family. Speaker 2: --yes. So she helped to mold us in, in that sense. My dad [Herman Brock, Sr.] and mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] they were influences but from an academic standpoint they were very limited in terms of what they could bring. They were able to push us. You know how they say in the Bible that one watereth--no one--God allows one to plant and he allows one to water and then he gives the increase? That's how I see my parents; they were part of a good process. They had--they brought us into the world, they encouraged us to go to college, they may not have known how to get us into college. And another person came along to help us to get into college and so on and so on. So they were major influences as well. Story_ID: 571375 Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about the visit of Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] to campus. Speaker 2: Oh yeah I think that was about '77 [1977], or '78 [1978]. I remember Jesse Jackson coming to the university [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi]. And he was in a dashiki, of all things, and he had the big afro and we were doing something called black power. Speaker 1: Uh-hm, okay, well, go ahead, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black power. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Black power, I remember him lifting his fist--but during that time that he was attending the university it was a all-out voters, he was trying to get all the student to register to vote, that's what it was it was a voters registration drive. They had Chaka Khan, she was there with Rufus, it was a major thing on that university campus. But I remember Jesse was real, real thin and he had a lot of people with him, I mean he came with a big group, but I do, I, back in, if you look in my yearbook you'll see the photos that we took of him on the campus with the--lifting up the black power and all that. But at that time he was pretty big in the, in the Black Power movement and that's what I remember that to be was a Black Power movement and the voter registration. I don't remember sitting down with Jesse Jackson during that time because being the person who was documenting stuff you just keep documenting as you go along as a photographer. That's all I did, I would--we just document, that's it. And then you go there you hear them you see them lift up the black power but you know that it's--they're there for voter registration, the voter registration drive because you got all these places that are set up on the campus for people to, to register to vote. So that's what the major thing was at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, any other celebrities visit campus when you were there, you said, Chaka Khan and Jesse Jackson (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chaka Khan, Rufus, I think there's a place in there that said something about Earth, Wind and Fire, at the time I think a group called Slade was there. Speaker 1: Slave? Speaker 2: Slave, yeah Slave (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they're from Dayton [Ohio], funk band. Speaker 2: --and Edward Starr was there. Speaker 1: Edwin Starr, 'War,' right. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'War.' Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That's all, you--we--we're southern, you don't get a lot of people to come down in that little part, you know, how you gonna get a plane, you can't get a prane--plane out of Greenwood [Mississippi], you ha-, would've had to get a plane out of Greenville [Mississippi], which is about what, forty-five, fifty miles away? You didn't get celebrities coming through that little area, and if you did they were probably on busses. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, 'cause there were no planes. Story_ID: 571376 Speaker 1: You said you graduated in 1980? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980] from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --Mississippi Valley State University [Itta Bena, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: All right and had, had, you moved to Chicago [Illinois] prior to graduation, or how did that-- Speaker 2: You know, I came and visited Chicago when I was in high school [Humphreys County High School, Belzoni, Mississippi] in '76 [1976]--that was my first year coming to Chicago. It was may like--maybe like May that whole summer I stayed here in Chicago. My sister had a place at 333 South East Avenue, here in Oak Park [Illinois]. That was my first inroad, I kid you not I was so fascinated because where she lived at, at 333 South East, my neighbors were white. And I remember talking back to my mom [Dorothy Amos Brock] and my dad [Herman Brock, Sr.], I said, "Mama," I said, "the people that live next door to us are white people." It was--that was fascinating to me to have your neighbors all around you be, you know, white. Growing up and, and in a time in Mississippi, that was a terrible time for us and that was in '75 [1975] and '76 [1976] where I made those visits to Chicago and saw these people and we, I--we eventually moved here. Every summer we would come back to Chicago, I mean we--when we say Chicago we talking about Oak Park, that's where my sister lived in Oak Park. We would come back every summer and visit my sister and each time she would be done moved to another little community. The next time we came she'd moved to River Forest [Illinois], which was another predominantly--I thought it was all-white community I never saw blacks except us there, maybe one, maybe one neighbor. And we did that all the way through maybe '86 [1986], I remember '86 [1986], and I think in '86 [1986], I officially moved to Oak Park myself. I lived at 246 South Maple [Avenue] and my sister lived at 201 South Maple. Speaker 1: Okay now where did you live before you moved to Oak Park, I mean were you, were you in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't live, I lived in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The day-- Speaker 1: So when you--oh, oh, wait, so when you moved here in 1980 you moved in, into Oak Park? Speaker 2: I, listen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --this is weird because the day, we, I graduated from college May 5th, 1980, okay, that was a weekend that was a Saturday, right. That Sunday we were in a car driving back to Chicago to live with my sister. So my first experience was 333 South East Avenue. We came--she says she want to have us--have a better life so she told mom she said she was gonna bring both of us, my sister who graduated with me, Lorene [Lorene Brock Mahan], she brought us both back here with her. That was so fascinating, we had no kids and we were just driving to Chicago with her and her husband. And we lived with her for, all the way through '80 [1980], I would say '85 [1985] or '86 [1986], maybe four years. And, and, she, she moved from one of those places in River Forest, no into Forest, I'll say Oak Park, 333, she bought a nice house in River Forest, and that's where we lived. It's kind of interesting. And from '80 [1980] it was maybe like a year from '85 [1985] to '86 [1986], I moved to a place called Brentwood, Missouri, I stayed in Brentwood for about a year, then my sister called me she says, "I'm starting my b-, my healthcare agency downtown Chicago, and I want you to come and run my company." I went to run her company for her. I ran her company from that time to '92 [1992]. It was a healthcare agency and she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Speaker 2: --all that time tried to get me to go back to school and get a, become a nurse, I told her--I, you know, bedside care, it wasn't me. It was not me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were you doing for a living during this time? I mean be, before you--in Missouri and before-- Speaker 2: In Missouri believe it or not I worked as a store manager at a lifestyle housewares shop called the Emporium [ph.]. And it was on Cl-, it was in a little town called Clayton, Clayton, Missouri. It was right outside of a town called Brentwood, and Brentwood was where I lived, very nice community Brentwood was. But Clayton was a very affluent town. I took on two jobs there, I took on a job at that lifestyle Emporium as a manager, store manager and during the night I would work the night shift at a local McDonald's and I was one of the shift managers at the McDonald's restaurant, which was on the corner of Clayton and the major street that runs through Clayton, Missouri. And I did that for about a year until my sister came--called for me to come back and help her. Story_ID: 571377 Speaker 1: During all this time you really weren't pursuing photography or, or, at all or--? Speaker 2: No, it was, here, here's the strange thing, and, and, and I have it in my books to show this. When my sister [Lorene Brock Mahan] summons me to come back, I didn't realize a lot of the things had started to jump off for her. She start doing a lot of different events around town where she needed, I don't know, she was getting a name for herself, she was making a name for herself where she was a big donor and she was putting together all these things. And it, it turns out that she summonsed me to come back because she was getting ready to also have this major party in her home in River Forest [Illinois]. She said, she says, "You know, Martha [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge]--." I--there's a part of me that's a little bit grey, because somewhere between '84 [1984], '85 [1985], I was shooting photographs. I had a camera, I was shooting, but I wasn't shooting for major people, like major magazines and stuff like that. I think I was just shooting around the house and stuff like that. And my sister saw some of my work, she saw my work and she, you know, when I came back in two thou--'80 [1980], '86 [1986], I started shooting a little bit more and for my birthday in '86 [1986], I'll never forget this, she and my brother-in-law bought me my first camera, professional camera. It was a Minolta 5000 Maxxum, and she, you know, she just said, "Martha, I want you to just start shooting and everything," I said, "Okay, fine." I started shooting her events; I started shooting her events behind the scenes while I worked for the agency. And she became so impressed with my work she said, "You know what--she had hired Michael Powells, Michael--no Victor Powell, Victor Powell Photography [Powell Photography, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], and Victor had charged her about eight hundred dollars she said, "You know I could've saved that money and given that to you?" I said, "What do you mean?" Because I, when I looked at the photos I go like, wow, there's a lot of things that were not captured and from there that's how I started in the industry of photography, it was through my sister. And from that point I start to build my portfolio, I, I, I shot that party in '86 [1986], after getting that camera. I got that camera in the ninth month, her party was in the twelfth month of that same year. And from there I just started shooting and shooting, and shooting, and shooting and going on, whatever. And somebody told me that I should pursue going into the media--into media, photography. And I started sending my e-, they didn't have email at the time, I started sending my photos, I would take some photos of different events that I would shoot all over the city and I would just send that to different magazines like, I would send something to Indigo, there was another magazine that was there, Chicago Defender, I was just sending this stuff out. Story_ID: 571378 Speaker 1: And during this time there was big people that was hiring me. At the time, Regina Brown Daniels, she was the publicist for Whitney Houston, she got whims that I was a photographer and she, I, I was in this office, you know, you've heard of, I don't know Butch's [HistoryMaker Morris Butch Stewart] last name, but he had a record store where he was doing a lot of production and stuff like that, downtown in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] and I was there on a photo shoot with--doing Butch's photo shoot for N'DIGO, and Regina was in the room and she heard me talk about the work that I had done (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Butch-- Speaker 1: Butch-- Speaker 2: --from Evanston [Illinois] who does the music-- Speaker 1: Yes, that's him, Butch-- Speaker 2: Butch, yeah, yeah, Stewart-- Speaker 1: I was in-- Speaker 2: --isn't it, isn't it Stewart? Speaker 1: Butch Stewart-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Butch Stewart-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's him-- Speaker 2: --right. Speaker 1: --I was in there and I was taking Butch the photos that I'd just finished taking 'em, he and his wife [Brenda Mitchell]. And Regina heard me talk, she came out and she wanted to see my portfolio and she wanted a card. I gave her my card, little did I know, like I look at it now, that was the beginning of my media career. She began at that point to take my images and she would send them everywhere, she would hire me for these major events called Tanqueray and stuff like that, and she was sending my images out to everybody, Vibe, you name the magazine my image was going there, Sister 2 Sister, Ebony, Jet, and they were--my images were actually being published in these magazines. But I didn't, I didn't know it. And one day I was introduced to Audarshia Townsend, from the Chicago Defender, she was doing a column called 'In There' [ph.]. I was introduced to her by Art Sims, you know Art Chat Daddy Sims? When I was, when that introduction was made, Audarshia already knew about me and I says, "How do you know about me?" She said--she invited me the next day to go to the Defender. I went there that Monday and we sat down and she pulled out her column, in her column, the first photograph that she ran for her column when it debuted was a photograph of Scottie Pippin, and another girl that is a rock singer and, and, the guy who speaks with a little bit of a slur in his voice (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ron Harper? Speaker 1: Ron Harper. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was a photograph of those three. And it had been sent out years prior to that, and she says, "Well my column--." She said when her column debuted that's the photo she ran, she--because the photo was so fly. And from that point we established a great relationship and we worked that relationship for about three years while she was at the Defender. And we--it went all over the City of Chicago [Illinois] just documenting major events that was happening and I would bring the photographs back to her and, and it was, it was so amazing. And from there people like N'DIGO, they started to hire me to do a lot of their work, you know, on a more consistent basis. And they started to give me assignments like Rosa Parks that you see on the wall, that's how I got that assignment--that was through N'DIGO. And it just, it just snowballed from that point, it just start to go into an area where people started having a demand for the work that I did through Regina Brown Daniels, and I just started sending it out to everybody and that's how I started to get media play with my work. Story_ID: 571379 Speaker 1: And that's how I made a living for myself and I did that for a lot of years and then one day, on a whim, I went to one of the seminars that WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] was hosting. And as I was attending that seminar, Elroy Smith came up to me and he said, "You know, my batteries in my camera they malfun-, my camera malfunctioned, my batteries they don't work." So he and I walked upstairs, little did I knew at that time, to one of the stores that, you know, sold stuff. And we were trying to find a lithium battery, but at that time lithium batteries were not as popular, they were not so readily available. So I said to him I said, "Well since you can't find the battery, I brought my camera and I could take the pictures for you." So he gave me his roll of film, it was a Kodak 24 frames, and I took the photos but before I took 'em I said, "You know, and I'll take the photos for you and I'll bring 'em to you." He said, "Can you have 'em in two weeks?" I said, "No problem." I took 'em there in two weeks. I called Elroy, I set the appointment, took 'em in there, all that. And when I got there Elroy was so astounded that I had taken everything in a chronological order of capturing that entire even he called on the phone and told Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], he said, "You need to get over here and see this, this is amazing." So Marv came and they hired me on the spot (laughter) for WGCI. I worked there for thirteen years, and it was just in 2005 that was my last year there was in 2005, June or July, was my last job I did with them. So that helped me to be able to do all of what you see behind you in terms of documenting all the people. It was an avenue that took me to so many places with c-, with that imagine me working also as a freelance photographer for the Chicago Defender. I got to meet people like Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], Hilary Clinton [Hilary Rodham Clinton] because I was the assigned photographer from the Chicago Defender. While all this stuff was unfolding with WGCI as well, so I had a two-punch. And then 92.3 [WPWX Radio, Chicago, Illinois], when they came into existence, because I had worked with GCI, they hired me to work with them and I was working with all three--I was working with three stations at the same time: WGCI, 92.3 and V103 [WVAZ Radio, Oak Park, Illinois] was all in one big shell and then doing all this stuff for all these major newspapers and things like that it really fascinating, it was a fascinating time. Story_ID: 571380 Speaker 1: But at the same time I was doing all those things, Larry [Larry Crowe], I noticed that I was internalizing a lot of the stuff that I was coming in contact with. Like every time I would come in contact with people that were in the political arena I would wonder how certain things was happening in--why certain things was not moving forward. But by the same token, I was documenting too and I just made that unfold and I said, you know what, I'm, I'm probably--I didn't know at the time that I was gonna go into the public arena. I had no concept of that, but I knew what was happening that a lot of the people were not making the differences in those positions that I thought that they could. And we start to have a lot of things happening in Oak Park [Illinois], you know, there was, in 2003, and this is all the time that I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm in full swing with the Defender [Chicago Defender], N'DIGO, all these magazines are, you know, I'm doing work for them. Stuff was happening here where a police chief [Rick Tanksley], they were gonna get rid of him, he's the first black police chief and nobody would stand up for him and I just could not get it. I just couldn't grasp why so many smart people knew that this man was in a great position, but no one could say, I will stand up and make sure that he does not lose his job because of this significance of what it means to our community. So I took a lead in that with another lady who you see on the wall there, Wyanetta Johnson, the big portrait, with two other men. And we stood our grounds and we took on the Village of Oak Park, and over a period of time, of six months he was--the chief was reinstated to full status and he did not lose his job. That was kind of like the inroad to my political career because what I learned from that experience was you had to be able to stand up and you had to be able to stand up and say things about what was wrong and not be afraid to do it. I promise you I didn't know that that was in me, but all of what I thought I didn't have, all of the smarts that people tell you that you need to have before you go into all these arenas, they lie to you because everything that you're going to need is really gonna come from God. And see that's the part of the puzzle that has always been missing. And I think I could've probably been a lot further had I known that early on. So I took the little knowledge that I knew and I asked God to help me and to strengthen me for all the areas that I found myself weak in. And I took that, after that victory in 2003 with the chief getting reinstated, people start to approach me about political office. I says, "In Oak Park? Hell no, they too racist out here." Because all the years of politics in Oak Park was for one group called the Village Management Association [Village Manager Association], the VMA, and that was a predominant group for fifty years. No one would dare cross that group and if you got accepted into that group you were somebody. I never had a yearning to be accepted by this group. I always thought that you, in life, you are the pioneer, you pave your own way, you don't let people pave your way because people will take that away from you at any given moment. And as I began to think about it a little longer in 2004 with all that I was--going on around me I had school issues we were fighting with the high schools and the elementary schools because of the achievement gap. I mean I was sitting on boards after board and I could not see anything, you know, happening really good. And one day while meeting on a school board issue I was able to go Downtown Chicago [Illinois] and meet with an, an attorney who was supposed to help us with winning a case against the school. He told me very clearly, you will not win against schools, schools are too powerful, he laid it out to me so tough. He says, "And the only way that--," he said, "if I can give you some advice today." He said, "The only advice that you, you, that, that, that, that--he, that the only thing that you can do today is run for public office and be a part of those boards that's the only way you can make things change." It was like a light bulb that was off for a lot of years, it was so bright I could see what he talked about. I went away from that meeting and launched my political career. Story_ID: 571381 Speaker 1: And people thought that I was gonna go into the school system, I says, "No." I said, "That guy told me I've got to run stuff." And the only way that you can run it is that you either have to be the village trustee or the village president. And I went for that job at the top. And, and basically it was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which one, the trustee (unclear)-- Speaker 1: With the trans-, with the trustee because I couldn't run for president because in order to run for president you would need to have trustee experience prior. And I ran on a political ticket and the people when they put me on the NLP, the New Leadership Party's ticket, they really did it for color, so they can balance out the racial, the ethnic part of that ticket being that I was the only black. And the other ticket was the VMA [Village Manager Association] ticket. The fifty year of history ticket. They put two blacks, one Hispanic and two other people against the ticket. The three trustee position that was open, we did a landslide. We won all the three positions, which had never been done in the history of politics in this community [Oak Park, Illinois]. And here I am this unknown, didn't have the money that the other side had. I win over the people who had all the financial backings and the community's blessing. And people still ask me to this day, "How do you figure that you won?" I say, it was very simple, I impressed upon the people that was representing me they had to get me my material so people could know who I was. I had them print up my bio and a picture of me and I hand delivered that to every person in this community. And every person that I could meet, Larry [Larry Crowe], I met them and I told them and I asked them major questions. But the one thing that I wanted to know from them, would you support me as the trustee once you read about me and see the things that I stand for and could I get a commitment and a handshake. The people that took the commitment and the handshake they voted for me and that's how I won. Story_ID: 571382 Speaker 1: So, I'm in village government [on the Village Board] now. I still do my studio work. I know longer work for the station [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois], but I think in life you, you go through an area in your life where there are things that happen and God makes it so you move from one stage to the next. And I'm at that stage in my life now where this political career is where God has me now. We deal with a lot of issues here in Oak Park [Illinois] on affordable housing. We deal with a lot of issues on development, preservation. Affordable housing is probably one of the areas that is the most pressing in our community because when you think in terms of communities like Oak Park the first thing that you think about is this great rich community. But by the same token there are a lot of people that are being displaced in Oak Park because with the last census it did show that it was a lot of people that were poor that lived in Oak Park that were on Section 8 and they were living-- Speaker 2: Now Oak Park--just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) below the means. Speaker 2: --to interject--Oak Park's interesting, part of--it's a suburb of Chicago [Illinois], western suburb of Chicago, I guess. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --it's a--I was--as we were coming in here I was, I thought about a sign I saw a long time ago at the border of Austin [Avenue] and Madison [Street] and that on the Oak Park side of the sign it says you are now entering the demilitarized zone (laughter). Speaker 1: (Nods head). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Did, did--you ever seen that sign? Speaker 1: I did years ago (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I di-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I--it's a--this, this is a town that's, was the home of Ernest Hemingway, I think right-- Speaker 1: Yes, the home of-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --Ernest Hemingway as well as Frank Lloyd Wright. And, you know, I think when people think in terms of the history of Oak Park, that's as far as they go. But I would like to draw people's attention to an area of downtown called Westgate [Oak Park, Illinois]. It's really the first place where African Americans could actually worship at a church called Mount Carmel Baptist Church [Mount Carmel Colored Baptist Church, Oak Park, Illinois], which was in the heart of Westgate back in those days, and we have pictures from early 19-, in 1895, 1905 that you can see at our Oak Park historical society [Historical Society of Oak Park and River Forest, Oak Park, Illinois] that talks about the first settlers, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So there've been black people in Oak Park for a long time? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, and see, that's where people start, they start with Hemingway; they don't even start with the Kettlestrings, who were the first families to settle here in Oak Park. But that's what's missing almost in every community, the historic aspect of who we are and I was visiting at the historical society on this past Friday and one of the things that we want to make sure of in Oak Park is that we, we will, by the time our office is done--everywhere in Oak Park we will have a place where people can go and see all the historic things like Dr. Julian right now, there's a bust of Dr. Julian and all of his accomplishments. Speaker 2: Dr., Dr. Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian]? Speaker 1: Percy Julian. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and our park, the Scoville Park [Oak Park, Illinois], right at the corner of Lake Street and Oak Park Avenue that people--I mean that part of our history, if you don't live in Oak Park you may not even know that that exists. Story_ID: 571383 Speaker 1: Dr. Julian's [Percy Lavon Julian] daughter, Faith [Faith Roselle Julian], still lives in Oak Park [Illinois]. And it's just so many different things, when I was researching a lot of stuff at the Chicago Defender when we were doing some pieces on Dr. Percy Julian, I was looking at how his house was, was bombed back in those days. And I don't think a lot of people understand all the stuff that people has had to endure-- Speaker 2: I didn't realize that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were, I'm-- Speaker 2: --they, they bombed-- Speaker 1: --I'm, not kidding-- Speaker 2: --Dr. Julian's-- Speaker 1: Yeah they-- Speaker 2: --home? Speaker 1: --they bombed Dr. Julian's house and they've got pictures of it at the Chicago Defender, it is so fascinating to see all of this history. Not to mention during that same time realtors did not even allow blacks to have real estate license. And some of the first movements in real estate moving away from making sure that blacks could get their real estate license and practice real estate in Oak Park--that came out of that same movement and during that same era. I was looking at the signs that they held up at that time of a actual sign that says allow equal work, equal pay for all realtors. And this was a time that Baird and Warner, one of the major, I would say the, the, it was a--is a major hurdle that we had to cross during that time. Speaker 2: They're a big property management company in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --the Chicago [Illinois] area, Baird and Warner. Speaker 1: Yeah, but they were among the last people to really have it so blacks could actually work for their company. And they had shops set up all over Oak Park during that time. And, and they were kind of like the last to integrate, you know what I'm saying? It's like--this is a hard thing, you know, this is a very hard thing when you really think about all the history. So here's my point that I'm driving at, so how do you live in Oak Park, and you have all this great history, and you have no blacks except for Dr. Julian that has made a contribution? You can't start our history that way, you gotta look at all the things that people like Sherlynn Reid has done over at the community relations [Community Relations Department] and making sure that we had a fa-, fair housing act that was enacted here. To make sure that we had the, the integration into the housing stock, making sure that all the apartments were not just apartments for one race but you have the integration of all races in all of these areas of our community. Those are things that Oak Park has built a foundation on. Of course now a lot of those things over the last few months has come back to haunt Oak Park as well. I mean there's--everyone knows about the big issue surrounding the Lane Bryant store having a list be created where that store basically was not acceptable as a--the type of store, but there was something at the village council [Village Board] level that we had to go back and revisit because it was a decision that was made from a previous board that carried over into our administration but it goes to show you that a lot has changed, but we have to still have people in place that gonna hold everyone to the fire on what has taken place before. Story_ID: 571384 Speaker 1: So that's my life in politics-- Speaker 2: Okay, well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and my term is gonna go through 2009 and at this point I don't know if I'm gonna pursue politics, you know, further, but, wherever God leads me. Speaker 2: You're a trustee now, would you like to be the president of the-- Speaker 1: My desire--I told someone, when I won the election I said, "Now it's not--it's time to be the president." If I do become the president of Oak Park [Illinois], I'll become the first African American to ever be the president of the board [Village Board]. People normally don't get elected for the second time if they're, you know, when they run for president. Speaker 2: Oak Park is interesting and Chicago [Illinois]--there's a, it's a town in, you wouldn't even realize there was a black presence here except for they (unclear)--well their radio used-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --to always be local here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --and the Oak Park Arms hotel [Oak Park, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Well we're working to change that. Speaker 2: One of our, yeah. Speaker 1: You're actually in one of the highly rated art districts now in Oak Park. If you, you know, I don't know if you'll have a chance to drive down, but there are some beautiful shops. A lot of minority shops that are in the next block, lot of dress shop--women apparel, what else is, just a lot of nice little places (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know there's a big books--art--AfriWare [AfriWare Books] is that it-- Speaker 1: AfriWare is over on Lake Street-- Speaker 2: AfriWare is, is here, yeah. That's one of the-- Speaker 1: And Charlie Robinson's of Robinson's Ribs [Robinson's No. 1 Ribs, Oak Park, Illinois], he's got both of his stores located here. We're currently really looking into having him move to a different location here in the community because he's such a staple in the community. And by the way he was very instrumental in helping me in that election, he and his wife. They were just, they rolled out the red carpet for me in making sure that one of the events they hosted one of my events for me. So, all the fabrics that, that has molded and shaped Oak Park, I think one of the tragedies of what has happened in Oak Park is that when you hear about Oak Park you don't hear about all the significant things that black people has done and they continuously do in Oak Park. The only reason that people know about me is because I'm in the new so much, you know, with all the issues that are going on around certain, you know, certain things that come across our desk, but far and by large there's so many people that has done so many great things way before I, I was even thought of in Oak Park. Speaker 2: What's the percentage of bla-, of the black population in Oak Park (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right now we're about 22 percent of the African Americans living in Oak Park, and then that breaks down in all different area of ethnicity, and then the major one being the whites they take up the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But there are 22 percent African American-- Speaker 1: Twenty-two percent of the African Americans live here in Oak Park (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 571385 Speaker 1: Back to photography for a minute, could you tell me some of the--there are some stories associated with some of the celebrities you've shot. You've shot all, all sorts of celebrities in town and one of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --them--I know one, one of the biggest ones was Michael Jordan, there's a story associated with his shoot, right-- Speaker 2: Sure, you know I seem to have shot Michael over the years working for the Chicago Defender news, it really gave me an opportunity to go out on a lot of photo shoots, you know, sports photography. I did Michael Jordan's, the photograph that you see here it's a--Michael Jordan was at the Berto Center [Deerfield, Illinois], and it was in '96, [1996], October of '96 [1996]. We were there for media day, you know, media frenzy everybody--they won a title [1996 NBA Finals] and you know, everybody gotta see Michael, Scottie [Scottie Pippen] and, and Dennis [Dennis Rodman], and you know the, the photo that I'm gonna show you is a photograph that I took and it was really on a whim, just like you see everything set up here, all the photographers will be where the camera is now and the 'SportsCenter' guy was sitting sort of like where you are basically, but kind of like so all the camera could see him and Michael. So he was interviewing Michael, but prior to him interviewing Michael they had four to five stations that were set up where photographers could go and take photographs of all the players for the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] because this is media day. They're taking their, their actual shots for the, you know the publications. And people are just crowded around were just crowded around all the other four stations, it was just one station that they didn't have anybody and it was set up just like this station. And that was 'SportsCenter.' I heard the Holy Spirit say, you know, Michael's gonna come to that station too, so why don't you just get a good spot. I got a good spot and by the time Michael came there the hundreds of photographers had to be behind me at that point. And I got right down on the--had gotten right down on the floor and I was shooting at the time film. And I was shooting with that same Minolta camera [Minolta 5000 Maxxum] that I was given as a birthday present from my sister [Lorene Brock Mahan]. 'Cause it, it took me so long, it took me a long ways, you know, I didn't have to get another camera until maybe in the 2000 margin. Speaker 1: So this is a 35 mil- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thirty-five millimeters [35mm]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --camera. And it was a Minolta, I mean it went everywhere. I, I, had people tell me like, "Oh, this is not a professional camera." I says, "Okay, not a professional camera, but I'm getting some really good shots, thank you." Story_ID: 571386 Speaker 1: So, while I sat there, Michael [Michael Jordan] had a mic on and some kind of way, Steve [Steve Levy], who was interviewing him from 'SportsCenter' said, "Michael, I ca-," no, somebody in the audience said it, said, "Michael we can't hear you, you need to adjust your mic." So Michael goes, instead of going under his shirt the way he had a little t-shirt on, you know it's a jersey, he opened his jersey up like so and tried to adjust the mic and while he did it he kept looking, but I was at his level of gravity, so my lens was shooting like so and he looked right at this part of my lens and, and the pose was so sexy. And I managed to capture right under his left breast was--I don't know if you call men breast. Do you? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: No, you don't say that--well under his left nipple, Michael, he had his brand of the Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], the Que sign, I didn't even know that while I was taking that photograph. It was later on when I went to the lab and I was headed back home and my--the lab tech called on my cell phone, she says, "No, you gotta get back here now, you gotta get back." And I says, "What's the problem?" She says, "Oh, you gotta see this." She says, "Michael Jordan, you have taken one of the best photographs of Michael Jordan that I've ever seen." I get back to the lab, now that wasn't the part that I got floored about, I thought the image was great, it was totally out of sequence from everything else 'cause I had documented Michael that whole day, everything that I could get close to him on. It turns out that this photo bared the number 23 and 23A as a negative. And that was his jersey number and I was like, how could this happen? And I believe that God planted that photograph there for that moment and that time. There were tons of photographers behind me, if you ask me what angle do you think they got, I guarantee they didn't get my angle because I was the only photographer at that angle and at that vantage point with Michael. And I had that mili-, it was a, it was a tech 10mm lens that I had on my camera to get that shot, and I just zoomed in and I just kept shooting. I never stopped shooting and when I began to look at the sequence now, that shot was like a shot that God just said, boom, it's gonna be right in there. Speaker 2: Now, now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's amazing. Speaker 2: --did you shoot with a motor drive or anything? Speaker 1: It was, it was, I shot on a continuous mode, it was, I, I didn't shoot it manually. I shot it, I think I shot it shutter priority mode, but I just kept shooting. I didn't, like, focus or anything like that. I didn't take the time to do that because when you shoot in continuous mode, you just pop, pop, pop, pop, pop, and you, whatever you get you're thankful that you get something. And, but I had it in focus from when I set there and being that I had, I, I was able to set up so early it was already in focus. Had that been out of focus it would, this point would be totally non-existent basically. Story_ID: 571387 Speaker 1: And this is a Minolta too, yeah? Speaker 2: The Minolta [Minolta 5000 Maxxum]. Speaker 1: That--you know, you hear people say, oh, you have to have this kind of camera to do this or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not true. Everything you see on my wall, except for a few photographs came from that camera, that Minolta. And I had--I told you I had my colleagues in, in the field always say, "When you gonna buy a professional camera?" They would always say that to me. "You know you don't have a professional camera, right?" I says, "Okay," whatever that means. Because people have these ways of (laughter), I don't know they just, I don't know they just, they get stuck in their ways and even when I did the, the story, I, I was profiled by Rolling Out magazine. And you can see when T.J. Crawford interviewed me, he talked about me walking around with an unprofessional camera. So whatever all of that means, it's meaningful somewhere, but it doesn't exist in my world. Because I think of those kinds of things as limitations and I, I refuse to allow people to limit me. See, I believe also that it is not the camera, but it's the person who's operating the camera that yields those results. And if what God gives you through your eyes and what He have you see is what you capture and that's what my work is representative of. It's what God has given me with whatever I use (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It raises a-- Speaker 2: --it's gonna be a great shot. Speaker 1: --yeah, this raises an interesting point because I, I read that you've, you lectured at, I think you lectured at the James Van Der Zee exhibit at the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and Van Der Zee was using a box with a, you know, I mean his early photographs are beautiful but he was using something that-- Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: --compared to your Minolta, was just a box with a hole in it. Speaker 2: Absolutely, it, you know, I think back to, and people have compared me to Van--God, oh, I don't even know if I'm worthy of the comparison, even when I did the lecture at the, at the Art Institute, I was just, I just didn't feel that I felt, you know, you know how you don't feel that you can fill somebody's shoes but you go because somebody has said you should do it. I did it because I felt honored to do it, but by the same token when I began to look back at some of my work I go like, "My goodness, I'm nowhere near this guy in terms of what he's accomplished." But I do wanna be able to leave a legacy in the area in which I'm a photographer to show how I documented things. And I think if we could parallel those two comparison I think it would lend itself to here is Martha [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge] and her era, which may or may not be compared to whoever the great photographers were at time before me or times after me. And I think the most important part about history itself is being able to document that history and having a place where people can see what you've done. I, I, think in most cases it's gonna be a moot point as to what you use 'cause you got the shot. Very seldom do people ask me, "How did you get Michael Jordan's shot?" You know, "What did you shoot?" It only comes up in technical situations where you're talking with kids and things like that. Story_ID: 571388 Speaker 1: Now you're a member of the National Association of Black Journalists-- Speaker 2: Well the National Association of Black Journalists, I was a member of them back, oh god, when was that, I don't know if I have a membership with them now (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Chicago Association of Black Journalists, yes, they are, I, I, somebody said if you're a member of the local you're a member of national so I still get their correspondence and things like that. I--when they came here in '96 [1996], is that when they had the big event? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: It was '96 [1996] or '98 [1998], '98 [1998] I think, whatever's on President Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] photograph there. That's when President Clinton was, he was the president at the time, I think that's '98 [1998], does it say '98 [1998], yeah? Speaker 1: I can't, I can't see it from here. Speaker 2: Okay, it's got a copyright at the bottom corner. Well, anyways, I was a member of that organization and we were able to do a lot of good things with facilitating the, the whole conference that's, you know, that was surrounding, you know, the next presidential election. But the journalists, you know, being a member of the journalists is--it was kind of nice, you know, because you got to do a lot of good things for what you did as a black journalist, documenting things like that. I don't--my membership may have lapsed now. I may need to send them a check. (Laughter) So, but it's, it's a good organization. It keeps you in tune with things that are current. You know there's been a, kind of like a split in the Chicago [Illinois] branch. Speaker 1: Right, I've heard that. Speaker 2: You know, it's--and that's so disheartening because I believe that [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett, you know, he laid a great foundation for a lot of things that we still love to enjoy now as well as the new era of people like Louis Byrd III, who, who came in as the, as the new president. But you know tha-, those are the kind of things that, that I think are so important to us as a, as a group of journalists you know. We have to really understand that the things that separates us is the things that causes us not to be able to give to the next generation of photographers and journalists. And we've gotta stop having that happen. Whatever it is that I can do in Oak Park [Illinois] to further whatever causes, if I can, if a young kid can see me documenting different things and they wanna know about it I open up my studio [Martha Brock Photography, Oak Park, Illinois] to make sure that they can come and see that. Story_ID: 571389 Speaker 1: And I didn't talk at all about the Time Out Two and the Neutral Ground Program that I started over at the Oak Park-River Forest High School [Oak Park and River Forest High School, Oak Park, Illinois] where I wanted to make sure that children had a up-close and personal contact with the people that they saw and they idolized every single day. So every time I would go out on an assignment for WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois], I would take two aspiring students. But it was only two guidelines that they need to make sure they had. They had to be either aspiring journalists or photographers and they had to take that experience back to the other kids once that experience was over and they need to talk about it. And they need to have the documentation of the pictures or the stories that they have to write for their local papers or to send it somewhere so someone else could see that story. And that program is still going on, I just don't have as much time that I used to spend because I spent a lot of time 'cause I was in the schools all summer. But now it's every now and then I'll take a kid, you know, under my wings just take them and they go like, "Oh wow this is so fascinating," and I say, "So what about this experience is fascinating?" Because this is important that you--what, what I do in, in journalism as a photographer is important but it's equally important to the kids who see it. So now on a yearly basis I have kids coming in from Unity School [ph.], they spend an entire day in the community and it's about maybe like eight to ten classes of kids. They come through here and everything that they see we have to talk about stories about it. I go through a camera session with them showing them how to use a digital camera. They take photographs of the other kids, it's just, it's really nice. So that's how I'm able to give back, you know, in this area being a photographer as well as a public official [on the Village Board, Oak Park, Illinois] now. Story_ID: 571390 Speaker 1: Tell us little bit about CAAAP, too-- Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you're one of the founders of CAAAP-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Chicago Alliance of African American Photographers, we started out, it was about five of us when we started out. Milbert Brown [Milbert O. Brown, Jr.], who's a phenomenal photographer for the Chicago Tribune, also, you know, Milbert had this really wonderful idea that he wanted to make sure that the history of who we are as blacks as the turn of the century, at the turn of the century was documented. He wanted to document the black community and he got this story from when he went on one of his family outings in Mississippi. He wanted to make sure that he brought this story back to life so he decided to get together all these dynamic photographers all over the city that are, that are African Americans and he charged us to document everything around us that we saw while we worked in our regular settings every day. He didn't want us to go and create something; it was already created through what we did and how we walked every single day. And this, we, we're still currently doing it, but this whole process created something called a body of work called, 'The Journey: The Next 100 Years.' In April of 2006 we had our book published for the first time of this body of work. The Chicago Tribune, the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] as well as Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] they came on board to help us to get this book published. It was a fascinating project to work on because we were all there, we've all been there with Milbert from day one. I mean I served as the secretary for the group since the inception until January of this past year after these elections 'cause it seems that every time, you know there's an election the people wanna serve--no they say the wanna serve but then when it comes to really putting in the time, the commitment sometime some other things may take precedence over that, so every time it happens Milbert comes back, he goes like, "Martha [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge], we need you as the secretary again," so. It's like a running thing at, at, in our group that right now we're looking for another secretary (laughter), so. I feel really excited about working with Milbert and all the guys, there're women that are part of the group but it's so fascinating to be able to document this work. And now to have this Chicago Historical Society be the place that's gonna store our work, which is so great to have the work archived and to be a part of that, you know. Again, we're in an era where we are the photographers right now and everything that happens within our surroundings we have a responsibility to our communities we have a responsibility to the rest of the world to show them what Chicagoland [Chicago, Illinois] is like through the eyes of African American photographers. And that project will never stop because there's always a new aspiring photographer who comes into the organization who's all bright eyed and bushy tailed and we wake them under our wings and the process continues. So we're looking for, you know, the next series or sequences of books to come out of this whole session. Story_ID: 571391 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: That's a big question. Let me start with the concerns first. One of the things that I'm really concerned about is the legacy in which we will leave, where are we gonna go in terms of the exodus of the male population. I'm concerned about those things, I'm also concerned about the financial aspect of African American economically, there's so many African Americans that don't even own bank accounts for whatever those reasons are. It's just so many little things that fits into a major puzzle you, you almost just have to reach and grab all these things and bring 'em in and says, I'm concerned about this and I'm concerned about that but if I had to horn in, and those would be the major things because I believe economically we're not going to be able to do the great things that we need to do unless we are in the places. People of the African American descent, minorities in general have to clearly own, take ownership of public office. They have to take ownership of leadership where ever they are I don't care what level of leadership it is, it could be at a McDonald's they have to take the leadership position. They have to stand out I don't care what it is you have to lead wherever God has given you the ability to frequent. Wherever God has given you the ability to be, I don't care, whatever terminology you need to associate that with you have to take on the leadership position and you have to be able to make a difference in a way that is second to none, I'm not talking about making a name for yourself I'm talking about making a difference. When you see things that are not right, you gotta call it out. That's gonna be the major responsibility, that is the only thing that's gonna give us the hope for a great future is to have people in those positions that are willing to stand up when it's not popular and willing to stand up when there's no money involved and if money is the driving force I can tell you right now you ain't up for the game, so don't even come this way. Because my public official job [on the Village Board, Oak Park, Illinois], they give us stipends and it's not even enough to eat off of. It's like two hundred and something dollars a month, you understand what I'm saying? So that's twice a month they do that. It's, it's not a paid position. So you're gonna have to do it for other reasons than money in other words. You're gonna have to have a passion, a drive and the hope is really gonna come from you as that person. It's your responsibility to instill hope and instill all the necessary qualities that you know that is needed to get a person that the next level. Whether that means you speaking positive stuff, whether that means you visited them or you reading about things that are happening and having them be a part of it. You've gotta engage this public, we've gotta engage our young people, we've gotta engage the leaders and the leaders who are not about being engaged, they need to step aside and allow the new leaders to come. That is gonna be the hope for our--us to have a great future. And we gotta learn how to check ourselves and not get an attitude about it when somebody like Bill Cosby put us in check. Because, you know, it's true that Mr. Cosby may have been absent from a lot of parts of our society over the years, but we also have to think about what he had to endure to get where he is. Does he have a right to say what he has said? Absolutely, and you know what, more people need to say it, like Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]. Oprah is in a great position, the Bible talks about the people who much is given to much is required, what Oprah is doing is not required of me, but I'm required to do something. And I had better figure out very early what that is because there're a lot people that's gonna be impacted by my indecision, if I make a decision early enough I can help people, but if I'm indecisive I can hurt people as well. So, if, if we're talking about what's, what is the hope? We are the hope. Each one of us that walks around is a--is hope. You represent the hope because you took the time, you and what is the young lady's name? Speaker 1: Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]. Speaker 2: Julieanna to document this so more people could see it. I hope that what people see about me is not something they say, oh, Martha Brock [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge], she's just a photographer that took some photographs, you know what, it may have meant that to me at first, but only God knew that I would be a public official and I could sit in my studio [Martha Brock Photography] in Oak Park [Illinois] and talk about the great accomplishments that I have. But you know what, this ain't nothing compared to where God is gonna take me and I'm gonna do some great things in this society. Story_ID: 571392 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask, I did not, I guess, ask this question early on 'cause it was kind of out of context, but you, you were on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show' in the '80s [1980s], right? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before you started shooting right? Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984]-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --eighty--all the way up to my last show I did with her was actually in 2003. Speaker 1: Okay now what was the-- Speaker 2: I've got fourteen shows that I've done with her. Speaker 1: Really, what was the nature, what was the-- Speaker 2: Well you know some were just guest, agitators, being in the audience, audience members. Some was more on the serious note like the one I told you about in '86 [1986] where I went on and talked about my family and the hardship I had endured. That was the one I thought was more meaningful. It gave me the foundation to really understand who I am in society and as I went back over the years, like in '94 [1994] I was able to, to look at the show and when I did that show I was like, I really, you know, there's a place that God does have you but you have no consciousness that you're there. That was the first time that I realized who I was as a person. I'm such a dynamic individual that I didn't know. It was like all of this person was closed to me, so what 'Oprah Winfrey Show' did, it helped me to unfold those things. There were like layers and layers of chapters that I think unfolded as I went onto her show because a lot of times I didn't have anything to do with my life, I was like, what they say, just out there, you know. I was taking photographs but I don't know if the photographs have as much meaning as they do now because there were some things God really didn't allow me to be conscious of. I wasn't conscious of Michael Jordan, the shot that I took. I was in the room but you can be in a room but have no level of consciousness that you're there, do you understand what I'm saying? I mean you could be a, like I'm at the Village Board [Oak Park, Illinois] now, I know why I'm there. Maybe because I'm much older and I'm wiser and with a little bit more wisdom and I understand what I need to do while I'm there. I can't shuck and jive but by the same token when I was on 'Oprah' I was finding myself and she helped me to do that with me looking back at all the clips and laughing at myself and having fun, fun moments. I remember when she invited me back in 2003, she says, "Martha [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge], what was you thinking when you was yelling at this guy about living at home with his mother?" and I start telling her about that. You know, in the 'Guinness World Book of Records' [sic. 'Guinness Book of World Records'; 'Guinness World Records'], I think it took place in, I don't know, maybe 2000 or something, I was looking at--through the library this is just how, you don't really know where god is going to land you. I was looking through the 'Guinness Book' and through the 'Guinness Book' the photo that you see on the wall with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] holding the mic on me, that was, that was at the time Oprah had the top rated shows. How did I know I was gonna be in the 'Guinness World Book of Records' from Oprah's show? Well she's, she's only go like a million clips to choose from, so you ask me if my life has purpose, absolutely. If I don't have anything to draw from no more than those little instances where God has shown me, he's shown his hand in my life through areas where it could have been a million other people, but he chose me. Story_ID: 571393 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this, when, when you look back on all these years-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and all these things that you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yeah, one major thing (laughter). When Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] interviewed me for her sh-, when, when Oprah's staff interviewed me to come on as a photographer [for 'The Oprah Winfrey Show'] (laughter) I'd have taken the job, yeah (laughter), that's the only thing I would have done differently. I would have been more assertive and more aggressive with taking the job and I would have sent her a letter back and said, "Thanks for the interview." But you know, how was I know to know that Oprah's going to keep my portfolio for a whole week. I had no consciousness of that because I was not seeking Oprah as a--for employment, they seeked me out, and I'm now understanding opportunities you know, I'm (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: --just s-, you know. Story_ID: 571394 Speaker 1: --A job or anything, but I probably should have taken the job [on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show'] being that I stopped working for WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: I probably would have handled that interview differently, that's true. I probably would have done the follow-up call and all that stuff as well. But I don't have any major, major regrets on, on a lot of things because I think the course of my life with all the scars, it's, it's made me who I am. And there are times when I'm sitting at the board table [of the Village Board, Oak Park, Illinois], people says, "I don't understand your dialect." I says, "Okay, it's southern, so I can understand that, but here's what I'm saying, let me read it to you," you know, you have to go there sometimes because people always try to make it seems as though you're so different that they can't understand you. So you have to reduce it to, to the lowest common denominator for 'em. And I find myself, a lot of time I don't get offended by it, I just do it so they can understand it. Story_ID: 571395 Speaker 1: Oh you said you spent two years with R. Kelly? Speaker 2: Oh god, two years-- Speaker 1: That, that's, well, I don't know in light of recent news events it seems like it would, would be a wild two years, but, I mean was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was wild. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I gotta say though, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2000--wanna say 2002, I don't know if it's 2002 or '3 [2003]. We were in Salt Lake City, Utah, and we were there for the Winter Games' [2002 Winter Olympics, Salt Lake City, Utah] opening ceremony. The scandal on the tapes broke that weekend, (laughter) I was like, you know, I'm a country girl, I don't need this media attention. There was like an onslaught of media attention surrounding R. Kelly. I mean they had me put away in this, I was in a separate hotel from where they were. I mean it was just an onslaught of media attention and it was something that I wasn't used to. I, I wasn't used to having secret service, two secret service people just be assigned to me because you know it was--terrorism was high at that time as well and they had all of this stuff that they wanted to make sure--and, and President Bush [President George Walker Bush], of all people was also at the ceremony. R. Kelly had a seat, and this is no joke, he had a seat next to the president and when the scandal broke, they moved his position. It was quite--it's quite interesting how everything fold--unfolded. So I'm standing there at the opening ceremony in front of the stage, I'm snapping all these fantastic shots of R. Kelly, now bear in mind that the opening ceremony is only gonna take maybe--you're gonna be out there tops five minutes, it's like five minutes you gotta shoot your butt off, you gotta shoot, shoot, shoot. And I'm shooting and shooting and shooting and shooting then all of a sudden the song ends and it's two--and I'm, I'm you know I'm a large woman, when the songs ends, the two secret service guys they come, they each grab me under the arm and they hoisted me down this, it's like a tunnel. 'Cause you only had so many minutes to get outta the way because of all the, it's called the parade of countries is coming through. Man, that's a fast life, I was like--when we got back into the room we were all taking deep breaths. Story_ID: 571396 Speaker 1: But the one thing that I remember from that whole experience of being on the road with him and, and, documenting him is that R. Kelly is a different person, you know. When you sit with him and you, you talk with him there's, there's a lot of things that I don't think a lot of people know about R. Kelly in the sense that he does require a lot of people to be around him to affirm him. That was something that I picked up right away, you know, positive stuff, not negative stuff. You know, he has to always, and I'm sure that's probably the case with a lot of artist, he always has to have someone to say that he's done a great job, or someone to say, "You the man," you know. I mean, when we were--do things like simple stuff like basketball games and I would be there documenting them, I mean he would dominate the basketball game. He's so talented, I mean, if the, if the game went for--it's a four court game and if it went to a hundred, he's probably got forty-eight of those points. 'Cause he's a bog holler [sic.], you know. Just like Michael Jordan was a ball hogger. So if you have the ball in your hand more than the other players, your percentage in terms of how many shots you're gonna make and how many you're gonna actually shoot is gonna go up. So, he's a great athlete by the way. And another thing I don't think people know about him, he's ver-, he, he's very family oriented with his, with his children. I enjoyed meeting his, I only met two of his children when I worked with him 'cause the one baby was, was, she, his wife [Andrea Lee] was pregnant with the second baby at that time but I did meet his little daughter Joann [Joann Kelly], she was cute little girl. You know he, he's got a way, you know, a private side that I don't think a lot of people take the time to know but I was happy to know that side. Even before 'In The Closet' ['Trapped in the Closet'] came out I was actually photographing him and I have these fantastic photographs that has never been released of him actually in the closet, you know, and he's nested behind all of these clothes and he's just peeking out from behind that. Very candid and intimate kind of things you know. And I was able to be behind the scenes to do a lot of those things at that time. Story_ID: 571397 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done so far what would you consider at this point to be your legacy (background noise)? Speaker 2: Whew, (pause) that's a toughie. I can't pinpoint one thing that I could say that I would wanna have people remember as my legacy without encompassing my body of work and being able to say to the public that I will stand up for people's rights an advocate. I want people to know me as an advocate. I want them to know me as a person who loved children and just, you know, want the best for them in terms of, of, economics as well as education. And I want people to know that I documented things in my circle, this is what happened in Martha's [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge] world and all of those links tie me to who I am and who I've become and I want them to know me as a person who's--was fair and tried to do the best based on whatever limitations I had I tried to make sure that I did my best, with whatever god gave me. So, that's kind of it in a nutshell. Story_ID: 571398 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you that you think you--I should have or--? Speaker 2: You probably should have asked me if I was married or single, if I had kids. Speaker 1: Oh, well if--you're a family, yes, tell us about your family. Speaker 2: My family, I don't have any children; I never had kids, actually. Never been married, still single, but I have about seventy nieces and nephews (laughter) that I love. And, I hope one day that one of them will wanna be a photographer and I could leave all of this to them and have all my work be archived, before I leave, to make sure they do the right thing, and, and just to continue to share this whole historic part of who I am in terms of politics as, as, well as the photography part. Story_ID: 571399 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to, similar to legacy, a little different, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered, you know that's a funny thing from a photographer because I--you know, I don't want to have parameters on how people remember me. I want people to be able to look at all the things that I've been able to accomplish in the world and they can draw their own conclusions on who I am and what I've done. And, I want them to also be able to look at that and say, wow, here's where Martha [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge] and here's where this next legacy begins. You know, I, I think when, if I answered that as an artist it would place a limitation and it'll close a door. I wanna door to always be open for new things to do--I want people to be able to see a Michael Jordan shot and say, wow, I could have done that better. And do it. Or, I want them to be able to see the things that I've accomplished in village government [on the Village Board, Oak Park, Illinois] and say, wow, she did some great things in Oak Park [Illinois]. But I wanna see the next person do a better job than I. That's, that's how you continue a legacy. That's how you continue to do great things and have people write about wonderful things because, you know, I'm not the ending; I'm just one of the steps in the process. So, my step is to pass it on to the next person, and that's what I would want people to know about me is that I'm not beholden of anything, I'm just passing through, and when it's time for me to pass the mantle to the next person, I'll do it with the most openness and readiness. And you all better be ready for it. Story_ID: 571400 Speaker 1: Okay this photograph you're looking at now was taken May 3rd, 2004 in front of the Chicago Defender news and this photo was for the APPLE, A-P-P-L-E, African American Parents for Purposeful Leadership in Education. And we were dealing with a, a discipline issue in Oak Park [Illinois] schools, the Oak Park and River Forest High School [Oak Park, Illinois] and we went down and did a story. From left to right you have Mr. Glen [ph.], who at the time was one of the teachers at the high school. Bursie Hines [ph.], myself, Martha Brock [HistoryMaker Martha Brock-Leftridge], Johnny Westmoreland [ph.], Wyanetta Johnson, and Diane, Diane Urban [ph.], U-R-B-A-N. We were all this advocacy group who wanted to make sure that we challenged the school on the high level number of discipline cases against the African American students. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay on the bottom here, this photo was taken in, oh boy, probably like in the early '90s [1990s]. With Gerald Levert and [HistoryMaker] Eddie Levert, father and son, we were doing a big event in the City of Chicago [Illinois] at the Hyatt Regency hotel and they were there and you see Gerald is trying to look down in my, my cheeks there. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: It's a fun photo. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay the one above (unclear). Speaker 1: One above is me with my friend Scott Julion, Scott Julion is the hair stylist for Chris Rock, and next to him is a rock and roll singer, DeBorah Boston. You'll see her on the walls here in a lot of my photographs; she's also my best friend. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: This photograph here this is when I'd frequented 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' and this is all--I got permission from the, the, people over at the Oak Park Library [Oak Park Public Library, Oak Park, Illinois] to make a copy of this. This is when I did 'The Oprah Winfrey Show' back in, I would say, '94 [1994] and they placed this particular photograph in the 'Guinness Book of World Records' ['Guinness World Records'] and it says here that 'The Oprah Winfrey Show' was the highest rated show during that time, 199-, '86 [1986] to '94 [1994]. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Okay starting with the top left, this is a photograph for a--I, I don't know what my birthday party was that day but these are the Chicago Association of Black Journalists. We all got together to celebrate my birthday over at Excalibur's [Chicago, Illinois]. You got Art Sims, Audarshia Townsend, oh you got a number of people in there. That's--and you see me in the front with my mouth wide open. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Looks like fun. Speaker 2: Okay at the top moving to the top that's me with Star Jones. Star Jones came down to do a big event for, you, you've heard of this group of women where they get together it's called the, the Expo for Today's Black Woman [Black Women's Expo, Chicago, Illinois], she was one of the guests there for that particular event. And I believe that date was back in '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember, yeah I remember. Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that. And then in this, right to the left, middle, that's my niece, Iysha [ph.] I raised her. In the middle of that photo that's me and Oprah Winfrey where I attended her show back in '94 [1994] and we took a photograph together. We look really great in our black, black. And, you see my photo is all the way to the right of that photo, that's just a family por-, portrait that I did, had done on myself in '96 [1996]. And then come back down to the middle, that's Helen Baylor, the wonderful gospel singer, she and I. And then the bottom left is me and Johnnie Cochran, it was a great time in '98 [1998] that I took that photograph. He was here for a books signing. And then, the last photo is my family, my sister-in-law, my sisters and my two nieces that are in the front of that photo with me there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, okay, (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay and this is me with Stevie Wonder and again this was the Expo for Today's Black Woman, the gala, where we had time to take photographs at the end of that show. It was a great time for me. And I think this took place in '87 [1987] or I can't remember the date on that one actually. I'll need to look at the back of it. Could be 2001 or '96 [1996] in that, in that, in that era. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, this is me with Geor-, George Clinton, better known as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: George Clinton (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, George Clinton (laughter). Speaker 1: --of Funkadelics Speaker 2: Of the Funka-, Parliament and the Funkadelics [Parliament-Funkadelic]. House of Blues [Chicago, Illinois], 2000, I believe. That's me and him backstage hanging out. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: These are photographs of my parents, to the left is Dorothy Brock [Dorothy Amos Brock] and Herman Brock [Herman Brock, Sr.] and this photograph was taken in 1997, one year before my mom died. She died in '98 [1998]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay Speaker 1: This is a family portrait you can see my parents are there. My parents are there, that was '96 [1996], you can see--not quite all of us are there, that's just a few of us. We just took a family portrait, we're in Scottsdale, Arizona on this photograph and this was '94 [1994] and we were there for the family Christmas celebration with my sister Catherine Brown [Catherine Brock Brown Norman], who's in the top middle of that photograph, top left middle, with the curly hair. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: This is a fantastic shot of Michael Jordan, Berto Center [Deerfield, Illinois], 1996 and that was October, media day. And you can see that brand he's got on his chest there. And this negative number for this photograph, believe it or not, is negative number 23 and 23A, quite fascinating. I was really excited taking this photograph because we were so many people there and I managed to get him in a sexy pose...