 Story_ID: 16489 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and Adele Hodge, H-O-D-G-E, is the observer, and I'd like for you to start off by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: I'm Lerone, L-E-R-O-N-E, Bennett, Jr. B-E-N-N-E-T-T plus Jr. Speaker 1: And your date of birth and I want today's date. Speaker 2: October 17, 1928; August 29, 2002. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan. I think we're about that. Speaker 1: And your occupation. Speaker 2: I'm a writer, an author, an editor. I also, I'm also an activist. Story_ID: 16490 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Collard greens. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Brown. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: I'm not a big vacationer. I'd have to think about it. Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Pause) "Never give up." Story_ID: 16491 Speaker 1: Sir, I'd like to start out by asking you to give your mother's name and I'd like you to tell us what you know about her background (unclear). Speaker 2: Her background in growing up? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Alma Reed [Bennett], she was a member of a very large family, thirteen, fourteen children. She grew up in Mississippi. My grandmother lived in Mississippi. They moved from Rankin County, Mississippi to Jackson, Mississippi sometime after the turn of the century, and they lived there--until she died. My grandmother, Lucy Reed, I often say was the greatest person I'd ever known--name anybody, but she was the greatest person I've ever known. She lived in Jackson for all these years, and raised her family and sent everybody to college who wanted to go to college. There's a great story about it but we don't have time for that. And my grandfather [George Reed] was a farmer and a businessman, and he lived in Rankin County, Mississippi and, and they were married--oh, 1870s, 1880s--somewhere, the date escapes me--and that's my mother's background. Speaker 1: What was the story there's not time to go into? Can you tell a shortened version? Speaker 2: After the [U.S. Civil] War--my grandfather was born in slavery, two years old or so--and after the war I don't know--when I retire I'm going to find out--somehow my grandfather ended up with very substantial number of acres of land in Mississippi. And he married my grandmother, Lucy Reed, and they lived in Rankin, County, he farmed. And my grandmother--this is the family legend dear to us--my grandmother kept telling him, "George, there are no schools for black children out here, and we've got to move." And he was a businessman, he was making money. He owned land. He had to think she was not thinking right and he kept saying, "Well we, we're going to do that. We're going to do that. It's on the agenda" She kept saying, year after year, "George, my children will have to be in a city where there are schools." And he said, "We're going to do something about that." So the family legend is that one day Grandmamma Lucy put all her children in a big wagon--the legend is there were twelve or thirteen then--and drove to Jackson, Mississippi where she--extraordinary woman--established a huge house and don't know how she did, but she had a huge farm in the city, raised cows, and corn, hogs--she had this huge farm, and she raised a whole family and sent them all to college, all who wanted to go to college, and--the funny story in our family is that some of the boys never really got over the fact that she walked off from all that land, and my uncle until the day he died--he lived in Harlem--and until the day he died one of his favorite stories--he would tell me the story over and over again, and he'd always say the same punch line, "Jay, she walked off from all that land. I could be a millionaire. I could--I could have bought some education, but she walked off from all that land." And he would tell it at the drop of a hat. That's the story in our family. But that's the background of how my grandmother got to Jackson and a brief background of my mother and twelve, thirteen other children in her family. Story_ID: 16492 Speaker 1: What about your father, your namesake. Speaker 2: Lerone Bennett, Sr.? Was at first a chauffer in Mississippi, primarily in Memphis [Tennessee], but he was a chauffer, and I--and he and my mother [Alma Reed Bennett] met and they married. They did not stay married long. He moved back to Memphis and was a chauffer for one of the big, rich families in Memphis, and we remained in Jackson [Mississippi]. My sister--I have a sister Elnor [Bennett] Hickman, she lives in Chicago [Illinois] now. My sister was awarded--whatever the legal settlement was--my sister went with my father and I was raised by my mother in Jackson. So later he moved--my father moved to Los Angeles [California] and became a postal worker but that's the brief first background. Story_ID: 16493 Speaker 1: My earliest memory, I think, is, is, is, is not an early memory, it's really a memory of my grandmother [Lucy Reed] and that huge house, and the farm, and the warmth, and the strength, and the spirit of that house, and so much was going on. All of the children were lively and persons in their own right, and I remember that. I don't remember a first memory beyond that going back to mother [Alma Reed Bennett] and my father [Lerone Bennett, Sr.]. I have--maybe it would be called a shadow memory, but I do have--and I can't have that memory, but I've been told probably. I was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi, but I grew up in Jackson, Mississippi and I'm always meeting people who say, "Aren't you from Clarksdale and you must know us." I don't know anything about Clarksdale. My mother was visiting in Clarksdale at the time I was born, and as soon as she could travel she, she, she moved back to Jackson, and I have some shadow memories of moving back, of traveling, of moving back but I don't believe that's true. I was told that. But--that, that's--those are my earliest memories. Speaker 2: Well can we take you back to your, you know, to your grandmother's house. I'm just wondering if you think that--would you think about any sights, smells, or sounds that remind you of your childhood (unclear). Can you do that for me? Speaker 1: What I remember, as I said, of my grandmama's house was the hogs, the pigs, the cows, the corn. It was a real farm--corn growing up. The backyard--was unbelievable. She had everything there, you know, they killed hogs and they had a house where they did all the thing to it. Everything was there. I can smell that and see that. That's what I remember. I also have strong memories of the houses I lived in with my mother, especially 206 Clifton Street where we lived for ages. Couldn't have been ages. I left Jackson in '60 [1960]. She was a great cook as, as my grandmother was and as my aunt is. Great thing in our family about who could really cook collard greens, and it's a very, very small circle. My aunt in her most expansive periods will concede that perhaps my mother could cook, but probably only three people in the world could cook collard greens, and so my mother was a great cook and I can remember that. And wherever she was, especially on 206 Clifton Street, she had a garden which is not, I guess, extraordinary in that period. She had a garden and there were collard greens, and hot peppers, and tomatoes, and on a hot day or whenever, after she got home from work, if the spirit was on her she would cook some collard greens and we would cut some tomatoes, and have some iced tea with some very hot peppers. Story_ID: 16494 Speaker 1: So what was the young Lerone [J.] Bennett [Jr.] like? Speaker 2: Oh--I was--for some strange reason that I've never been able to figure out--a very studious boy. I studied, I read--amazing, I fell in love with words when I didn't know that they were words, and all my life I've been in love with words, and all my life I've been a reader, and all my life I've been interested in, in the world. My aunt tells a story and I don't vouch for it, I merely tell it because it's complimentary and--I think it's complimentary, and for that reason you should approach it with caution, but my aunt--and I will tell you about my Aunt Thelma--tells the story today that they would send me to the store in Jackson [Mississippi], and that I would disappear. An hour or so would pass and they'd say, "Where is Jay? Where is Lerone?" And they would send out a posse to find me, and my Aunt Thelma says invariably they would find me sitting on the curb of a street with a dirty newspaper in the street trying to read it. Now that's complimentary to me and I'm not sure that ever happened but they tell me that happened, but there's an indication at one time that I was--for some strange reason--fascinated by words from an early age, and, you know, it's no compliment to me it's just that I was doomed to fall in love with words, and I--I'm still in love with words. Story_ID: 16495 Speaker 1: Do you think your grandmother had some influence on you going, you know, for that [reading], or you think it was just instinctive? Speaker 2: Oh, I-no, I, I--my grandmother [Lucy Reed] had a passion for education, which is the basis of the story I told you. She wanted her children to go to college and urged them to, so she had this passion for edu-, education and excellence in education. My mother [Alma Reed Bennett] had the same passion for education and my aunt--most of the people in my family, so I would imagine it came that way. My sister [Elnor Bennett Hickman] has a passion for education. Funny thing about my mother, a great cook and I, I tell this story all the time. She loved good food, she loved to cook good food, but she believed until she died that any meal in the world could be improved by good reading material. And so, here--there were the two of us, I'm growing up and my mother's cooking, she'd come home from work, and she was reading something, and eating, and I was reading something and eating. We were--just total peace, you know, so she loved education. I'll tell you another story, which is perhaps too complimentary to us, but it's been documented. My mother went to school with Richard Wright. She was in school with Richard Wright, and Mrs. Davis who lives there [Jackson, Mississippi], came here later. I've got to call Mrs. Davis--was in the same classroom and she told Richard Wright's biographer and she's told me that, that my mother was the smartest child in the class, and that she had--so some people say--the best mathematical mind in Chica-, in Jackson. And she also says--and I hope this is on the record, take it out of transcript if it's on there--that Richard Wright didn't like her because they were the two smartest kids in the class, and my mother's hand always was up first, but that was, that was, that was my mother and, and she was very bright, but unfortunately there was no outlet for a brilliant black woman in Jackson, Mississippi at that time, and she was never able to break through to all these things. I'll tell you another story and then I'm not telling no more because they all seem to be complimentary. I am perhaps the only person you've ever met who flunked kindergarten, absolutely flunked it, whatever the first grade was. I just flunked it. I don't know why or how, but I remember vividly coming home from school that day when I went to pick her up. I went back to school to pick up my card to go to the next grade or whatever, and my teacher telling me that I flunked it and I would have to take it over again, what that first grade--kindergarten, I think it was. And so I took the card and I walked home all the way up Lynch Street from Jim Hill High Sch- --Elementary School. Almost everything then, all the way up Lynch Street to Clifton Street where we lived, and I turned right and I, I went home and mother was cleaning up the house. She was getting ready to go to work. She was a cook and she was preparing something for me to eat and to leave there for me, and I brought this card in and said, as a boy that age would, you know, either crying or pretending to cry because of what I thought would happen, and gave her the card. And so she looked at the card and she--very attractive woman, she never went out of the house without dressing completely. She grabbed the first hat she could find and threw on some shoes and took me by the hand, and walked out of the house. And you don't see it I guess in these days, but my day you could always see a mother with a small boy in tow, pulling him along the street and dragging him--is virtually dragging him. You'd hit every two or three steps, and so she took me down Clifton Street and we turned right on Lynch Street and we walked all the way down to Jim Hill [School], and we got to school. Mother said--I guess a person today would say, "I want to see the principal," or whatever, she said, "Who taught this boy?" Was the only one question she wanted to know, "Who taught this boy?" And finally it was determined that some woman down the hall taught me, and she dragged me by the hand, I was not--I didn't want to see this confrontation, but she dragged me by the hand. She went into the room and she said, "Did you teach this boy?" And she said, "Yes." And she said that, "You're either incompetent or you're a fool." And that's the first thing she said, and the second thing she said, which was her take on what the--that "No Reed ever had any trouble reading or adding," and then having said that, she threw the card on the floor, and pulled me out. And we walked back up Lynch Street halfway and we turned--I forget the name of the street--and she took me to an Episcopal school, St. Mark's Episcopal School. They had a class size of about three people to a class and great teachers, and the long, the short story is that in that environment I did rather well. I skipped some grades and made up the time I left and the great thing for me--and I'm through with this story--is that she never told me that--she never mentioned that again. She never said that I was supposed to do well, but I got the point, you know, I got the point. Always--Never she'd say I was supposed to be good or we're supposed to be able to read and write but it was the understanding that I was supposed to do that, and--. So that's a part of the background in reading and my family and my mother. Story_ID: 16496 Speaker 1: You're an introspective person, so what was going on in your head as a young person? Would you think, would you talk with your mother? Would you (unclear). I mean reading is, you know--were you taking things in? Were you envisioning yourself other places? What was going on inside Lerone Bennett's mind? Speaker 2: I was in Mississippi. I was a black boy in Mississippi, and God knows how and why this came to me, but at an early age one of the reasons I was reading is I wanted to know why places like Mississippi existed. The second reason I was reading is I thought in my stupidity, in my ignorance, I thought if I, if I knew how to read I could do something about changing it. Completely stupid but, but that's two things I thought. I just had to know why white people treated black people the way they treated them, and I thought if I, if I could read that I could find out. And so again, as I say, from a very early age I--oh eight, nine, ten--I was wrestling with that problem, and at a very early age I started to hang around the newspaper offices. We had two black newspapers in Jackson, and I was around there so often that one fall when back-to-school season, about this time of the year, the editor [of the 'Mississippi Enterprise' newspaper] say, said, "We need an editorial. You're going back to school. You ought to know something about it. Write it." And so that's the first thing I wrote for a newspaper, an editorial on going back to school, but--but this, this was because of reading, because of being fascinated by words, and because of having this--this, this passion to know why white people treated black people the way they treated black people in America, and especially in Mississippi, and what could be done about it. Incidentally--and you're not going into this and it's so long--it was about that time--maybe I was eleven, I think I was ten--that I discovered for the first time that everything I've been told in church and school about Abraham Lincoln was a lie. It was about that time that I discovered that everything that Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], everything all the schools were teaching about Abraham Lincoln was a lie. I just happened one day--I used to have this crazy thing. I'd go to used bookstores and I, you know, to the extent of my pennies I would buy used books, and I bought a book and one day came across--just sitting there on the porch reading Abraham Lincoln's speech at Charleston, Illinois in which he said he was opposed to black people voting, sitting on juries, marrying white people, and that he was opposed to equal rights for black people. I was just--I was shocked, I was--that, it was that early when I came across that, but that was a kind of childhood. (laughs) Speaker 1: I was curious about when you were going through school and understanding this gigantic lie. Did that--what did you do with the anger that that must have--? Speaker 2: Well two answers. One has some unbelievable talented teachers in the black school system of Jackson, Mississippi. I had a great, great history teacher, M. V. Manning (ph.), and I've said many times since then that, you know, she just--never met a better teach-, she just made history just dance. People think history's dull but she could make it just hop, skip, and jump, and so in that setting most of the teachers were orthodox, but you would find a teacher who said, "You're right. He wasn't right." All the way going to--up through college, I've managed to run into people like that. So I had great teachers and found some guidance in that setting that I might not have found, might not find in some settings today. Speaker 1: Now St. Mark's [Episcopal School, Jackson, Mississippi]--those teachers were at St. Mark's, was that what they were--? Speaker 2: In both. M. V. Manning was at Lanier High School, a public high school in Jackson. Story_ID: 16497 Speaker 1: What was your first experience with racism or with, you know, an oppressive South? That's what I'm just trying--you said at eight or nine you were starting to question, read and do things, so I'm just wondering what was that environment like, you know, or what were the experiences that you had? Speaker 2: In Jackson, Mississippi then [1930s] black men especially were whipped all day long. Not unusual--policemen, for some white person to hit a black person in our neighborhood, and this was happening all day long, it was just an attitude, an atmosphere, a climate of complete violence. In Mississippi at that time--and I was younger then--a black man, a black boy, left home in the morning and no mother knew whether they would return or not. They could, the kinda thing, walking along. They could walk down the street and look up and look into the eyes of a white man, which was against the law, and be whipped all across the street. They could be walking down the street and somebody'd say, "Well you looked at this white woman," and they could be whipped all across the street. They could go in a bus station or a railroad station and--and not say, "Yes, sir," fast enough. It, it--I can't--it was a climate of total violence that, that was everywhere and everybody was exposed to it and--if you were a black male and you survived that without great harm, you were very lucky. So I, I was curious and I could see what was happening around me, and at a very early age--certainly by eleven or twelve--I, I was running around newspaper offices trying to find out what was happening in the world. I was interested in it, and so at a very early age I had a sense of, of what the South was like. There was hardly a gathering--the, the state fair, the, the brutal sheriffs, brutal policeman would, for some reason, pull some black person out of the crowd and whip him or whip her. It was just, you know, it was an everyday kind of thing. And it was impossible for anybody to, to evade it or ignore it. So I was aware of it, I was never--the violence, and the intimidation, and the terror and the humiliation, and--. At that time, as I've said, Mississippi was the worst place in the world for a black male. Story_ID: 16498 Speaker 1: I was not--I didn't live a cloistered life. I worked as a porter in clothing stores on Capitol Street downtown [Jackson, Mississippi]. I was a porter in a hotel. So I was exposed to the brutalities and the demand that everybody say, "Yes, sir," et cetera, et cetera. I also was, at a very early age, a jazz musician. And see I left for college at sixteen, from the time I was about twelve until I was sixteen, I was a jazz musician, and I played in an adult orchestra, Duke Huddleston's Orchestra. I played in that and I don't know if you know what that means that we played at honky-tonks for white people on the outskirts of Jackson and other places, and certainly, I played on the weekends. Some days, if I could arrange it, I'd play in the middle of the week, I mean--and made fair money for the time, good money for the time. So I was out there in the middle of it and saw these things, and I was--I was threatened on a bus. For some strange reason it came out but I was threatened on the bus with a group of high school students, and just picked out at random. I was picked out, really, because I was--at that age--well I don't know how I can explain it, I must have been fourteen or fifteen--it was fashionable to smoke a pipe, and I had a pipe in my mouth unlit, and somebody on the bus said something that the white bus driver didn't like. He pulled the bus up to this corner and stopped and called the police, and he said, "Well which one of them said that?" Now that's ridiculous, you know, and he looked down through there. See that boy with that pipe, and so they took me off and the policeman--I was lucky--obviously knew that he was, you know, he didn't know who he was talking about, and he threatened me and said, "We ought to take you to jail." And in the meantime all of my friends--they let all of my friends off the bus, and I was the only one left on the bus, and they (unclear) by now this time all my friends reported to my mother [Alma Reed Bennett], you know, that, "Oh you probably will never see him again," but they let me go. The policeman said, you know, he realized that the driver didn't know, but that was common. I remember some others but you're not interested in all these things. I can tell you one more, I can tell you one more, I can tell you one more. It's just that I played all over Mississippi. There was a town called Canton [Mississippi], which is not far from Jackson, and Duke Huddleston went, we went up this weekend to play a Saturday night honky-tonk. This was for a black group, and (pause) things went well. There was--a very attractive family from Chicago [Illinois] who had returned to Canton to live--not to live--to visit their hometown, whatever. And they were sitting in the middle of the place and oh--one of the members of the family was a very attractive black woman, black teenager, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, and, and they were there in, in, in the shack, the great shack. I don't know if you know the South where they had the Saturday night dances, but great shack and they had two doors in this shack which is of interest here because at intermission another black woman, who I'm told was attractive was, was cut or stabbed down the street from where we were playing, and we were all in the club. Didn't really know about all of that until both doors were pushed in from either side--boom-boom--and, and huge numbers of white men came in both doors with shotguns and with--so much armor as you've never seen before in life, and it turned out the report was true that the black woman who was attacked or cut was the sheriff's woman, and he was hugely mad, and he was going to find out who did it. And what he did--and this I can see even today. He lined up everybody in that place starting--let's see, where, if you say that door is there (pointing), lined up on the wall all the way around, all the way around, and he started from that end and we were covered with all kinds of guns, and he started over there and I was about here with the band leader, because Duke had promised my mother he would always take care of me, and I was always with Duke. And he started over there and he would question people, and every fourth or fifth person, for no reason at all, he would just hit them with the pistol, just hit them, knock them down in the floor. And to tell you how--what a strange boy I was, I'm over here and you know what I tried, I tried to do, I tried to figure out the mathematics of that. He's hitting every fourth or fifth one, you know, I was trying to figure out how that would play out, but the main thing of the night was he questioned the black family from Chicago, and there was a rumor about Chicago in Mississippi. Police officers particularly didn't like black people who had been to Chicago, and they looked like they had come from some where else, and so--questioned the father and it went well, and they questioned the son, all the members of the family until he got to the young lady, and he asked her a question and she said, "Yes," and he hauled off and hit her with all his strength. And the father jumped, of course, and guns clicked all over the place, and the brother react--but there was--you know--and, and, and that was it. I don't, I don't, I often thought about that family, that--that was--it could never be the same again, it could--. What could have happened to that family after something like that? What could happen to that father who couldn't do anything about what had happened to his daughter? So that was another incident. The short story is that when they came around to us nothing happened to us. He told Duke--first, Duke always carried a lot of money, and probably he had four or five hundred dollars in his pocket, and he said, "Boy, what are you doing with this money?" and he said, "I'm the bandleader. I have to pay the people." He said, "I'm going to give you--thirteen minutes and I want all of you such and such a band--to be on your way back to Jackson." So nothing happened to us, but the point of that is the--the terrible thing that happened to that young girl who, who--I don't, I don't know if it's just "yes" as an answer, just "yes." And so that's another of the kinds of incidents that I saw. Story_ID: 16499 Speaker 1: Can you give me the names, like even of the first elementary school, and I know there was St. Mark's [Episcopal School] and then Lan-, Lanier. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Lanier [High School]. Jim Hill [School] was the elementary school. It later became an elementary school and a high school but at that period it was in a two or three story--it was on Lynch Street and I guess had all kinds of classes. Speaker 1: And then the two black newspapers, do you remember the names of the ones that--? Speaker 2: The 'Mississippi Enterprise' and the 'Jackson Advocate'. Speaker 1: And the other thing--Clifton Street and Lynch Street--can you describe them? I mean what was your neighborhood around, like, Clifton Street? What was the--? Who were some of the people on the block or--I mean was there a block? Or was it, you know, more rural, or--? Speaker 2: Well there was a block. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: My mother [Alma Reed Bennett] succeeded in getting this house. It, it was a brick house. It's still standing. It's the only thing in that area that's still standing. Why? I don't know. Urban development, they, they've--redevelopment, highways, all sorts of things. Clifton Street was off Pearl Street over here--Pearl Street--and it's very close to downtown. We--I lived within, I would guess, four, five, or six blocks of downtown of Capitol Street which is the main street, which is over here (pointing). Clifton Street was very close to downtown--that's Pearl here--and if you go over, as I remember, you'd go into Lynch Street, and Lynch Street led to down to Jim Hill, to Jackson College [later Jackson State University] and Campbell College. So what do people--it was a neighborhood, all--almost all black--I started to say all black--across Pearl Street, white people lived and in that time white people lived in, all over the city and you could find them intermingled anywhere, living (unclear). Some white people lived on the other side of, of Pearl Street. On this side of Pearl we were all virtually black, although you could find a white house--person in a house here or there, et cetera. A great thing about the South then, and a terrible thing about America today, is that well-to-do black people lived everywhere. Down Pearl Street, the dean of Jackson College--down Pearl Street not too far from a house--the dean of Jackson College lived, Dean Sampson, and some of the major professors at Jackson College lived down there. On this side there were major funeral home, the Lathans were down this street. All the way down and in my day, yes, he was still there was--what was it? Attorney *Reddick, one of the richest black families in the South, probably in America. He was an attorney and the Republican powerhouse in the state of Mississippi. In those days before Richard Nixon and [Ronald] Reagan, the only Republicans in the South were black people. Mr. Reddick--I think L.D. [sic] I got, got it right. I'll have to check the name--was the Republican chairman of the State Republican Committee. He controlled whatever patronage there was in Jackson. My point is that there was a doctor or two who lived down the street there, all the way down Pearl Street was the principal of the Lanier High School. The point I'm making here is that in those days, certainly into World War Two, black people, all kind of--all classes, lived in the same neighborhood without any sense that, "I'm high class and that I don't, I shouldn't be living here." So one of the good things about that is that you saw deans, I mean, everyday you saw L. D. *Reddick. You saw the doctor. You saw people like that. And also--but in, on our street, most of the people were working people. (Pause) I can't remember--two or three teachers or so lived down the street. It was all--all--and across the street from us was--I'm getting old and--I'm sure it's the Pearl Street AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church is right across the street, Pearl Street AME Church, and that was the 'hood [neighborhood]. Story_ID: 16500 Speaker 1: Did you have a facility like the rest of your, like you said your mother did? Have a facility for numbers as well as words? Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't get that for--from her. I never tested it but I've never been that much in love with words--with numbers. Speaker 1: Now where did the music come in? I mean, you know, you say just sort of cavalierly, "I started playing music," you know, "I was playing with Duke Ellington, you know, at twelve," and I mean--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Duke Huddleston. Speaker 1: Duke Huddleston, I'm sorry, Huddleston. So when did that--what happened? So what was, you know, how did that--when did you become interested in music and what were you playing? Speaker 2: Okay. So much of this goes back to the heart of the whole Reed/Johnson family. All of them were singers and musicians. I didn't inherit any of that and they're very amused by it. But my uncles were great, great tenors, both of them, George and Richard, and they sang for events all over the city and the state, but they were great, great singers. My Aunt Thelma, who's still alive in New Orleans [Louisiana], was and is a great singer. Almost all of them sang and they would get together and sing, and I started once to do something with my family history, and I talked to some people in Rankin County [Mississippi] who remembered the family when they lived there, and apparently it goes back to [grandfather] George Reed, too. They said that the whole family would sit on the porch and sing and people would come from all around just, you know, say, "The Reeds are singing down there." So it was in the Reed family--were the musical family, and my mother [Alma Reed Bennett] could sing--was not that much of a singer as my aunt is. At any rate, she was like my grandmother [Lucy Reed] and I never questioned her about that. Whatever I wanted to do or whatever I wanted to study, she would find a teacher for it. My sister [Elnor Bennett Hickman] studied piano and she's very musical, and I decided one day I wanted to study saxophone and clarinet and she found Duke Huddleston who was the bandleader. That's how I got in with him and I took lessons from Duke and so I continued. Speaker 1: So you have talent, though. Speaker 2: Well there's all kinds of opinions about that, but I played well enough to survive with these adults, and in fact, so much in my stories is disreputable and I don't want repeated. I had a band when I was thirteen, probably fourteen. This is during the war years and for some strange reason, the U. S. Army and the government in their madness was accustomed to sending black men from Chicago [Illinois] and New York to Mississippi to train. Madness, but anyway there they were in Mississippi and they needed bands, and the men were away and I started a band. I had about a thirteen, fourteen piece band, started it in high school [Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi] and we played all over the state. Story_ID: 16501 Speaker 1: I'm wondering when you read that [about Abraham Lincoln], who did you go and talk to about that? You know, that was when you were in high school. Did you go and talk to your--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I wasn't in high school then. Speaker 1: You weren't? Oh that's right, you were ten. Speaker 2: That's ten or eleven or so. Speaker 1: Ten or eleven that's right. Speaker 2: I didn't talk to anybody about it then. I just thought about it and read it and tried to find more books in the used book store that would tell me more, and from that moment I started studying Lincoln, not for a degree, but simply because I had to know. When I got to high school [Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi] I asked my history teacher some questions about it, but in general (pauses) except for the rare teacher at DuSable [High School] or Wendell Phillips [High School, both Chicago, Illinois] you could find them anywhere--in general almost all blacks believed it, you know. And almost all black ministers believed that Abraham Lincoln was the 'Great Emancipator'. He emanc-. To say that Lincoln didn't emancipate black people in Jackson, Mississippi in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] was like saying, "Jesus did not rise." So there were not that many people to talk about, and I just studied and read and studied and read, and when I got to Chicago I didn't talk to anybody about it. I just studied and read and studied and read until I had a chance to do something, to write a piece on it. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Adelle--I'm going to stop here. The only reason I say that is he's looking at you and it's not going to look good on camera. Go on (unclear). Speaker 1: (Adele Hodges:) I'm just saying it's surprising you didn't chose to do your first big piece, published piece on Lincoln. Speaker 2: But he did an article on--you did an article (unclear). Speaker 1: No not until much later. Speaker 2: That was much later. Speaker 1: That was much later, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Right, right. Wasn't that article in the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 1: 1968. Speaker 2: Right, 1968. Speaker 1: No you've got a good memory. No--from the Lincoln thing and form my passion and madness to know about black people in America, I became interested in African American history, Frederick Douglass and Sojourner Truth, and Harriet Tubman. And so as a child all the way up I read black history and studied black history, got some great help from M. V. Manning [at Lanier High School] and other people, Mrs. Keeling at St. Mark's [Episcopal School, Jackson, Mississippi]. And when I came to Chicago to write something on black history, I was prepared to do it and that's how I wrote my first book, which is--probably came out in August '62 [1962]. Story_ID: 16502 Speaker 1: M. V. Madden, when was she your--how old were you when you had her as a teacher? Speaker 2: She taught us in history class. Speaker 1: And how about Mrs. Keeling, also? Speaker 2: She was at St. Mark's [Episcopal School, Jackson, Mississippi] when my mother [Alma Reed Bennett] took me the first time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Let's take Mrs. Keeling first, do you remember something--what was it about her that influenced you? Speaker 2: Well Mrs. Keeling, Reverend [Arthur Buxton] Keeling, Father Keeling, was the Rector of the [St. Mark's] Episcopal Church. Mrs. Keeling was his wife. She ran the school and she had four, five, or six teachers. Extraordinary people. She was very learned, very precise, very elegant and insistent that we get our lessons and that we excel at whatever we're trying to do. She's an unusual woman and she turned out--I mean, it was a small school but she turned out so many good students out of that school. Speaker 1: Do you think she saw something in you, too? Speaker 2: Possibly and probably. I don't know. She had to approve when I skipped a grade, so she had to approve that. Probably so, probably so. Speaker 1: M. V. Madden-- Speaker 2: [M. V.] Manning, M-A-N-N-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay good, Manning, I'm sorry. What did you think was so extraordinary about her? How did she open your eyes? Speaker 2: She had an enthusiasm for history, a passion for history. She could make it human. She didn't rely on dates alone. She could make it interesting. As I remember, I think almost everybody went to her class feeling that, you know, "We're going to have a good time," I mean. "This is not going to be a 1776 thing. We're going to have a good time." And she challenged you and pushed you, and almost all the teachers there, certainly Mrs. Keeling and Thelma Dodd Robinson and all the teachers at St. Mark made you feel that, that you could do anything that you wanted to, learn anything you wanted to learn, and they expected you to do it and that you could do it. So all of these teachers were very challenging and very stimulating, and were very helpful at this crucial period in our lives. Speaker 1: So now when it's time for you to graduate, how do--how does Morehouse enter in when Jackson State is sort of the family place, I mean how does that--how do you end up there?. Speaker 2: It's another, forgive me, story, forgive me, it's another story, and to tell that story I have to tell you another. As a young boy, I was trying to figure out how I was going to get out of that madhouse alive, and I didn't spend all my time on [Abraham] Lincoln. I spent a lot of times figuring out, "How am I going to get over this fence?" And that meant that that's when a lot of times looking at the city, looking at Jackson, Mississippi. And the first thing I discovered growing up is that I discovered that the only black people who didn't work in Jackson, Mississippi, who wore shirts and ties, were the teacher, the preacher, the undertaker, and we only had one doctor, so I figured out immediately, I mean you don't have to be dumb. I figured, "I'm going to do--one of those I'm going to do." My publisher [John H. Johnson] said he went through the same experience in Arkansas, and said, "If I don't get enough education to become a teacher, I'm going to preach." And I said, "How you going to preach?" "Somebody's going to call me but I'm going to do one of those things. The only people who don't work"--black people, and black people, they sweated and they got dirty and the worst work--but the only people who wore white shirts in Jackson were people in that categories. And at an early age, I figured it out. I'm--I'm going to be and do one of those things. That's the first thing I discovered. Then I discovered something else that was, was, was interesting and complimentary. It could have, could have happened to Xavier people, but I discovered--I looked around the city and the only men I saw--black men who carried themselves like men, who looked like men, who talked like men to the extent that that was possible, and who dressed well--that, that, that's ridiculous, I shouldn't have put that into the equation, but the only black people who dressed well, who walked well, who looked good, who talked and who held themselves up, every one of them I'd say, "Who is that man?" And they would say, "He's a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] man." The dean of the college, I said, "Who, who is he?" He said, "He's a Morehouse man." My college, my high school [William Henry Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi] coach in football, Ben Allen Blackburn, who was a great influence--he was a Morehouse man, so I made up my mind. I didn't know where Morehouse College was, never heard of it in my life. I made up my mind that the only school I would go to in America was Morehouse College--not Harvard [University], not Princeton [University], not the University of Chicago, and I went home and I told my mother that in just that way. And she said, you know, she laughed at me, she said, "That's ridiculous," you know, "You don't even know where it is." And I didn't know where it was. She told me that, "I don't have a lot of money. I intended for you to go to college. I intended for you to go to Jackson College [later Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]. We can handle that. That's right here in the city. You can go to Tougaloo [College] if you want to. Maybe you can go downstate to Alcorn [State University]. The state will take care of your tuition, but I can't send you up to Atlanta and pay a big tuition." They tell me I said--but I don't believe I said it--but they tell me I said, "Then I don't want to go to college." They tell me I said that, but at any rate she said, finally, "It's that important to you? We'll see." And so she got enough money to pay part of the first tuition, I got a scholarship and I, I went to Morehouse. Story_ID: 16503 Speaker 1: No big thing. I know this. That's the only thing I know. I'm going to be one of those. I tell--I told that story and teachers get mad, they say, "You say the only people that didn't work in Mississippi [were Morehouse men]." I said, "I meant that. They're the only people who didn't work (unclear) here. They did not go down in the ditches." Speaker 2: So when you, when you, when you--What year--Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], is that 1944--? Speaker 1: Forty-five. Fall of '45 [1945]. Speaker 2: What was, what was--? This was a place you wanted to go sight unseen, right? Or had you been there to--? Speaker 1: I'd never been there. Speaker 2: Never been there. Speaker 1: I've just read about it and I've seen a number of Morehouse men, and what I heard about it is that they produce men, and so I was going. Speaker 2: And so what was the Morehouse of 1945? What did you find when you entered in? Speaker 1: Well I got to Atlanta--a 'Jim Crow' city. The water Jim Crowed, the railroad station Jim Crowed. People who know it today would not know it--would not have recognized the complete Jim Crow city. And they sent the upperclassman to the railroad station to haze us and to take us to the campus and--it was then--it's a huge place now--it was relatively tiny then, but just so gorgeous--that's--on a hill. Green grass, not many buildings, and this was wartime and there were few men--for a time we thought that Morehouse would close because all the men were in the [U.S.] Army and drafted. And they had started to admitting early students in order to survive, so I found--the whole college, probably, was about four or five hundred men then, and you knew everybody, but I found all these young men--the greatest young men I've ever met in my life in that one place, and some of the greatest teachers I've ever heard of in my life in that one place. And I found Benny Mays [Morehouse president Benjamin E. Mays] who was in charge of all that, and he was, in my view, the greatest motivator of young men ever produced in this country. He taught us every--once a week. He didn't teach any classes, but once a week--we had chapel everyday--once a week on Tuesday he spoke to the students, and he might talk about anything, challenge us to do this, but that was a life changing experience for everybody who went there then. M. L. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was there then, Julian [Bond] came later, Maynard Jackson came later, but it's just an extraordinary place, and the teachers were so extraordinary. I've served on the Board of Trustees at Morehouse for a number of years until recently, and I've always been trying to say on the Board of Trustees that when we were in school the teachers taught everywhere. They don't do that anymore and it's, it's unfair to ask them to do that. In the first place, most of them lived in and around the campus, but if they, they saw you at the restaurant and--they taught then, and if you mispronounced a word, they would stop and, you know, and say, "Young man, that--that's not the way that word--." And so they taught everywhere and it was just a wonderful, liberating experience, and oh, I was so lucky to get sent there. One of the first things that Benny Mays told us--there was a theater in Atlanta then. I'm almost certain it's the Fox Theater. I think it's still there, but then in order to go to the Fox Theater you had to go up--they had this rickety fire escapes all the way up the second, second floor--and one of the first messages that Benny Mays gave us was that--and they always called us from the time we hit the campus--it was "young men." "Young men, this is a segregated city. You might have to ride a segregated bus to go downtown, but gentlemen do not pay to be insulted. You--" We were never to go to a movie house and pay to be segregated. That's one of the first messages we had. So we had that all throughout my four years there and oh, it was just a great experience to be there, yeah. Transforming. Story_ID: 16504 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite Benjamin Mays story? Speaker 2: I have a lot of them. Let's see, which one--Dr. Mays [President of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] prided himself on the fact that he was a great debater. He believed in logic. You could debate with him toe-to-toe if you could maintain your position with logic, and--well I'll start a story--in our day, food was not what we considered the best. I don't know of any university that's ever had good food according to the students, and one week when Dr. Mays was in New York or somewhere, we decided to have a strike, we decided to strike, and it was well-organized, beautifully organized. To keep the kitchen staff from reserving food and not--and knowing who would eat and who would not eat, everybody would go through the cafeteria and they'd get the food and they would dump it at the trash can. Terrible, okay, and it worked. It was 99 percent effective. And so Dr. Mays came back in town and, I've said in other places, he did an interesting thing. He didn't send a vice president, he didn't send a dean. He called a meeting of the student body. He probably got there on the train at 2:00 o'clock, he called a meeting at 6:00 o'clock and he believed he could out-talk anybody and so he stood out in the middle of the stage and, and, and I remember the first thing he said was that, "You are not men. You waited 'til my back was turned before you would strike. So you are not men." And he went on to say something that became very famous in black educational circles and you might have read it somewhere. He said, "Students are striking all over the world," he said, "The students in India are striking for freedom," said, "The students in China are striking for a new government, the students here are striking for liberation, but when the black students of the South strike, they strike for their belly." And he had this thing of (unclear)--"belly"--he could do this thing on the word. Great speech but it--But Benny opened it up and he was challenged on every level, toe-to-toe, and there was this heated argument and, and, and somebody said, "You can't talk to Dr. Mays like that." And Dr. Mays said, "He can talk to me like that if he wants to as long as he can defend himself." And they were--it was just a great scene. It did not--what he did--he called a meeting and the strike subsided, but it was a great example of a man who believed in freedom, and who meant, you know, he didn't dictate to us. He didn't say we had to go back. He wanted to hear our reasons and if our reasons were not good, he had an answer but it was a great dialogue of, of a great man at the height of his, of his powers, but it was a great lesson in freedom, because he did not dictate. He didn't presume to say we didn't have the right to debate him and it did not end because he said it had to end. It ended because of a meeting of minds and a debate between men, which, which brought fruit so--there were so many like that. That's the way he taught. That's the way he was. Story_ID: 16505 Speaker 1: What other things were forming you in Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], though? What, what things--were you still interested in history and--I mean, what other things--? Did you become--were you doing work, even any work with the newspaper? Speaker 2: Since childhood I've--newspapers everywhere, everywhere. I worked for them for nothing, et cetera. Yes I was editor of the [Morehouse] 'Maroon Tiger' and I must mention a great friend of mine, Robert E. [Edward] Johnson, who was a former late editor of 'Jet', was there. He was editor at the 'Maroon Tiger' one year and I was editor the next year. I worked for the 'Atlanta Daily World' as a freelancer, so yes I was working for newspapers and I was sending things off across the country trying to--a stringer for people. I did not major in history. I majored in--had a double major--I majored in political science and economics. I intended, at that point, to, to practice law, to study law, and the reason I intended to study law was while I was thinking in Mississippi and looking--in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] the biggest show in the South, the best show in the South was when Thurgood Marshall came to town to argue before one of these bigoted courts. In our day, the first level of suits were teacher salary suits. They paid black teachers ten dollars and they paid the white teachers a hundred dollars so the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] filed teacher salary suit all across the South, and my great memories when Thurgood Marshall would come to town [Jackson, Mississippi] and would argue a teachers' salary suit, just, just, just magnificent, and that's what I wanted to do. I mean I learned later they had nothing to do with law--deeds and wills and--but--that you don't stand up and argue like Thurgood all the time. I learned that later but I though then that you argued all the time the way Thurgood--and so I wanted to be a lawyer. And I had the double major and I was going to law school. I decided not to go later but I didn't major in history. Speaker 1: So what--why did you decide not to go? Speaker 2: (Pause) A mistake--maybe it was not a mistake--a mistake in terms of, of--paperwork. I was poor, still poor, and I wanted to go to law school which would take a lot of money, and I needed a scholarship. The question was--and I didn't get it settled right--what comes first, do you get a scholarship and then you apply, or do you apply and then try to get a scholarship? However it is, I did it wrong. I was accepted and I didn't have a scholarship or whatever when I finished college, so I couldn't go that year. They say, "We'll, we'll, we'll honor it next year." And so I had to work for a year, and I started work at the 'Atlanta Daily World', and when the year came around, I decided I didn't want to be a lawyer. I decided I wanted to stay in journalism, so I've been in journalism since then. Speaker 1: And what captivated you about journalism? I mean you had been doing it all the time but was it--did it seem something that was just natural and sort of a natural second thing after law school--you know, going-- and that you were good at. Speaker 2: (Pause) It was not a second choice. I was in love with journalism and it was an easy thing for me to say, here was the only daily black newspaper in the United States of America at that time and I had a chance to work on it, and I was fascinated by it, I loved to cover the theater, write sport stories, and cover [Atlanta] City Hall and the police beat. And the great thing for me then and for Bob Johnson then, we did things because we were a daily that I don't think any, any [weekly] black newspaper in the United States was doing. We, we covered the police beat, we covered, covered City Hall and we--so I had a chance to do that, and it was just, it was a lot of excitement, a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Can you talk about who the owner was of the 'Atlanta Daily World' at that time and how it even got started? Do you know that? Speaker 2: It was C. A. [Cornelius Adolphus] Scott, the Scott family, C. A. Scott was the, the publisher. The Scott family owned it. I'm not sure about the division of shares. I don't, I don't know the division of shares, but the Scott family owned it and C. A. Scott was the operating head of that. It had been founded by W. A. [William Alexander] Scott [II]--was the visionary--brilliant man who had started it and did not live long, and C. A. Scott and the family continued it, so it was run by the Scotts when I was there, by C. A. Scott in particular. Story_ID: 16506 Speaker 1: Things were sort of brew-, starting to brew, right, in the South and--? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So what were, what were some of the issues you were covering then? Speaker 2: Police brutality, bad schools, segregated schools, police brutality, as I said, segregated schools, trying to get a student in the University of Georgia, trying to get a student in Georgia State [University], rights, veterans' rights, the same issues we are concerned about today, we were concerned about then. The schools are not segregated.--they are segregated de facto now but we were concerned about the same--police brutality always, you know, Los Angeles [California]--whipping blacks and throwing them against cars, it was going on all the time. Those are the same issues we're concerned about today. This is in '49 [1949] when I started at the [Atlanta Daily] World and I--stayed there until '53 [1953]. In '52 [1952] Ike [U.S. President Dwight D. 'Ike' Eisenhower] was elected, with the Republican thing, and [Adlai] Stevenson ran, but--the same issues. In '49 [1949] the 'Dixiecrats' were walking out of the Democratic party because they said the Democrats were too liberal to blacks, and Republicans were turning white, and driving my old neighbor--no not neighbor--my old city-mate [in Jackson, Mississippi] Riddick (ph.) and all those [black] people out of the Republican party. It was the same scene. Nothing else has changed. Speaker 1: I know, you know, what--it's amazing when you hear about the issues you think, "Oh my goodness how--" doesn't seem like we've come that far if it's the same issues. Speaker 2: The issues of change. We've come a long way, but I say--the thing I say is, "Everything has changed in Chicago [Illinois], and Atlanta [Georgia], and New York, and yet paradoxically, nothing has changed." Story_ID: 16507 Speaker 1: Now who came to 'Ebony' fir--did Bob [Robert Edward] Johnson come--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Bob came first. Speaker 1: He came first. Okay, and do you remember how that even happened? Speaker 2: Well at the time--Mr. [John H.] Johnson started 'Ebony' in '45 [1945], and in '51 [1951] started 'Jet', and he was in the process in '51 [1951] or so, I guess, he planned a number of other magazines, all sorts of things he's planning. He was in the process to my understanding of trying to find and bring to Chicago [Illinois] all of the best black journalistic talent in the country. He was offering what was considered outrageous salaries to come to, come to Chicago. He brought a whole number of--Vincent Tubbs and [Art] Carter and people from the 'Afro [American'] in Baltimore [Maryland]. He brought Simeon Booker from the Nieman Fellowship, so he brought Bob [Robert E. Johnson] from Atlanta [Georgia], so he was in the process of bringing as many of what he considered good writers and photo-, photographers to Chicago, and he offered Bob a job and Bob came. And it's my understanding, I know it's true, that when Bob got here he told them that "There's another young man down there that you really ought to take a look at." and he did and he offered me a (unclear) job and I came here. Speaker 1: And do you remember--So you came here with great anticipations. This is the 'Ebony', very very new in its beginning. Speaker 2: Oh it was about eight years old but it was still a new thing. Speaker 1: It was still new. Speaker 2: It was still a new thing and the, the possibilities for journalism we thought were unbelievable, especially because we did a number of things, that--we traveled everywhere, money was not an issue. We traveled to the islands, to Africa. If there was a story in Los Angeles [California], we traveled everywhere. We traveled--if not first class, the same way other journalists traveled, so it was a very exciting era for blacks and journalists never seen before, so it was, it was a good time. Story_ID: 16508 Speaker 1: Did, did--Mr. Johnson, did he talk about, sort of, his vision to--I mean how is he forming this team? And was he doing things like talking about the vision? And like you say, you know, here was the '[Chicago] Defender', sort of, down the street. I'm just saying, what was happening and brewing here, you know, besides the fact, you know, you were saying he was paying good salaries and all of that and he was wanting to do things in the right way. But was there much discussion about what it was going to be? And what was gong to shape it and form it and--? Speaker 2: I don't know how to answer that. Let me answer it two ways and then I'll come back to it. The first time is that I'm uncomfortable putting words into his mouth. He said in his book, you know, what he was trying to do. My sense is that he wanted to create a great journalistic empire, and he wanted to do things for his class, and he wanted to do as much in his own sphere as 'Look' and 'Life' were doing at that time, and that's the sense we have. A thing I say myself which would be helpful in understanding that era--from the days of the Great Migration to, to 'Ebony' and 'Jet', black America had been dominated by series of great newspapers. 'Chicago Defender' here brought all the people up in the [Great] Migration--"Y'all Come! Y'all Come!"--big red headlines, extraordinary journalistic adventure--'Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] Courier'. And, and when I was a boy growing up in Mississippi, we used to wait, we used to wait every week for the big black newspapers to come out. It was like for oxygen, you know, I mean. Until the 'Courier' and, you know, the 'Defender' came you didn't know what was happening in the world. So from all that time from the Great Migration until 'Ebony' and 'Jet', the great newspapers had dominated the dialogue in black America. Well in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], something began to happen. Not only to black newspapers but to white newspapers. First there was radio, and then there was a thing called photography, and, and, and everybody wanted to see photographs, 'Look' and, and 'Life', then there followed television. Well this is a great challenge to all print media. Almost all of the dai-, afternoon newspapers--white--have gone out of business, simply because of the problem meeting the challenge of television and and photographs, and if you look at most newspapers today--look at the '[Chicago] Tribune'; the front page is almost like a magazine, great big pictures and color. That's the only way people can survive in America today in our field. Mr. Johnson anticipated that in black America, and what he was doing he was doing with pictures, you know, showing black people the way they looked, and it just exploded, and this was the great contribution at this period, and the great excitement for a lot of us because of the great change in American journalism. We're going through another great change now. Who knows what it would be--new media--but that was a great crossroads journalism in America, and he invented an answer for black media, which enabled black media to survive and thrive, and it's my sense that almost all of the black magazines today are extensions of what he dreamed and tried to do all those years ago. Story_ID: 16509 Speaker 1: When you were traveling and everything during those first years around [at 'Ebony' magazine], what was also forming you? 'Cause you're seeing things, and it's one thing, you know, going from, you know, Jackson, Mississippi to Atlanta [Georgia]. But then you say you're coming from Atlanta to Chicago [Illinois], but you said you were even traveling outside the country--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --and doing all of that. And what were those experiencing--how were they--what did you find surprising or what did you learn, or what--you know, what was forming you, I guess, as a person and also as a journalist? Speaker 2: Oh, the, the whole idea that I learned at the [Morehouse College] 'Maroon Tiger' in Atlanta and at 'Atlanta [Daily] World'--that black journalists could do anything any other journalists anywhere in the world could do and could probably do it better. And competing with other media, competing with other writers was good for us in this period in the sense that it confirmed some of these things, it taught us in some other things that we were weak here and we have to, we have to do other things, but this was, this was the great explosion period. Carl Rowan, the, the--comes out of this period, I mean, I guess in Minneapolis he--at this time the '[Chicago] Tribune' and the '[Chicago] Sun-Times', they didn't have any black writers. I mean 'Look' didn't have any black writers. 'New York Times' didn't have any black writers, but writers were breaking through and, and everywhere there was that sense of a change and it was, it was, it was linked with a real change. I, I got here in March of 1953--never will forget May 1954, 17[th] We were at Johnson Publishing Company and the news started coming through about the Supreme Court--Brown versus Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas]--and then it was, you know, then it was Emmett Till and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and it never stopped after that, but this was the beginning of just--it's an unbelievable period in, in, in the life of black people in this country. And in, in, in the life of America because I maintained that because of what black people did from '54 [1954] certainly through the '70s [1970s], the whole of America was transformed. The women's movement was transformed, student movement, the whole South was transformed. Chicago was transformed. It was a dinky, segregated town when we came. It's still segregated, but black people transformed all these, these places, so all that happened in this very exciting period, which I was just very fortunate to, to live through. Speaker 1: Now I wanna--just--this--the, the team--that initial team [at Johnson Publishing Company] included who of the writers? Speaker 2: Well, Simeon Booker, Cloyte Murdock [Larsson], Vincent Tubbs, Dan Burley, Roi Ottley--Herbert Nipson. Who else? I'm forgetting so many of---[Leroy] Winbush in art, Herbert Nipson in art, and don't forget that, that, that's--we had not done so many things. We'd not sold advertising on a major league level, and Mr. Johnson was instrumental in creating a team that started to sell advertising on a major league level, I mean full page ads with all that implied, and you can't-- it's difficult to have a good medium if you don't have some advertising, so he, he got great advertising people, New York and Chicago and Los Angeles [California], and we had offices in all these places. It was a real, real adventure in that time. Story_ID: 16510 Speaker 1: How did 'Before the Mayflower [A History of Black America]' fit within the context of this? Was it encouraged? Because it almost seems like, in many ways, it was an incubator, you know. I mean it's not how you describe but, you know, it could have been that you weren't encouraged to write so I'm just try--I mean when I say "write," write your-- a book. So I'm just wondering, you know, here you're saying, you know, people are learning how to sell advertising. You know, there's this whole push to do something of quality. You know, you're almost inventing things, doing something different than your typical black newspaper. But I'm just wondering, how did 'Before the Mayflower' come out of this thing, and it's--really comes nine years--it's published nine years after your coming to Johnson Publishing [Company]. Speaker 2: Well, it was a part of our--all explosion. I had been studying black history all my life, virtually. And as soon as I got to 'Ebony', we got, we began to get more letters saying, "You know, why don't you do something on this or why don't you do something on that?" And Mr. [John H.] Johnson said, "You know--you--we've talked about stories of what you could do." Said, "It would be a good idea to do a history series." Then the question was, who could do it? I said, "Well, I've been studying history all these years. I can do it." So he said, "Try it," and so I started the history series, and it was received, you know, very, very well. One of the things we tried to do in that and one of the things we were forced to do because we started out in a popular medium, one of the things we were forced to do is to try to make it dramatic, exciting, human, readable; the same sort of thing, same kind of feeling I got from M.B. Manning [at Lanier High School] in Jackson, Mississippi. So we tried to make it dramatic and human and readable, and people have been kind enough to say that we succeeded on some levels. So it was published in a book and, oh, that's been forty years ago, forty years ago this August. It's still August. Forty years ago and it's been selling well for forty years. And it was voted at the end of the century--a number of people and a number of lists--most of the lists said that it was one of the most important book, black books, of the 20th century. And we'd been doing that since and 'Ebony' was one of the leaders in the whole black history movement, the whole popular black history movement. Of course, Carter G. Woodson and John Hope Franklin and Benjamin Quarles and the great teachers in Chicago [Illinois] led that movement, but we had a chance to do something on a popular level, and we're still involved in it. Story_ID: 16511 Speaker 1: So how many articles were actually published [in 'Ebony' magazine] before they ended up being a book called 'Before the Mayflower'? Speaker 2: About twelve and then I rewrote them, extended them, wrote new chapters for the book but there was at least a year. The series ran for more than a year, and we had about twelve articles. Speaker 1: You said that it became very popular, and I mean people were writing in or they giving you feedback. Was there, like, any editorial discussion about what would actually go into your articles and things like that? Any feedback that was negative? Anything that sort of changed between the articles and, you know, the actual book? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of, and I was so, so, so lucky. The outlines of the chapter basically 'Behind the Cotton Curtain'--basically the titles we selected then were the titles that we used and to block out a section of history and to deal with it--no, the only feedback we got, we got feedback from teachers in high schools and elementary schools and, you know, "Let's have some more." And they used it in the classrooms. They would paste it up in classrooms. I can't remember--I hear something else in your question, but I can't remember any, any specific, you know, finger-pointing in any particular direction that we were not going in. I don't remember that. Speaker 1: But you know, the reason I'm asking the question, it's almost like you have--it seems like you had a pretty free reign. That's what I'm, you know--that's what I'm trying to get to. I mean I'm trying to get to--because some things sound like they wouldn't exist today is what I'm trying to say. Speaker 2: Well, I, I had a free reign. The publisher [John H. Johnson] let me write it the way I wanted to write it, and the executive editors, Herbert Nipson then and Era Bell Thompson--I meant to mention Era Bell Thompson--were supportive and I had a free reign in doing it. I was very, very lucky. Very, very lucky. Speaker 1: But in many ways, really, 'Before the Mayflower' had been germinating in you for years. Speaker 2: I've been working on it for years, for years. I mean ever since Mississippi. Ever since Mississippi and had not put a word down. I had written some short stories. I'd written the novel that everybody is supposed to write. I'd written that, and it's still not published. I'd written poetry. I'd written several things on Frederick Douglass and published at that time. I'd written, actually written some of the things but this is the first time we tried to put it in a series in a consecutive way. Speaker 1: And did you know that at the time that you writing that it would be as important a book as it ultimately ended up becoming? Speaker 2: No. No, I did not. No, I did not. I just--you know, it was just fun and exciting to do and I got so much good feedback on it. People would tear their articles out and to say that, "You know, for the first time I'm reading history. I've never read history before." And I got so much fun out of that, so no, I had no idea that it would be important. And then to tell you the truth, nothing astonishes me more, nothing humbles me more than the times I walk Wabash Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]--and that's a daily thing I do, walk up Wabash--and the number of times I meet, almost every week, a brother or a sister who says it's the first book I ever read, certainly the first history I've ever read. But the most humbling experience is when I meet brothers--I meet them everywhere, all over the country--who are in the penitentiary and who were exposed to a paperback for the first time and said, "You know, I sat down and read it all the way through, and it changed my life." So that's, you know, that's worth more than anything, you know. Story_ID: 16512 Speaker 1: But you know the other thing that's fascinating about it [his book 'Before the Mayflower'] is the area that you focused on, and it's an area that's still not that much known about. That's why it's such a seminal important. It's an area that still, you know, more--it's that point--I'm sorry, it's the historical period of time that not much has been talked about and that black people are not viewed necessarily as having a history. That's what I'm trying to say. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And that's what, what I'm trying--I would like to have you artic--Why did you choose that period? You know, I would like you to articulate that. You could have been writing about, you know, the `30s [1930s] or `40s [1940s] and `50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: I mean you could have chosen-- Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: --to do that. Speaker 2: Well, first of all, we started out with the premise that, that black people are descendents of great people in Africa who played major roles in the development of civilization and who made seminal contributions to, to European culture and elsewhere. We started out with that premise and the first chapter, 'The African Past', again, we had a lot of fun doing it and, and, we worked-- William Leo Hansberry, at Howard [University], was just one of the great scholars of America, never recognized, who had done so much important work on Egypt and Ethiopia and the kings and queens of that period, so--we were able to use some of his work and some of other people's work to talk about the your queens of Egypt and Africa and how that developed. And to deal with, again, in almost all cases, great African American scholars and some great white scholars had put the material out in many cases, in some cases it was in a very academic setting and people had not known about it. But I am indebted--oh, and all of us working today are indebted to Carter G. Woodson, Charles Wesley, Ben [Benjamin] Quarles, and John Hope Franklin, and we were able to take some of that and make it popular and that's a part of, I guess, the appeal of the book. But we start it there and the first blacks to arrive in America; for example, in 1619, the twenty blacks in Jamestown [Virginia]. I maintained and--in 1962-- that they did not come here as slaves; that most of them, perhaps all of them, were indentured servants. That's commonplace now but it was, it was a lot of fun dealing with that and saying that and going on to, to, to make a point of it. We, we, we we dealt with the point, and I imagine some of this was--I don't think it was that controversial then. We said bluntly that Thomas Jefferson was the father of some of Sally Hemings's children. I mean and white scholars were just appalled and, and (unclear) "It's not worth even talking about." Here again, black scholars that were there before had dealt with that. But to deal with all those issues was, I think, very good for me, and I hope it helped African American people and other people. The thing that's--and I'm appalled--that's not the word--I'm shocked. I'm outraged that the fact that [Jean Baptiste Point] du Sable founded the city of Chicago [Illinois] is one of the biggest secrets in the city of Chicago. It's just outrageous in 2002 the fact that they don't have a major street for the founder of the city. I--I--I don't know. Everything has changed and nothing has changed. It's unbelievable as much talent and power as we have in this city that we let this city insult us by not doing something about du Sable, but we wrote about that man forty, forty, forty years ago and still we haven't won that fight on du Sable. We haven't won that fight on du Sable. And the other black men and women who are among the founders of this country. Black men and women were among the founders of Los Angeles [California]; they were among the founders of San Francisco [California]; they were here in the beginning all over this country, and we still haven't caught up to that so that's still a lot of work to do. Story_ID: 16513 Speaker 1: I'll ask this question because actually you talk about popularizing history, you know, and you've been noted as a popular historian, meaning you're making history popular, you know. You can bring it alive. Speaker 2: It means two things. The other thing it means that I'm not an academic historian when they want to criticize me, but that's all right. (laughs) Speaker 1: I wanted to ask about that. I wanted to ask, you know, what was some of the criticism on the part of, you know, historians also. I mean of the classically-trained historians, that's all I'm saying because--. Speaker 2: Yeah--oh, I have received so much support from people like John Hope [Franklin] and Benjamin Quarles, so much support from them. Other people have said, you know, they used to say that, "There are no footnotes," which is, which--and that "Lerone is a popular historian," which is neither here nor there. It doesn't bother me at all, but I just say whenever they, whenever academic historians say he's a popular historian, most of them mean the second thing but that's all right. But I have received just enormous support from black historians. Meeting--I can't tell you what a joy it was to me to meet William Leo Hansberry, who had not been recognized all those years. One of the greatest minds on Africa in America. But to meet him toward the end and to get a chance to talk to him, to meet J. A. [Joel Augustus] Rogers and people like that, one of the things that says to me is that there's been this long and consistent line of black men and women who've been trying tell this story, and we're not at the end of that line yet. Speaker 1: Now, do you think also that--you know, I'm just trying to put, you know, 'Ebony' and that whole--your team, you know, that team there in historical context. And the thing was that not much of white America was paying attention to you in some respects. I mean you were--you had the freedom to talk directly to your audience, and it was an audience that was needy and wanting, you know, things about themselves and things that were uplifting. Now, when you--so the feedback, so Mr. [John H.] Johnson was very happy about 'Before the Mayflower'. Was he happy? Speaker 2: I think so, I'm sure, yeah. Speaker 1: And that sort of put you on the map in many ways, right? Speaker 2: I think so. Yes, yes it did. Story_ID: 16514 Speaker 1: How did you end up choosing to do 'What Manner of Man [A Biography of Martin Luther King, Jr.]', because that's two years later? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, after '[Before the] Mayflower', the [Johnson Publishing] company started the book publishing company, and I started writing books for the company, and I--if I had an idea, I would suggest a book; or in some cases, because of [Dr. Martin Luther] King's [Jr.] popularity, they would suggest that, you know, we ought to do a book on King. And I happened to have attended school [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] with King and Bob [Robert E. Johnson] did too, so we knew King. So I did that and it was just sort of a logical progression, but I--I remember that it was suggested that we do a book on King and that I, I did the book. I thought it was a good idea, and I did the book on King. And other books I suggested during that period, book of essays, two or three other historical books, so I've done several things for the company since then. Speaker 1: You know, can we go back just with the 'Negro Digest', because you were--that was also, right? Speaker 2: No I wasn't-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You weren't--. Speaker 2: I wasn't here but 'Negro Digest', it started in '42 [1942] and reached its peak before I came. What happened was that in the '60s [1960s], in the middle of the great explosion of the '60s [1960], Mr. [John H.] Johnson revived the book on a new name 'Black World'. And Hoyt Fuller was the editor of it a long time, and he played a major role in developing consciousness during the--what we call the "Black Revolution". Speaker 1: And a lot of people, you know, people who are black nationalists say that, you know, they still miss that book to this day. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Good. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I mean--I'm sorry--the publication to this day. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Yeah. And I say to them, and, and--I miss it too. How should I say this? I said at the time and I say now that, I, I just wish that the company could have continued it, but I also wish that black professionals had supported it at the level it should have been supported at. Now, now, America is not a place for intellectual magazines. They--American white people don't support intellectual magazines, but we have a greater need and we have enough teachers, we ought to be able to maintain a circulation of 100,000 for an intellectual magazine. Several have died since then, and I refuse to believe that black professionals will not pay for an intellectual magazine. At least 100,000. There must be 100,000 out there. We haven't proved it and it's getting worse in the sense that, as you know, you're in media, attention span is shorter than it ever was. TV and DVD and magazines are becoming more picture-oriented. It's going the other way, and I still hope to see a time when black professionals, we have enough, we have at least 100,000 who ought to want to see a black intellectual magazine and ought to pay for it. Story_ID: 16515 Speaker 1: Now I want to go to [February] 1968 when you wrote that essay ["Was Abe Lincoln A White Supremacist?"], you know, the essay and the prelude to the book ['Forced Into Glory: Abraham Lincoln's White Dream'], you know, you've just published. And was there outcry about that, that, that article at all? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, yes. All over the world, newspapers screamed, the 'New York Times' screamed, the 'ChicagoTribune' screamed, the 'Chicago Sun-Times'--everywhere there were news editorials, there were condemnations everywhere. Paris [France], London [England] there were outcries, and, and it continued for six or seven months. And I don't think there's ever been anything like it, but it was just explosions everywhere and some of the biggest explosions were in Chicago [Illinois] , whether it was the 'Tribune' or the 'Sun-Times'. They were just mortified. They said, "Oh, my, my goodness, this is terrible." And I'm doing and I'm going to do another book on [Abraham] Lincoln and on that whole response sort of thing. Most of the--it's a very interesting thing--I, I, I find it difficult to talk about. Most white historians, even in `68 [1968], knew that I was telling the truth and so they modified the more passionate thing, and I thought they were going to change for a while but appeared that they had not changed, which is why I wrote the second book. And the response--oh, I love living in this period--the response was the precise opposite. They had learned something since 1968. It was published in February of 60--February of 2000. Silence. Absolute silence. Total silence. We have a big shop, so we--we, we, we did what you do. We sent books around, packages, media packages, and, and, and we called again and said "You probably didn't get it." We put books in limousines, and we sent it up to the 'Tribune' and to the 'Sun Times'. Say maybe--and we call them and they--and silence. Absolute silence. Finally--except, God help us, except in the black press, 'The [Chicago] Defender', Cliff [Clifford] Kelly, WVON [AM, Chicago], and black radio stations across the country--which saved it. But there as silence in the main media until--no, one exception: Eric Foner, a great American historian did a review in the 'Los AngelesTimes'. I don't know how that happened. That wasn't supposed to happen. So that was the first review. Then Jack White in 'Time' magazine heard about the thing, and he did an article in 'Time', and it said, "What's going on here? Say, here's a major book documenting something that nobody's said in America. Scholars say it's well-researched, and nobody will review it. Why is there this conspiracy of silence?" Because of that, the newspapers, they immediately assigned it to a hatchet person to destroy me. They said that it's crazy. and this is, this is (unclear) this new thing and, and then that was it. But black people--I mean I hate to be chauvinistic about this, but black people on the street--it's a 652-page book, costs thirty-five dollars. Black people on the street kept it on the best-sellers list of Afro-centric bookstores for a year. They're still buying it. More so than, than, than, than intellectuals, the people on the street have been buying it, and they would not let it die, and I still get a just overwhelming response from them. That's--that's so gratifying to see the way they've responded to this thing. Speaker 1: But you know, one question that I have for you is that when you wrote that article in 1968 and there was, you know, this sort of this firestorm that went, did that scare you, and did that scare Mr. [John H.] Johnson? Because at this time, were there, were there any issues about people trying to pull advertising or writing editorials or, you know, any feedback that would have said maybe you shouldn't go there? That's all I'm just wondering because this is, we're in 1968, and you know, we're starting to get into the, you know, be popularizing in the mainstream. Speaker 2: Well, let me put it to you, the first thing I would say, 1968 was probably more liberal than 2002. The second thing I'd say is that, God help us--thank you, spirit--most people in America seem to understand that 'Ebony' is one thing and Lerone Bennett [Jr.] is another thing. You know, this is remarkable, you know. I would imagine they say, "Well, you know, Lerone Bennett is crazy." You know, so--. But most of them, so far almost all of them have made the distinction. They don't say it and there's no reason they should say that, this is 'Ebony' saying this. This is Lerone Bennett saying this. And it's just been remarkable and a wonderful thing. People are not always that perceptive, but I, I, they always, you know, even to this point--'Forced into Glory' has, has angered more people than, than the 1968 thing, quietly, but I think that they understand that Lerone Bennett's Lerone Bennett and 'Ebony's' another thing, and they're not the same. And they're not the same--so people should understand that. I did a book of essays in the `60s [1960s], 'The Negro Mood'. What I said was Lerone Bennett saying it, it was not 'Ebony' saying it, so I think that's operating and I will continue to operate. But no, I, I again, the bottom line is I think a lot of people say, "Lerone Bennett is absolutely crazy, so you know, don't pay any attention to him. It's not 'Ebony'." Story_ID: 16516 Speaker 1: You've had a Lerone Bennett [Jr.] franchise within 'Ebony'. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's why I say this is what is really amazing, and people--and it's almost that the two--some people see, you know, Mr. [John H.] Johnson is running, you know, this really tight ship and yet here he, here was allowed to exist Lerone Bennett. Speaker 2: Well, there are two things: One, what I do at 'Ebony' and what I do for 'Ebony', praise the Lord, most people understand that he's doing that, he's talking for 'Ebony' now. He's, he's, he's wearing his 'Ebony' hat. When I call for reparations, I don't think anybody in his right mind thinks that I'm speaking for Mr. Johnson. I mean I hope there's nobody in his right mind, but some people probably will. But it's clearly, when I speak for reparations--and the thing that's operative here, since 1962, I have been speaking all over the country on university and college campuses and, and that's another completely separate thing. People hear me speak at Urbana [Illinois] or here somewhere else. Fortunately--and it's interesting. Fortunately, they say, "Well, this is Lerone Bennett speaking, this is not 'Ebony' speaking." They have to know that because--and you know, it's something that happens in American journalism. An editor from 'Time' magazine writes a book, nobody in his right mind thinks that he's speaking for 'Time' magazine, but they tend to try to do it to us. So--but that's the way journalism is. I mean the 'Washington [D.C.] Post', [Carl] Bernstein, all these people, they understand that when an editor writes a book, he's writing it himself. They don't--they have no idea in the world that Katherine Graham ['Post' publisher] is writing this book. It's idiotic. So that's the way the American press operates. Story_ID: 16517 Speaker 1: So 'Forced into Glory [Abraham Lincoln's White Dream'], Johnson Publishing Company published it, and--to the extent that people are mad, I think they're mad with me, (laughs) but that's all right. Speaker 2: What publication, what are you most proud of that you've written? Speaker 1: 'Before the Mayflower' and 'Forced Into Glory'. Speaker 2: Two bookends. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: For now. Speaker 1: For now, for now, for now. Yeah, that's, that's--those are the two I'm most proud of. Speaker 2: And how, why did it take that much time to do 'Forced Into Glory', do you think? Why did, why was--? Speaker 1: First of all, I had to--I, I was walking on uncharted ground. I had to research everything I was going to say and had to research it and research it again because nothing would have overjoyed my critics more for them to say that, that, that this, "This is wrong," and I, I think [Eric] Foner and, and two or three other critics that we--"He's terrible, he's crazy, but, but there are no, there are no errors in it. What he said is factually true." So that was, so, it was also the natural inertia of saying certain things that had never been said before, and, and, and dealing with that. I, I, tell the story in some of my lectures. I--the first chapter of my book, I said, "The Emancipation Proclamation freed few, if any, Negroes." And then I went on to say that, "The most famous act in American history never happened." Now, that's crazy. Everybody knows that [Abraham] Lincoln freed the slaves, everybody knows it. I, and, and, and to publish a book and say he didn't do it is, is just crazy, you know. The other thing is, is to say that he wanted to send all black people out of this country, out of--he just didn't want any black people here. All these things are in the record. They've been known for a hundred and thirty-seven years. For a little old--for, a, you know, a little old brother on the South Side [of Chicago, Illinois] to say that was, was, was shocking, and, and it took time to research it. It took time to write it because here again, I was trying to write it, not in the academic, dry style. I wanted to make it readable and wanted people to read it. So, but it was, it was the most interesting thing I've, I've ever done in my life. And, and I, I remember I--the two, two great things about it, I was working on it all of, you know, ten years, eleven years and, and one time I was on vacation, and I happened to--I, I went to Walgreens and, and the clerk said, "I don't see you here in the middle of the day. What, what, what's--why are you here in the middle of the day?" And so I made the mistake of saying, "Well, I'm writing a book." And she said, "Well, what is it on?" I said, "On Lincoln." She--the upshot of that was, when I went back to Walgreens next, she said, "Did you finish it yet?" For a whole year, "Did you--?" And so I had to change Walgreens, you know. I couldn't go back there, and, and all over the 'hood [neighborhood], I met people who knew I'd been working on it, they say, "You'll never finish it," and, and so, so that was, was one thing about it. But one, one brother told me, this is an absolutely funny thing, he said, "For a hundred and thirty seven years, the University of Chicago, Harvard [University], Princeton [University], [University of California] Berkeley, the University of Illinois have said that Lincoln was the 'Great Emancipator' and that he freed the slaves. And here you are, one little old colored man on the South Side of Chicago, and you're gonna tell us that all those people were wrong." [he] say, "You crazy, man." And I mean, and it hadn't been written yet, and, you know, I got a lot of that. Say, "We know he freed them," so, so, I, I continued and we published it, and the response has been interesting, and it's, it's, it's still developing. Story_ID: 16518 Speaker 1: I have several questions to ask you, but back about 'Forced Into Glory [Abraham Lincoln's White Dream]', with this book, what was--you were bound also to prove yourself to--well, I don't want to say you wanted to prove anything, but as a academic historian, in some respects, you wanted to legitimize something. You felt that--this is what I hear you saying. Now, I'm--what kind, what--did you learn anything more that was shocking, I mean or different than that child of ten did in reading that, you know, reading what you read. But you said you read, you said it was a paperback you had bought at a second-hand store. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a paperback. It was a hardback. Speaker 1: It was a hardback, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, way, way long ago. I don't know what it was, a collection of his speeches, waterlogged, ten or fifteen, twenty-five cents. I don't know what it was, but it was hardback book, probably a collection of his speeches. Yes, I learned a lot of things. I, I learned more about how we've been bamboozled in the last hundred and thirty-seven years. I, I found stuff in the Library of Congress and in, say, the [Sydney Howard] Gay collection at Columbia [University] of letters that people have not told us really what's happened in this country. One of the most interesting things is that you know who said worse things about Abraham Lincoln than I've said? Joseph Medill of the 'Chicago Tribune'. You know, and the Chicago, the 'Chicago Tribune' is my biggest critic--they don't want to know it, but Medill said Lincoln was no good. I mean, and, and I keep teasing the people at Northwestern [University], the Medill School of Journalism, I said, "Why doesn't--why don't you, why don't, why don't somebody out there read a book at Medill and say something about Medill, I mean, and his crusade against Lincoln and how slow he was." And, but, but that's one example of that. I've learned so much, and, and in writing it, ooh, my goodness, I learned so much about how to deal with, with, with concepts and, and about certain basic defects, I think, of American scholarship. And that I, I was, I, I, you know, that I'm still pursuing. The excuses they give, and it was just, it was just a trip. It was just very, very interesting. I've had an opportunity--and then I'm through with this--first, the, the Lincoln scholars, they said, "We'll ignore him," and then they denounced me. And, and then, I had a, an interview with [Kevin] Lamb on CNN [Cable News Network], which helped to change the course of the book, 'cause orders, they started pouring in. And Lamb said, you know, just in passing, "Well, why don't the scholars ask you to come to a place and you'll have a dialogue?" So in part, because of that, I was invited to Gettysburg [Pennsylvania] to talk to the Lincoln scholars. And at University of Indiana, Indiana, I talked to a conference, and on February the 12th I was invited to talk, go to Springfield [Illinois] and talk to the Lincoln scholars. And very interesting, very interesting, but we talked. Speaker 1: Very interesting because of their comment on their inability to see beyond things, to recognize, to hold up, perpetuation of things to--I mean very interesting because? Speaker 2: Very interesting because in general, almost all of the academic historians accept the traditional view of Lincoln with certain changes they made because of what I said in '68 [1968] and what I've said in 2002. I said that the Emancipation Proclamation didn't--freed few, if any, slaves. I don't know any sane historian, black or white, who denies that, academic. They don't tell people in schools or they don't tell people who write for newspapers. What they say now, the academic scholars, they say, is that, "Well, it was a step in the right direction, it had symbolic importance." They say, grandly, "Well the Declaration of Independence didn't free anybody either." But they concede the point--it didn't free black people, and everybody knows that the thirteenth amendment freed blacks. Nobody thought about it then. I said that Lincoln was a racist, used the "N" word, loved minstrel shows, called black men 'boy', called black women 'Auntie', without--no doubt. And I was just reading a book a couple of nights ago, a fellow said, "Of course, he was a racist. All white people in Illinois were racists in the eighteen hundred and fifties [1850s] and sixties [1860s]." And they say "don't deny it and--"and, and my book disputes that because my book does an interesting thing, it's not a black book. I dedicate my book to black people and white people who helped push the emancipation process on. And I've, I've been, you know, I told them that I'm just shocked that none of you have done any serious work on the white men in Illinois and America who really fought for black freedom. So and, and they concede that, but they say all of them were racists, and they--but they concede my point. I said that Lincoln wanted to, to ship all black people out of the country, an absolute fact. They concede that, and they say, "Well, he was just playing to the galleries, people were racist and he just wanted to throw them a bone for that." And, and so, on and on. They don't deny anything I say, but they're organizing their wagons around a new, around a new theory. And I'm not disturbed about it because I tell you one thing, and I guess, we can put it on the tape. The ironic thing here is that 2009 is coming. They plan to have the biggest 200-year celebration [of Lincoln's birth in 1809] since the beginning of the world. And they're still gonna have it. We're talking about a hundred million dollars, two hundred million dollars, tourists coming from everywhere, all across the United States. And as I told a friend of mine, "I'm not under any illusions that one colored man on, on the South Side [of Chicago] is gonna stop that." They aren't, they aren't gonna give up all that money. They've got to find a way to continue the game, but as I told them in, in Gettysburg, they've got to decide whether they are gonna continue to lie or they're gonna begin to tell the truth. And if they're gonna continue to lie, then just come on out and say it, but they cannot continue to say these things just because it's palatable. But they're gonna have the celebration (chuckle). They're gonna have it in 2009. They're gonna have it. Story_ID: 16519 Speaker 1: I want you to comment also on the defects of American scholarship. Speaker 2: (Pause) It's been interesting. (Pause) How to put this? On the minus side, with the exception of two or three black scholars, I don't know of any black scholars who've come out and said anything favorable about the book ['Forced into Glory: Abraham Lincoln's White Dream']. That's the first point. The second point is more interesting and more favorable. The way we do these things in America, if a Lerone Bennett [Jr.] jumps out there and says something, you get a posse of all the black scholars and you said, "Beat that man down, you know, knock him, criticize him." I can't think of anybody who's joined the posse or who'scriticized the book publicly. I can't think of anybody, I can't think of anybody. Now, and that's the most amazing thing in the world because always, in these kinds of things, they ask a black man to go after a black man, and black--but I don't know, I don't know--now, they've gotten some conservative blacks, and with no reputation. I don't count that, but I don't, I don't, I, I can't think of any major black scholars who, who've said anything. And, and I think that's so interesting, and, and so encouraging in a way because if it's, you know--I, I think that's interesting. Speaker 1: You think it's encouraging? Speaker 2: Yes, because-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Or is that--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --because they have not--because the, the game is not working. They've not been able to get people to come out and say, "Let's denounce Lerone Bennett." Speaker 1: Well, what about your views on the defects of American scholarship? Speaker 2: I, I, I think it, it's, it's, it's slanted against poor people, poor white people, poor black people, poor brown people, all poor people. I think its methodology is slanted so that it will come up with results that punish poor people and minority people. In the case of the [Abraham] Lincoln scholarship, for a hundred and thirty-seven years it has been a defense of the status quo, of the racial status quo. One of the reasons that, that, that people love Lincoln is that he--it can be cited in favor of status quo. Don't do anything radical; don't do anything extreme; don't do any John Brown things, don't do any Frederick Douglass things, but, but support whatever status quo there is. Lincoln scholarship all this time has, has been organized on a basis, and it's still being organized on this basis. Since my book came out, they've published a great book, and they call it 'Lincoln's Virtues [An Ethical Biography]' in which they are justifying, they are, are justifying his refusal to come out against slavery in the South, and they're justifying something else, which I hit them hard on, and they have no answer for--Lincoln supported the Fugitive Slave Law [of 1850]. He asked, in Illinois, he asked people, white people to go out into the streets and capture black people and send them back to the South until his dying, until he became president and long after, he supported the Fugitive Slave Law. And I was at--and I'm through with this, and I guess we can--I was at Urbana [Illinois], and I told them I have been waiting for fifty years for one scholar, for one Lincoln scholar to say that what Lincoln did in Charleston [Illinois] in October 1847 was despicable. What he did in October 1850--'47 [1847], he went into court, and asked the judge to send a black mother and her four black children back to slavery--despicable. And, and I said, "I've been waiting for one, one scholar to say that that's unforgivable." And I'm still waiting, and they know it happened. So, it, it's been a defense of the status quo. It, it has not been--they've not told us about John Brown, George Julian, Charles Sumner, Thaddeus Stevens--white men who were far more advanced on civil rights than most white people are today. Then I told them--and as a matter of fact, all the books, the traditional books denounce Sumner and Thaddeus Stevens and John Brown over and over and over again. All the people who were in favor of black emancipation, they denounce them. They support Lincoln who was never really in favor. Story_ID: 16520 Speaker 1: It's fascinating, and, you know, it's also--I couldn't help thinking about, you know, how [Abraham] Lincoln you know and Marcus Garvey, you know, could have been--, (laughs) Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --I mean, but--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And the, and the--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --could have been, you know, of the same mindset--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --the mindset. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --on different sides of the--. Speaker 2: But you know what I say about that, and, you know, it's interesting only--yeah, they, they bring that up. But I say, even in defense of whatever, that it's a different thing for [Theodor] Herzl to call for Jews to leave a country and go establish somewhere else. That's one thing. It's another thing for a Nazi to say that Jews ought to leave and go somewhere else. I mean Garvey had an absolute right--any black had a right to say, "I think black people ought to leave." But no white person had a right to say that, "I think we ought to deport you." So the, the Herzl thing is just, just absolute. I mean individuals in a group have a right to call for that, but people outside the group have no right to call for deportation of us. Story_ID: 16521 Speaker 1: What about Ralph Ellison, what were your beliefs about about Ralph Ellison and--. Speaker 2: What--? Speaker 1: And I say as a writer because he wrote one book ['Invisible Man'], even though it was a seminal book, like 'Before the Mayflower' was a seminal book, but he could never write after that. Speaker 2: I have an immense respect for Ralph Ellison and his achievement. He gave--he fin--he didn't finish the book [his second novel 'Juneteenth']. Somebody finished it after he died. I think it's a tragedy that he was perhaps intimidated by the magnitude of his first success to, to, to not go ahead writing and complete it. I saw him the last time he came here [Chicago, Illinois] for Harold Washington's library, the book thing, and told him how much I respect him. I disagreed with his racial politics, and he had the greatest difficulty in, in staking a position outside of 'The Invisible Man', I mean political position, demonstrations, which I believe in, pressure, pressure, which I believe. I, I disagreed with his racial politics. I, I agreed with Jimmy Baldwin's politics, racial politics, and his literary politics, and Gwen [Gwendolyn] Brooks's literary politics. We, we were different persuasions on that. I enormous respect for him; I still do. Speaker 1: [Adele Hodges, interview observer:] James Baldwin--. Speaker 2: No, go on. It's fine to ask the question. Speaker 1: --a great and angry black man, all that, that he was well-known for when he was very popular in the, in the national media. When he was here last, and that was during the time of the Atlanta [Georgia] child murders, and I saw--that was the first time I saw him in person, a delightful man. I mean he's just sweet--I was just so shocked that he was so different from his media stance. And, would you address that for me, that angry black man thing in the media, and then what the real deal is? Speaker 2: Oh I thoroughly think he was a charming, beautiful human being, such a wonderful person. I think he was angry. I think he had a right to be angry. I think, and certainly toward the end, he had this great love for black people, which was a part of his anger. He was angry at the way black people were being treated in Harlem, not in Mississippi, but the way they were being treated Harlem [New York, New York]. And when he South, I think he was angry about that, but I think the two, two go together; the two go together, from my standpoint and not from, possibly not from Ellison's standpoint. And I think a great writer or writer has a responsibility to speak out about the injustices against black people. And Lorraine Hansberry from Chicago [Illinois], and the first of the black revolution, Jimmy Baldwin, Lorraine Hansberry, some others of our friends were the leading edge of the cultural revolution. But I think they had a right to be angry. The, the trick in America--I don't know how to put this--is to never stop being angry and to refuse to let that anger destroy you. But I think, and I think Jimmy said it or Malcolm X said it, "That to be a black man in American is to be enraged almost all the time," you know, because you run into foolishness all the time. Let me just give you two or three examples and they're, they're foolish, they're foolish. You go to New York, and, and you're not bothering anybody. You, well, not--don't even go to New York. Go down on North Michigan Avenue [in Chicago], you're not bothering anybody. You, you're, you, you've paid your money. You, you, you're dressed up, you look good, and, and you in a hurry. You got to get to this TV thing in five minutes. And no taxicab will pick you up. I mean, I mean I, you know, I mean, and that's a, that's so stupid. (laughs) That, that--the only thing for you to do is to scream and holler, you know, because it's just absolute stupid. I, I, I went to--I was in New York one time, and I came out of the theater, and you know, and you know the New York thing, if you come back--every cabs, everybody's trying to get-- get a cab, and my wife and I. And, and the cab pulled up. I said, "The cab empty," and I opened the door, and the driver said, "I'm off duty." And I was enraged, and I told a friend, "Give me your number." And he, he gave me his number, and then he pulled up five yards, and he picked up a white couple. That, that happens all the time. It happens to Harry Belafonte, it happens to Vernon Jordan, but I'm, I'm saying that that type of stupidity you run into all the time. And it's not always the major things, but when you're trying to get somewhere, you got five minutes and they just--and you can stand on North Michigan forever, you know, unless, you know, something--unless you're lucky. So he was beautiful and he was angry. I think Gwendolyn [Brooks] was angry and was beautiful. I think, I think Ellison was an exception. I don't think he was that angry. And I don't know. Maybe he was, maybe he was angry in a different way. Story_ID: 16522 Speaker 1: You've been a big proponent of, you know, outspoken on reparations, and I'm wondering if you could just articulate what you--one, do you think that black people will see this, and two, do you think that there have been some missteps to date, in the whole reparations movement, or are you pleased? Speaker 2: I was walking across Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] (chuckle) and a brother who had seen me on TV or somewhere, hollered all the way across Wabash, the whole block, "Brother Bennett, when are we gonna get the money?" And I told him, hollered a whole block, I said, "The check is in the mail if you march and mobilize and raise hell, every day, twenty-four, seven for the rest of your life. Nobody's gonna give us anything." They, they don't intend--nobody's ever given us anything in this country. If we want it, we're gonna have to mobilize, day after day and never let up and continue to do it. There's a chance now, when they start suing the insurance companies, there's a chance that [U.S.] Congress will say, "Let's stop this." That's one thing, so, but I think the answer is yes. I think nobody is, deserves reparation more than we; nobody's suffered as much as we've suffered, a hundred million, fifty to a hundred million in four hundred years of the slave trade. Two hundred and five years of slavery without pay, hundred years of lynching, nobody's owed that more than we are, and we ought to, ought to continue to do it. I, I tell the story, and you don't have the time, but when I testified at the [Chicago] City Council, which was a great thing, and I--the City of Chicago doesn't get enough credit for that [voting in 2000 to urge Congress to consider reparations]. We went there, they voted, I think it was forty-eight to one in favor of that. But after I testified, Alderman [Bernard] Stone, an ethnic, a Jewish-American alderman, told me he agreed with me, but he said, "I have one question." The one question was, "What took you so long? What took black leadership so long to raise this issue?" It, it's just mind-blowing. I mean, the question keeps me awake at night, what took--and we, and still we--we haven't made our point lately. One of the major problems is that the suits--Renault Rob--. Speaker 1: Randall Robinson. Speaker 2: Randall Robinson talks about we need to have some, more suits in this. We get brothers in uniforms and hats. We need brothers in suits, and, and you know, we need well-to-do black, professional blacks out there screaming and hollering about this. That's one of the things we haven't been able to do. And we haven't mobilized sufficiently. I don't think, you know, jumping up on a platform. I talked to them at DePaul [University], jumping on a platform, jumping up on a platform. We need to mobilize. We need to get petitions everywhere. We need to bring pressure on organizations. Story_ID: 16523 Speaker 1: The are two things I say--and you're really on target with the Howard thing. Howard University [Washington, D.C.] was founded because of money, unclaimed money that black soldiers, that, that black soldiers were killed and left and they never did know. And they said, we're not taking this money, that was the actual beginning of the first money for Howard University. So, good. The other thing I, I agree with you, mobilization--we need to get more suits. We need to get more organization, but, but I, I'm hesitant--well, I'm--I'll tell you where I'm, what my problem is (pause), It's no doubt that for 400 years, unbelievable, you can't imagine 400 years, I can't, cause it's just, how can you imagine 400 years, these ships crossed the Atlantic. A conservative estimate is fifty million. Some of the Mau Maus say a hundred million. Let's say it was twenty million, never, unbelievable in the history of the world. There's no, no doubt about it--that. The other thing is 205 years, they know three to five million people working sun up to sun down, every day except Sunday, 365 days for 200 years without pay. I got a--the computer, that, that, that's trillions of dollars with compound interest. I mean they know that's happened. So a lot of other things happening. The other thing is that I said to [Chicago] City Council, there are two issues here, and that the other one just makes me so discouraged, two issues here. I've said, and maybe I'm the only saying it--and I'm, I'm talking about two things, an apology and repentance, reparation. The apology, it could--whenever, it can come after, but apology. Now, the apology doesn't cost anything, and I am so--I get so mad that we can't get anybody in this (unclear) country to say, "I apologize, we were wrong for keeping your people in slavery, for keeping your grandmama." The President won't say it. Bill Clinton came close to saying it, and then they whipped him back. No president, no Supreme Court, no, no, no official in Washington has dared to say, "I apologize." And I, and I say that's unforgivable. I say, you know, I--I don't know, we don't have anything to talk about. I mean we can begin to talk about reparation. But we don't have anything to talk about if you don't say, "I'm sorry, I apologize." And when I said that to the City Council, Alderman Stone and several other people said, "I, I apologize, I'm sorry." But it doesn't cost anything to say, "I'm sorry." And if you got people who won't say, "I'm sorry," I don't know what you're dealing with; I don't know what you're dealing with. I know what you're dealing with, but I hate to think of what it is. Speaker 2: So what do you want the end result of reparations, what, I mean what would you see cause there's all this whole thing about what would happen, and they say how will people be paid, all this, "Oh, it's unrealistic"-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)--.Ah, that's, that, that--. Speaker 2: What do you think is, is, is important? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Nah, that, that--First, I think an apology where the president, the Supreme Court, the Congress, (unclear) "We sorry," you know. "We were wrong." I mean that, that's one thing. Then, then secondly, reparations, a national commission, I don't know, anybody's guess is, cause it's mine, I'd say the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League, some white fellow, a woman, about five or ten people to say how are we gonna distribute this money. My recommendation is not to individuals. We need a Marshall Plan, trillions of dollars for the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and Harlem [New York, New York] and all the black communities. We need--I'd like to see a GI-type bill to provide housing for the descendants of the slaves. Third, I'd like to see a GI-type bill provide college scholarships for the descendants of the children of black (unclear). Those three things, and I (unclear) no argument on it. I, I, you know, I'm not talk--some people think that they might get-- I don't, I don't, I don't think we ought to get into the one--how much money I'ma get. We talking about a collective distribution that can be manageable, that can be--but it's a matter of trillions of dollars. Economic development on the South Side to make it possible for entrepreneurs to do this and that. So--it, to--for me, it's simple. It's, it's, you know, a Marshall Plan, housing, GI housing. And we could, we--for the first time, we could clean up and renovate the South Side and Harlem. For the first time, we could create cities in this country that, that are worth living in. But the other piece of that--I want to say this slowly, I don't believe there's any other way to solve the race problem in this country. I believe that's the only way to solve the race problem in this country. You know, we're behind. We're gonna forever remain behind unless somebody puts trillions of dollars into the South Side. And every year, it, it increases extensionally. We get further and further behind. And every year our children, you know, are more maimed in, in schools. So I say, I don't think that, that's--the only way to solve the white problem in this country, the race problem in this country is, is by reparations which will do a lot for us, but will also do a lot for whites. I think for the first time white people could begin to shed the guilt that they have and know--they, they know they have it, but they don't--and the fear they have because tied up with us in white America is this guilt and this fear. They're never gonna be free inside. They're never gonna be free in dealing with us until they begin to deal with us on this level, a truth and reconciliation commission. But it would at least let them begin to stop feeling guilty, which they do feel and fearing black people. So it's the only solution, and I'm not sure we can pull it off. But otherwise, we are getting further and further behind, and nothing--the pennies they're throwing in the South Side is not gonna make any difference in the world. Story_ID: 16524 Speaker 1: When you look at the continuum of black, blacks in America, are there--well, if you--I want you to look at the continuum and I want you to look where we are presently. And I'm wondering what hopes or concerns you have for that people, for us as a people, and what thi-, what maybe fundamental things have happened to us along the way that may affect your, you know, your concerns? Speaker 2: (Pause) I think still chauvinistically that African Americans--are potentially the most creative people, politically and culturally in the world. For 400 years, they've been trying to destroy us. It has proved impossible. The new techniques, TV and electronics might do it, but I don't think so. We're a very resilient people. And despite everything that's happening to us, we're still in there plugging and still in there creating, still in there doing all sorts of things. It is an interesting fact, I don't like the music in general, but it's an interesting fact that nobody has said anything new in music in this country for the last forty years except black people, the hip hop generation. Everybody else, totally, culturally sterile. They don't have it--the only creative people that's still left are the people who come out of the Bronx [New York], out of all those terrible conditions. We still got it. And I think what we have America needs, and I, I, I have great, great hope for that, that reason. I think the problem is a new climate of hard drugs and electronic media which are messing up our minds and giving us problems that we've never had in this country before. And that's why it's so urgent to, to solve the problem before it just destroys all our young people and destroys all our, our, our families and our young men and our young women. You know, I--the last figures came out, black--the number of black men in prisons, Ah! And it's increasing every day. And nobody has an intention of reversing it. And that, that, that's a worry. That's a worry. But I still think we're a tough people. I think we're a creative people. I think we have something to give that nobody in this world can give. I think it's a matter of life and death for Americans to let us, give an opportunity to do it, not only for black people, but also for white people and all the people of this world. So I, I'm pessimistic and I'm optimistic. I just don't think there's much time. Speaker 1: And when you look at the things that occurred, I mean given our slave heritage, if you look back historically, what do you think, had it been written different, might have changed the course of things for us in this country? Speaker 2: If, at the end of slavery, that is [Thaddeus] Stevens and Charles Sumner and Frederick Douglass and Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman had been successful in making America free the slaves by providing some economic foundation and making it possible for them to get an education and to start out as free men and women on an equal level, I think that would have just transformed--all of this, this country would have transformed us and everybody in this country. I think at the end--well, let's just remember another case. After the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., almost everybody got a religion. They, the university say "We're gonna bring people in, gonna have--", the corporations say, "We're gonna have a fast-track program." Most of the black executives we have today are a result of that fast-track program that started there. Everybody religion, let's, let's do this thing. It's gone too far. And it got cold, people forget and they've not done anything since then. I got--I just keeping coming back to this front, to the point that our history tells us over and over again that it can be done, that it's doable, but it cannot be done on the cheap. It's gonna take trillions of dollars to do it, and reparations, as I say, is I think one of the last hopes we have of really dealing with the race problem in this country. Story_ID: 16525 Speaker 1: But do you think that the black community has changed in fundamental ways, you know? Look at the--and I'm asking you, the community that you grew up in, in Jackson [Mississippi], and the community that you came to Chicago [Illinois], and--in the '50s [1950s], I'm just--has that community changed in fundamental ways that would, that would impact just--had that money [reparations for slavery] been given in during any of those times or if people had really been given their, you know, land or forty acres and a mule, you know, that whole thing. I'm just wondering, have--would that, would there be? Speaker 2: I think the structural changes that I've been talking about--hard drugs, electronic mumbo jumbo are--frightening developments, but I go, I go to, to a, to a black church anywhere, and I see the same spirit, see the same potential. So yeah. So yeah. I see, so young black sisters, I go to Atlanta [Georgia] and see young black sisters coming out of Spelman [College], some bad sisters. You talking about some, some, some prepared people, I mean, with their little, little telephones and their little things. They are bad [slang for good], and I see them all over the country, you see them all over the country. I mean I'm just not, I know Spelman in Atlanta, the sisters are, are bad, and, and and brothers are when we give them a chance. I think the potential is everywhere. The potential's everywhere, that, and danger's everywhere, the danger's everywhere. And we don't have much time. Story_ID: 16526 Speaker 1: What does Lerone Bennett want to still do in his life? Speaker 2: Oh, I want to finish two or three more books. And, and that's about it. I want to finish two or three more books. Speaker 1: And what are those books that are inside you? Speaker 2: I, I, I'm doing a revision of 'Before the Mayflower [A History of Black America]'. And that will be, I'll bring it up to 2002. I'm doing my last book on [Abraham] Lincoln. And I have a book of essays that I want to do and complete. I have them. And I just, just want the time to do that. Most of all, I, I want to hope that, that I can, can play some small role in, in helping us to realize our full potential in this, this country. You know, and maybe I--I go to, I make speeches, and I say one thing sometimes that one of our problems in this country is that we don't know who we are, talking to black people. I tell them that traditional media and black people and white people influenced by traditional media, tell us we're weak, confused and helpless. But the black tradition tells us that we are giants, and sons and daughters of giants. And I stop there, and, and especially [if] I'm talking to young people, I look at young brothers and sisters, say, do you believe that? I say to, to, to older black people, do you believe that? Do you believe that we're giants? And a lot of them want to believe; they can't believe. They see the ten o'clock news, they see all the things we--the challenge is to, for, for us to continue to believe that. For me, I do believe it. I believe, I, I see it every day, and for us to make our young people believe that we are giants. Like you're talking about the sis--I'm talking about the sisters. We're giants, we're still giants. And we got to get that message out first so that we can still love and respect ourselves and recognize what we got to do in this country and what we can do. Speaker 1: And what would, what do--what--you've been a very popular and public figure, what little-known thing would people be surprised if they knew about you? Speaker 2: Hmm, I don't think they would--I play tennis. I'm a tennis nut. I love music, and I listen to music, classical jazz, not easy listening jazz. I love music. What else? I still read, I'm still a nut about reading. I'm married. My wife, Gloria [Sylvester Bennett]. We have four children [Alma Joy Bennett, Constance Bennett, Courtney Bennett, Lerone Bennett III], have three grandchildren. I--it's a very unsurprising life. (laughter) It's, it's a very ordinary life. I can't think of anything else that they'd want to know. Story_ID: 16527 Speaker 1: Given your history and your work, how have you put that all together and given the individual that you are, to impact your children [Alma Joy Bennett, Constance Bennett, Courtney Bennett, Lerone Bennett III] and grandchildren? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think you, I think you try to, you try to say to them what you say everywhere, and that you try to make them understand the tradition that they have behind them and the tradition that they can carry forward, and they must carry forward. I, I think--not to get off your question, but I think there's a particular problem we have and it's a good problem. We've not dealt creatively and adequately on the level of transferring accumulations from one generation to another. We need to work on that as hard as we mean, I mean, talking about middle-class children or children of parents who have more than one meal ahead of them. They know where more than one meal is coming from. I think we need to work on that, especially with our young black males. And I, I try, you know, to do that, and I, I think we should, should all try to do that. I have a crazy thing, and I hope that--I'm, I'm going home now, I have a crazy thing I do, and I, and I, and it's one thing I would leave. In Jackson, when I was growing, terrible as it was, it's one thing black people used to do always and we don't do anymore. And I challenge people, black people to do that everywhere, and that is to speak to every black person they pass on the street, you know. I mean you're in a hotel, you know, you're bad with your attitude, speak to the maid. Speak to the porter, speak to every black person you pass. And you know, that's a way--not only speaking, it's of assuming responsibility for them. I'm responsible for you. Hey, brother, hey sister, how you doing? And, and that's not much, but if we could get everybody again to say that whatever I do, I, you know, I'm obliged to speak to every black person I pass and let them know that I'm responsible for them, that I'm your brother and I'm your sister. So that's a beginning of the process, and, and we have to continue to push the process in the spirit of our ancestors who came through at, at a time when, when things were a hundred percent more difficult than they are today. And yet they never, and they never, they never gave up, and they, they never stopped hoping. We got to go back, I think, to that future. Story_ID: 16528 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I haven't thought about it, and I, I, I don't--if, if people would say that, "He, he tried to tell the story of black people," I, I would appreciate that. That's--and that "He did his best to, to push the process on." I believe, and we never got a chance to talk about this, and I'm going, I believe that it's not enough to write. It's not enough to speak. I believe all of us, especially if we have some money are obliged to get involved in the struggle. I mean--and I think it's a responsibility, and I, I hope people will say that, that he tried to, to, to push the struggle forward. One of the things I'm enormously proud of, and I shouldn't be. It's, it's a sin to be proud of it. One of the things I'm enormously proud of is that I went to jail in Chicago, Illinois, not in Selma [Alabama]. I sat down in the middle of the street at Madison and State Street, when it was the busiest intersection in the world, and was thrown in the paddy wagon for protesting segregation in the City of Chicago. I've always believe that, the reporters, writers, media people, professors, you got to do your job, but then you also got to be involved in struggle. And so I hope I--I hope people will say he tried to be involved on that level. And that's the final pen of my thing about American scholarship. I like French scholarship and French scholars who recognize that media people ought to be philosophers, activists and, and to be involved on every aspect of life. It's not enough just to do, you know, write and, and go home and shut the door. Speaker 1: And therein, therein lies Lerone Bennett [Jr.], the activist. And I won't--my final question, your grandmother, if you were saying something, telling--saying something to her now, what would you say? Speaker 2: I would say that we're trying to keep the faith. She was a hard woman. She demanded your best and would not accept anything second rate. I, I would like to say to her that we're trying to keep that faith. I would say that, also that I will never rest, and I hope African American people will never rest until this guilty country apologizes for what it put her through and what it put her generation through and what it put the slaves through in this country. I say, I will never rest until, until somebody apologizes for that and makes restitution for it. Speaker 1: And you want to thank her also. Speaker 2: Oh, without a doubt, without a doubt. I still have not met anybody as extraordinary as Lucy Reed was. And we're living on her, her legacy, on her foundation...