 Story_ID: 61597 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Manford Byrd, Jr. The spelling is M-A-N-F-O-R-D, B-Y-R-D, J-R. Speaker 1: All right. Can you give us your date of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth is May 29, 1928. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July 1st, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we? Speaker 2: We're at my house, 9515 South Parnell Avenue in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 61598 Speaker 1: All right now I have five People magazine-ish type questions I need to ask you before we get into depth, and they just require a short answer. The first one is what's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Grits. Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't know, but I suppose I do have that's my identity. I would think it might be that's "The way it is." Story_ID: 61599 Speaker 1: Okay. All right now, now you were born in Alabama, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes I was. Speaker 1: What was--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Brewton, Alabama, B-R-E-W-T-O-N, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay and can you tell us something about your parents. Could you give us their names and spell them and maybe talk about your family background- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know your parent's parents and where they came from or they can recall any stories from their grandparents from the 19th [nineteenth] century or anything like that? Speaker 2: Well, to being with my parents were Manford Byrd, Sr., and Evlyn Turk Byrd. You know, you have the spelling of my father's name, I just gave you mine, and my mother's spelling would be E-V-L-Y-N [sic, E-V-E-V-L-Y-N], T-U-R-K, B-Y-R-D. They were themselves born in Alabama, and met when they were very young. My mother was fifteen and my dad was twenty or twenty-one when they got married, and they were very supportive loving parents. And I often think of my dad as one of the real models of, of believing in something that you didn't have. He was a firm believer in education, but didn't have any. He was, was illiterate in my growing up. As a matter of fact, didn't learn to read until he was sixty-five, but had a passion for education. Brewton, Alabama was a sawmill town, and he worked at one of the establishments in that complex, and that was a big company store, a commissary, where they did the shopping and so on. And he took me in one day and said to the manager of the shop, "This is my son. If he comes in here needing anything for school, let him have it." I was a blank check for me to get what was related to schooling as I saw it that could get him indebted for years. They were keeping the books, but so much, so supportive was he of my getting an education and having what I needed. That's the kind of blank check he issued and so I just, I remember him fondly who believed in education, though he did not have one. My mother was a domestic, a great driver, a great believer in, I had two other brothers, in our possibilities and our potential, and she used to say, "All the time you gotta make something of your life, be somebody." Where she heard this first I don't know, but I heard it often from her, be somebody, do something. I mentioned she was a domestic and she was fortunately, fortunate enough to work for some of the riches people in the town who had children, but I could hear her, I don't whether or not she did it deliberately, so that I could hear it often in talking about her work experience and the kids, and she's say, "Yeah, they're fine, but they're not as bright as my kids." She said that, "They're not as bright as my kids. My kids are gonna do better." And so hearing that you got the feeling well maybe I do have something, you know, and maybe there is something we should push ahead, but I had great parents, great, great love, great support. Story_ID: 61600 Speaker 1: Can you recall any, any stories from their coming up or did they tell you any stories about? Speaker 2: Only that maternally from my mother's side her mother died when she was under ten years old. There were three of them. She had a sister and a brother, and they were distributed to live with other relatives. They--my great grandmother reared my mother and her sister, my aunt. My uncle, who went to live with another relative, but they grew up, but remained quite close, quite contact and was quite instructive to me on the value and the strength of family. How the three of them was so united, such a strong bond and how close they were as sisters and brother, and I said, "Well that's, that's what family ought to be." So, yeah they would talk about some of the difficulties they had in growing up, talking and my uncle would talk about some of the harshness that he experienced as an uncle reared him, so much so that he ran away to, to avoid it and so I would listen to those experiences. But, often they had to do with hard work and working hard for what they got, but having dreams of getting something and then going out trying to make those dreams reality. Speaker 1: And were they all from Brewton [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Little communities around Brewton [Alabama]. They were actually from--Brewton is in Escambia County in Alabama and adjacent county is Covington County and they, my mother's family, really grew up in Covington County. An interesting side note of that, there is the [my] family has been getting reunited for the last twenty years or so, twenty-five years, and this year they're going to gather in Brewton [Alabama] and in Covington County [Alabama] back to the roots and that should be quite an experience because there's a whole family cemetery with gravestones and markers of ancestors and the names and so on and so, Saturday in July, that's gonna be July whatever the second Saturday is [2002]. They're gonna gather up there just prior to, prior to a barbecue and then gather in the cemetery and revisit with ancestors. Story_ID: 61601 Speaker 1: Okay, now can you, can you take us back and describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of Brewton, Alabama? What did it look like? What did it smell like? What- Speaker 2: A, a small sawmill town in South East Alabama with a population of about, I guess, eight thousand, six to eight thousand when I, I grew up, about fifty percent white, fifty percent black. And I grew up in Brewton, Alabama in the, right in the midst of segregation, I mean stringent, deep segregation. I could not go to the library that was there. I went through public schools through grade nine, but the nearest public school for grades ten, eleven, and twelfth to me was thirty miles away. Fortunately, the Reformed Church in America had a church school, a boarding school, church school right in my community and so I went there [Southern Normal High School, Brewton, Alabama]. Had it not been for this church school in my community, I would have had to go thirty miles away to finish high school. I could not go to the local high school right in my community, and I do remember that. But, I guess the, one of the most disappointing things that I remember, one of the harshest things that I remember at that time was that I grew up a young fellow, but I had white friends, and I was going to the black school, Southern Normal [High School, Brewton, Alabama], and participating in athletics, and they were going to [T.R.] Miller High [School] in Brewton [Alabama] participating in athletics, and we talked about what we were doing and how we were doing, so one Sunday they gathered around my work spot, I'd shine shoes and sold newspapers and some other things, and they mentioned they were gonna have a baseball practice the next day and so on. And I said well I don't have anything to do, maybe I'll go down and see you guys practice and so I did. And they got down and the players were gathering and so on, but something happened or something was going on, some other celebration was going on in the community, and all the players didn't show up, so they were short players. So, I'm just innocently watching them and one of the, one of the fellows that I knew had a bright idea, he thought. He said, "Coach we're waiting to get some fellows, let's use Byrd over there." And boy the coach really took his hide off. "No, we can't use Byrd. We can't use anybody like Byrd and we'll never use anybody like him and don't you ever say that." And I could have crawled into a shell. I hadn't said anything, but he in the process went on the take Joe Parker's hide off and in the process did it to me, and that was a very humiliating and demeaning experience. Just to emphasize again this, this harshness of this, this segregated life and, and, and these, these systems in place, these mores in place, stop the natural interactions that the young people. Left to Joe Parker and to me we would have been playing, there wouldn't have been any problem with that, but it didn't happen. Story_ID: 61602 Speaker 1: What kind of a young man were you when you were growing up? What kind of--what did you--how did you approach school and, and, and--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: I had an older brother, Ralph, that I, that I admired very much. Ralph was four years old, and he was a good student and he talked about doing things and, and growing and so Ralph graduated high school in 1942. He was eighteen. This was right in the midst of the second World War [World War II] and he was about to be drafted, but he was working at the time in the shipyards in Mobile, Alabama, and he discovered that some of the big ship building companies had ships that were sailing and he heard about the Coast Guard, the Merchant Marine, and so someone said to him, "Well if you become a merchant seaman you won't have to go into the draft." And so he volunteered and became a, a merchant seaman and, and went to sea, but had he been able to go to college that fall he talked about becoming an engineer. Now, the only thing I knew about an engineer was that the guy who drove those trains and blew the whistles that I heard that split the community every day those were engineers, but he said, "No I'm not talking about that I'm talking about the kind of person who builds bridges and buildings and who does a whole lot of other things; I'm gonna be that." Well, he didn't get to be that, but I start soon saying I'm gonna be an engineer. I had never talked to one, but I was gonna become an engineer. And in high school I was a good student. I graduated the salutatorian of my class [1946, Southern Normal High School, Brewton, Alabama], but there were some people, I mentioned I went to a church-affiliated school, and we had a visitor from that denomination come to your campus one day and he asked the principal to, if he could speak to five or six promising students, students that he thought that could profit from higher education, and the student, the principal listed some students and included me among them. And I was a part of the interview. Now the visitor was from South Holland, Illinois, and after the, the interview he said to me, "You know I believe I can find someone who would finance your education." I said, "Oh you do," and he said yes. He said, "But it would require something of you. You would have to leave Alabama and you would have to go to school in either Iowa or Michigan because that's where we have our colleges." And I said, "Well," and he said, "Do you want an education?" I said, "I certainly do." He said, "Well let me see what I can do." And he went away and I guess within a month I heard from him saying he had located someone, an organization, that would finance my entire college education if I would go to Iowa Central [Central College] in Pella, Iowa, and as a--at the time I was sixteen, fifteen, fifteen and a half maybe then, but I made a decision right away. Yes, I'll do it. Now, I had, I had an option. I could have gone to Alabama State [University] in Montgomery [Alabama]. That's a college for Negroes at the time in Alabama. And Alabama State [University] had promised me a scholarship for the first year, but I often say that I had the wisdom, I don't know where it came from, to say no although it's a strange land and whatever, I'm gonna make the choice for four years rather than for one for sure and we'll see what happens after one, and so I went to Iowa [Central College, Pella, Iowa] and graduated there [1949] and majored in mathematics. And out of that experience, came my first job, interesting. Story_ID: 61603 Speaker 1: Before we go too far into the job, I wanna back track a little bit to high school and, well even maybe grade school, but who were some of the teachers that, that influence you or, or guided you? Speaker 2: There was a young man by the name of Elbert Spencer who came to our town to teach. He was a graduate of Alabama State Teacher's College [now Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and had just graduated. He was twenty-one years old and lived with us as he taught in the public school there. And I just admired him so, his courage, his brightness, and I said I wanna be like him privately. And so, he was my first model of the kind of person I wanted to be and to do what he was doing. And then when I moved to high school I ran into a fellow who by the name of Andrew Branch, who was the, the director of, of the high school, and I had a math teacher by the name of Mary Willis who really was the cause of my saying that I wanted to major in mathematics, although I found out when I, I got to college that I, I had some gaps in my background that I hadn't had all the courses that I should have had to, to equip me best for the competition that I met. But, I believed in her and, and so I stuck it out and I, I prevailed. But, they were influences on my, on my life. Story_ID: 61604 Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what was--how did your parents feel about you going to Iowa to school? Speaker 2: Well, they believed in me. They wanted to be supportive of me. There was never any doubt in my mind that they, that they loved me and they supported me. They wanted me to have more education, they just could not support it. They had no money and I knew it and when I talk to people I said I've got to talk about my education without any family support. I don't have any. It's taking every cent they've got to keep family together and they were buying a house and so on to keep this together. I had them make one promise to me that if I went to Iowa [Central College, Pella, Iowa] I wouldn't come home at Thanksgiving, which was all right I'd stay there, but the one thing that I wanted them to promise me that somehow or another the family would raise money so that I could come home for Christmas, for the Christmas break in return, and they said no matter what we have to do to do that we're going to do it, and they did it and they kept that promise for four years. Otherwise, I knew that although they loved me and supported me they had no money for college. But, fortunately, there were other means. I started out with a scholarship and then as tuition and, and fees escalated, I wound up working. I got a job in college and I also, although I went there on an academic scholarship, I wound up with an athletic scholarship too because I played basketball and baseball. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, so you were a good athlete? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and when you left for college did you have an idea--did you still have, want to be engineer? Speaker 2: Yeah, whatever that was I was gonna pursue it (laughter). And I started out, I started out in a pre-engineering course and which meant I was taking mathematics and I was taking the hard sciences. But, I often think I got snookered into something that pandered to my ego, but was a part of my educational downfall. I hadn't had any physics in, in high school, and so when I got to, to Iowa Central [College, Pella, Iowa] most of the freshmen following the sciences had had at least one course in physics. So, they were moving on to what was talked about as sophomore physics and so on, but I didn't have any. And so, they entered me in a, in a freshmen physics class that was designed primarily for home economics majors and so they had a teaching assistant teaching that course, and I was assigned to it and I had some leanings towards sciences and I had read--(unclear)--, so I soon became at the top of that group. And I guess I was a bit disturbing to her and the rest of the people in that class because then she went to the head of the department and thought that I should be moved out and into sophomore physics. And they did that and I thought that was great, but in retrospect it was not a good idea because I really had to, I really had to hustle. I joined some guys who were way ahead of me and it was, it was a real struggle to keep my head above water, but, yeah I followed that got up to my junior year and went to New York to work. And now it after the war and engineers were a dime a dozen. You'd take a look at the Want Ads section, engineer jobs wanted. A lot of people would come out of the Service with training in these technical and engineering background and couldn't find work. So, I said well what am I going to do? So, I went back and I said well, and I talked to my advisor, he said well you can take some educational courses and you can be prepared to teach, and so I said that's what I'll do. So, I continued with mathematics, but I started taking methodologies of teaching and so on and so now I'm headed toward becoming a math teacher and got prepared for that and graduated with that in mind. Story_ID: 61605 Speaker 1: Okay now, what, what was the toughest thing about Iowa Central? Speaker 2: Well, being, being one among many. I was the only black male in the town [Pella, Iowa], in town, not only in the school [Iowa Central College], but in the town. There were no blacks in the town, and there were a few at the college, three of four young women. Another black male was a commuter from a community nearby, Oskaloosa, Iowa. He'd come over. But, just being one among many you'd walk down the street and a guy would come by driving down and he'd over and see you and he'd do a double take to be certain that his eyes were not fooling him. But, that was it. But, there was a lot of support and a lot of love I found on that, on that campus, and a lot of growth, and a lot of feeling as, as a free human being. I could move around freely, do things. So, it provided me a number of, of experiences. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was the toughest thing, but it might have been the- Speaker 2: It was a good thing. Speaker 1: Good thing too, yeah. Speaker 2: It, it revealed--so let me give you a story. A group of freshmen gathered and the college [Iowa Central College, Pella, Iowa] was growing. A lot of the veterans were coming back, and we were just, the college just didn't have space for all the students that it had admitted. So, they were having to go out into the community to house some of their students. So, a group of about ten or twelve of us gathered in the office of the Dean of Men and he said, "You guys get to know each other quickly because you gonna break up and become roommates," the ten of us. And we had talked as we waited gathering in, some from, were from out East. I was from the South and then from the Middle West [Midwest] and so on, and so we talked. And so after a while he said, "Okay I want you to pick your roommate because you're going to be paired by twos." And I said, "My God I can't pick anybody. If I pick anybody, I might pick someone who can't, who can't live with me, who can't tolerate them." But, there was a young fellow in the class by the name of Arthur Deering (ph.) from Secaucus, New Jersey. He was from--he had German parents, and I don't know what kind of problems they had experienced during the war with being of German ancestry, but Art Deering stepped up and said, "If Manny Byrd will be my roommate we'll be roomies," and I said, "Sure, sure," relieved that I had been picked, did not, was not left standing, and we became roommates. And I asked him one day, "Art why did you pick me?" I said, "I must tell you frankly if the situation had been reversed, if we were on a black campus and you were the only white male on campus, I'm not certain I would have picked you my roommate. Why did you pick me?" He said, "Well, Manny, I always thought I didn't have racial prejudice, and I thought this would be a good way to put it to the test." I said, "Well so much for the testing," and we were good roommates for a couple of years. And the GI benefits, the GI Bill of Rights benefits were drawing to a close, and he said to me one day he said, "You know my money is gonna run out so I think what I'm gonna do is join the Service, so come on let's go, let's go in the Service we can spend whatever the time is and come on back." And I said, "No mouse," that was his nickname for me, I said, "No, I think I can make it on this side, so I'm not gonna do that." So, he said, "we'll-- I'll see you," and he left and went to the Service, and I stayed. And he got his--that was at the end of our freshmen year, I believe. He came back when I was starting my junior year and a sophomore, either a junior or senior, maybe it was in my senior year. But, anyway, he did come back to the school, but I went ahead and I did make it without going into the Service. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna stop right here and change tapes. Story_ID: 61606 Speaker 1: I wanted you to tell the barbershop story? Speaker 2: Ah, my first run-in with racism [in Pella, Iowa] occurred oh I guess three weeks or so after my being in the community as a freshmen. My hair was getting long, and I knew that sooner or later I had to have a haircut. And in my mind, I felt that, that might be a problem, but I didn't know. So, one day I was alone and I walked downtown Pella [Iowa] and I walked into a barbershop and I said to the barber I'd like a haircut. And he said well I'm sorry, but we can't cut your hair. He said, "Where you from?" I said, "I'm at Iowa Central [College, Pella, Iowa], I'm a student there." He said, "Well we can't cut your hair here, I'm sorry." So, I came out and I was crushed and I was in tears and I went back to, to my house, to my house father and mother and I told them that I ran into my first experience of segregation today they wouldn't cut my hair. And so the house father who was a professor at the college was infuriated. He was very disturbed that this had happened and so on, and it so happen that he knew another barber in town, a fellow by the name of Viss (ph.) who had been in the Service and had just returned and had resumed his barbershop practice. And Viss, he must have talked to Viss, and Viss said, "Of course I'll cut his hair." And so he came to me and he said, "I'm sorry about the other barbershop, but here's a barbershop right around the corner that will cut your hair." And so I walked into Viss' barbershop and he said, "Well Manny I was in the Navy in San Diego and I cut some hair and sometimes I do a pretty good job and sometimes it's a bad job, but you, you just tell me how you want it and we'll try to get it done," and he took me. Well, the irony of that is as it turned out I told you I played basketball and baseball, and by the end of the first year I had really blossomed as the baseball star and was the leading home run hitter on the team and therefore I had an entourage when I went places. So, Viss got by getting my hair whenever I went to the barbershop I had six or seven others with me. And often I would pass--but there's another part of the story when the guy didn't cut my hair. His conscious got to him in some kind of way and so later the night when he denied me service he called the dining hall and we were at dinner and someone, one of the waiters came over and got me and said, "You're wanted on the phone," and I came out and it was the barber saying, "I told you earlier today that we couldn't cut your hair, he said but I'd be willing to do it if you would come to the shop after hours." I said, "No but thank you, but I won't do that," and of course I didn't, and I went to, to Viss. And often in, in walking with the crowd to get to Viss' shop we passed the other guy, so he'd see me with a group of guys going to the other barbershop. But, that was one of the first stories that led to what a pleasant experience growing out of discrimination. Story_ID: 61607 Speaker 1: The other one that had an influence on my career as I told you when I changed from becoming an engineer because engineers weren't working and started toward teaching, I did my practice teaching at the local high school with one of the best math teachers in the, in the county and I did an excellent job, and she gave me A and I got superior markings and great potential as a teacher. Our placement office communicated with superintendents of schools and placed many of their students and in the fall of my senior year my colleagues were being interviewed for jobs. Nobody interviewed me. No superintendent interviewed me for a teaching job. But, I wasn't the only one who noticed that. The dean of the college noticed it. I hadn't spoken to anybody about it, but just before Christmas the dean met me on campus and said, "What are you gonna do for Christmas?" I said, "Well I'm going home." He said, "Enjoy it, but when you come back come in to see me. I wanna talk to you." Well that was disturbing to me because I was in my senior year and everybody was expecting me to graduate come June and here it is this stern dean wanting to talk to me. It can only mean that something has cropped up in my, in my record that's causing a problem was my thinking. But when I went in to see him, he said we have noticed that nobody has interviewed you and we're sorry about that, but we think that's the way it's gonna be too. He said, "Now because of that we reached out in some other directions. I have a, I have a son-in-law who's an administrator in a school system in Illinois down on the Mississippi River called Quincy, Illinois." He said, "There are black people there and so on and he said they'll be looking for teachers and so I have alerted the placement office that if you agreed that they would forward your credentials to the Quincy [Illinois] public school system for review." I said, "Well thank you, thank you very much." They sent the credentials, they invited me an interview, I went down, and I got the job. And I subsequently found out once I joined the school system that the recommendations and my record was so strong one of the interviewers told me later, he said, "The job was yours to lose. We had made our decision about you prior to your coming. You had to lose this job," and proudly I didn't, but that was my beginning in, in Quincy [Illinois]. I stayed there five years before coming up to Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 61608 Speaker 1: Now, what was Quincy [Illinois] like? Speaker 2: Quincy [Illinois] was a river town, medium sized city in Illinois about fifty thousand; it was a college town. It's a Catholic college there, Quincy College, so a lot of various kinds of experiences. But, ran into racism was there in Illinois. We're talking now in '49' [1949]. I went there in September of '49' [1949], but blacks had difficulty getting into the hotels there. There were black barbers in the town, so you, that, that problem I had in Iowa was not mine anymore. But, going to movie houses, going to restaurants and so on black people were still slighted in a sense there. The most, the most visible instance of this discrimination occurred with the AAA Motor Club. One of the leading citizens of the community was a black man who was a principal in the city, a fellow by the name of James Redmond, and he was very close to the guy who was head of AAA in Quincy [Illinois], but they wouldn't insure James Redmond. And the story was according to AAA that blacks didn't have equality under the law, so it was not fair for their company to take on this additional insurance burden knowing that if they got to the court system it wasn't, they didn't stand an even shot, chances are they were gonna lose and so they did not ensure black drivers at Quincy [Illinois]; didn't insure the principal of one of the schools. So, there were these subtleties and those things were there. But, Quincy [Illinois] was a good town. It was good for me in a sense then that I dug in, honed my skills as a teacher, and boned up in reading and reading and growth and growth, and then some things grew out of that. I entered graduate school at AU [Atlanta University, Georgia] and got a Master's Degree [1954], and when I did that, it was the intent that I was going to come to University of Chicago [Illinois] and get a Ph.D. and return to AU [Atlanta University, Georgia] as a professor. My mentor, my advisor at AU [Atlanta University, Georgia] wanted this to happen, but some interesting things happened along the way. Story_ID: 61609 Speaker 1: Okay, now, how, how was life like as a classroom teacher and now you taught high school or elementary school? Speaker 2: Elementary school- Speaker 1: Elementary school. Speaker 2: --and high, but- Speaker 1: Okay, you started in elementary? Speaker 2: Elementary, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, you know what was the classroom like--were you--and how did you feel about being an elementary school teacher? Speaker 2: Well, that was the beginning point. I started with teaching seventh graders at, at, at Quincy [Illinois], and I discovered continuing my high school practice teaching experience I was successful there, but I was successful because I knew the critic teacher was there or nearby and I thought the students maybe out of, out of consideration to her responded to me well, so that, that was a good test. But, here at Quincy [Illinois] I was on my own, and I had to make it on my own. And I soon discovered that I had some what I thought were talents as a teacher as discerned by my, my colleagues and they, they have some encouraging words. "You're doing this well, oh you, you gonna be great and so on." And I hooked up with, with a foundation that was a feed company, a Mormon company, who wanted to take a look at some of the delinquency in this "River City," and they wanted to see if they could do something to intervene in the lives of fourth graders or so to help them so they wouldn't become delinquent. And so they did a longitudinal study called 'Growing Up In River City'. They did it in cooperation with the University of Chicago [Illinois]. They brought Robert Havighurst down and his whole staff, and they came down and established this ten-year-old longitudinal study. And I became a counselor in that study, and the University of Chicago [Illinois] people would come in and observe and so on, and they noticed and thought that I was a superior teacher. And so they'd come back to Chicago [Illinois] and report it what was going on in this, this study. And one day one of the guys talked about this young black teacher that they thought was a real cracker jack and mentioned me. Now, just so happen that I had been planning to leave Quincy [Illinois] to carry out the goals that I had with my mentor back in AU [Atlanta University, Georgia] to wind up back there, which meant that I had to come to the University of Chicago [Illinois]. And so I thought that in order for me to get to there, I'd better try to come up to Chicago [Illinois] to teach because I couldn't take off full time and go to the university, so I'd better come up here and if I got a job in the city teaching then I could start taking courses at the university and so on. But, I hadn't told anybody in Quincy [Illinois] that these were part of my plans, and I was planning to leave. But, the guy from the University of Chicago [Illinois] was up talking about this experience and mentioned my name. There was a principal from a Chicago [Illinois] school in the group and after the meeting he said to this guy, "You mentioned a Manford Byrd he said that same guy, that was the same guy who had been assigned to my school to come and teach." So, Gordan [Little] said, "No it must be another Manford Byrd because I know this guy he isn't gonna leave Quincy [Illinois]. He's well thought of in the community, so I'm just certain he isn't leaving." But, Gordan [Little] did come back and say, "You know a strange thing happened I was telling these folks about this experience and a guy came up to me and said a Manford Byrd supposed to come up to his school. And I said 'It's not our Manford Byrd'," "Shh don't tell anybody, yeah I'm going, I'm leaving." And he was shocked, "Why?" And I said, "Well I'm gonna go on and do some other things." But, because of that and shortly thereafter I did come to Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 61610 Speaker 1: Okay, you came to Chicago [Illinois] to- Speaker 2: As a teach, as a teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Came as a classroom teacher and it's interesting that I had only--while at Quincy [Illinois] I did make an application to, to teach in the Chicago [Illinois public school] system, and they told me what their procedures were. They had an examination and so forth, and I applied for the examination and was admitted to the examination and came up and took the examination and that was my first experience in talking with anybody who had even taught in Chicago [Illinos] a day. And I took the examination and passed the written phase of it, and then you had to come back and do an oral part, and I did that, so I passed and therefore they invited me in to become a teacher. And I came up and I started as an upper elementary teacher in Chicago [Illinois] on the West Side, 16th and Spaulding. Quite a different experience. I had twenty students in Quincy; I had forty-eight in Chicago. I was in a room that had six rows of eight seats, and they were all filled. This was in the middle of, of a great migration of blacks from the South moving into Chicago [Illinois]. This was in the early '50's [1950s] and the schools on the West Side especially were just growing, growing, growing, and so we were very overcrowded. I was at the George Howland Elementary School and in those years we got up to twenty-eight hundred elementary students enrolled, but I started out there and became a master teacher, became an assistant principal, one of the first African American assistant, black assistant principals in the, in the school system and on the West Side for sure. There were a few on the South Side, but I was the first on, on the West Side see. Speaker 1: What did you, what was the [Chicago, Illinois] West Side like when you got here? I know you said the schools were crowded- Speaker 2: Crowded teaming, a lot of gangs along the 16th Street strip, just a lot of disruption, a lot of growth, lack of stability, lot of agitation. People concerned about the crowded schools that black kids were facing and the empty seats that were in the, on the periphery of the school system that those students were not able to take. Story_ID: 61611 Speaker 1: Now the, the superintendent was Ben [Benjamin L.] Willis. Speaker 2: Benjamin Willis was the superintendent. Speaker 1: Right, and he was famous for the portable classrooms. Speaker 2: Classrooms. Speaker 1: And called Willis Wagons. Speaker 2: Called Willis Wagons and those classrooms rather than to distribute a disbursed students to existing classrooms and seats they tried to contain them by putting these mobile classrooms on the playgrounds of schools. So, they used the Willis Wagons and double shifts. Double shifts, there were two shifts of students in most of the schools. One shift would go from 8 to 11:30 or 12 and a second shift from twelve thirty [12:30] to three-thirty [3:30] or four [o'clock] and double shifts didn't end for black kids in the Chicago [Illinois] school system until the early '70's [1970s]. It was the early to the middle '70's [1970s] before black children all over the Chicago [Illinois] school system could go to school at a regular school day. Speaker 1: It sounded like a serious issue in the black community. Speaker 2: It was a serious issue. Much of the political agitation that occurred in the Chicago [Illinois] community occurred around the schools and their crowding. One of the lead--and, and of the staffing of the schools. One of the leaders in that, in that movement and struggle was Al Raby who was a teacher in the system, but also was connected with Southern Christian Leadership Conference and Dr. [Martin Luther] King and was instrumental in Dr. [Martin Luther] King's coming to Chicago [Illinois]. It was the education and housing issues that were the points of greatest agitation in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now black students were the only students in the city that had to- Speaker 2: Were on double shift. Speaker 1: On double shift and had to deal with the portable classrooms. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Hispanic student body had not started to grow and had not increased to that size. In later years, they ran through the same cycle in rapid growth, needing space, and they would have to have the portable wagons and the shortened school days. Story_ID: 61612 Speaker 1: So, when you started teaching, I mean, did you have, I mean, was your assessment of the Chicago [Illinois] Public Schools positive or negative or how, how did you feel? Speaker 2: It was, it was a, it was a means to an end. I knew that I was a good teacher, and well as a matter of fact someone asked me, Gordan asked me, Little, the guy who had first introduced my name up in the Chicago [Illinois] Community, said to me, "So Manford why would you want to do this? Why would you want to leave Quincy [Illinois] where everybody knows you, you're well thought of here. You're gonna go up to Chicago [Illinois], Chicago has twenty-eight thousand teachers. You're just gonna be one of those persons. I don't know if you gonna have the same impact that you would have in this community. Why would you do that?" Then he asked me, "What are you going to do?" I said, "I'm gonna do in that community just what I've done here, and I'll give my best and I'll interact with the kids and so on." And so, that was my mantra, that's what I did here. But, it wasn't long--now when I came into the Chicago [Illinois] school system there might have been ten or eleven black principals. There might have been five or six overall eight black assistant principals. Speaker 1: Now this is in a system of how many schools? Speaker 2: It was six hundred schools roughly, and a system at that time that had an enrollment of over five hundred thousand kids. But, this is just, that was just the presence educationally of black professionals in the school system. But, I got encouragement. One of the things that happened once at Howland [Charter School] a black man came to me one day and he said, "Did you ever consider becoming a principal? I think you'd make an excellent principal." And the principal of the school, a Jewish fellow by the name of Joseph Rosen, whose still living, still around, who was very encouraging who said, "There aren't many black principals in this school system, but I think you'd be, I think you'd be an excellent principal," and sort of took me under his wings and told me everything he knew about it and, and encouraged me. And when he got an opportunity, although it cost him politically, he named me as--first of all he named me as a master teacher. Now the politics of that system was that this was in North Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois]. North Lawndale had been a Jewish community and it passed from being a Jewish community to a black community, but the schools were still populated with, with blacks being the minority in the teaching force. So, when Redmond, not Redmond, [Joseph] Rosen named his master teachers he had two blacks and a white in the school. The school was almost totally black, but that's the breakdown that he had, and he thought politically with his faculty that was being true to them. Now, the white master teacher served for a year or so and then she resigned to do something else, so here was a vacancy. The young Jewish men on the staff and women too, but more than men, thought they were next in line for that position. Instead of picking one of them for the position, [Joseph] Rosen picked me. Well, that made some people happy and made some others very unhappy, and some of the young Jewish men then left the school. So, Rosen stuck his neck out first for me as a master teacher, bu, bu- Speaker 1: What, what is a master teacher? Speaker 2: A master teacher was a sort of a supervising teacher, almost like a division head, was an experienced teacher--(unclear)--,although I was in my early twenties, mid-twenties when I came here I had a Master's Degree, had taught five years, I came as a regularly assigned teacher, so that I had more experience, more training than ninety-five percent of the people on the staff in spite of my youth. We had just that kind of turnover. So, master teachers were to give some supervision to the incoming new teachers and some stability to, to the faculty. Well, an opportunity for assistant principal came up and now some of the blacks who'd been around longer at the school than I who thought that they are the ones who should have been considered for that position. [Joseph] Rosen stuck his neck out again and appointed me assistant principal, and I became then one of the first black assistant principals on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. And then I said to my wife that I was changing career goals, that I had talked at one time about going to the University of, of Chicago [Illinois] and then back to AU [Atlanta University, Georgia], but I wanted to give my, take a shot at the principal's exam and before then furthering my training for a doctorate degree, I wanted to see what I could do with, with the principal's exam and she willingly and graciously went along with me and said, "Whatever you wanna do I'm with you a thousand percent." And so, I went in and started taking these courses in preparation for the principal's exam. Principal exam was offered in '61' [1961], and I passed it and I started my career as a principal. Story_ID: 61613 Speaker 1: Okay, now let's see, let me back track a little bit more. How, how did you meet Cheri Byrd? Speaker 2: When coming into the, coming into the school system, the, the school system, there were some very good things about the system. It was not functioning well in a lot of areas, but there were a lot of things they were doing, I thought, were good things. They had a requirement that if you were new to the system you had to go through a seven or an eight week training system, spending three or four hours a week finding out different things of how to get things done in the system, the philosophy, how the system works, the several departments, where to get here and there. And so I was assigned to get my indoctrination at this training center. It just so happened that Cheri Warfield was a recent graduate, just graduated from Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] that December and so, and so she had started to teach that spring in Chicago [Illinois], so she was brand new too, although we both are brand new to the system, but we're at different points in our career. So, I went to this, this training session and who should be in there but Cheri Warfield. Now, I saw her and there must have been thirty-five or forty of us in this training thing and so on, and I guess on the second session or so we struck up a conversation. I had a car, she didn't have a car at the time and she lived on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], and I told her that after the session if she didn't mind I'd give her a lift home, so we struck up a conversation and our relationship grew and, and I guess a year and a half after that we became engaged and got married [1956]. But, what I found out that she, she had a, she had critiqued the session on two levels and had talked to her sister about it. She wanted to talk about the session in terms of its educational value, helping her get ready for the new assignment, but she was a young woman and she wanted to talk about it also in terms of what the prospects were in terms of finding a mate. And she had made comments to her sister on, on both levels, but on the mate side she said to her sister after looking at the group for a couple of times sai, "There ain't nothing in there" (laughter). And I reminded her of that years since that if you look carefully what you when you think there's nothing there, there may be something there, but that was our beginning experience, and it's been a lot of beautiful years since. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna change tape. Story_ID: 61614 Speaker 1: Could you--let, let's ta, talk about Atlanta University [Georgia], on, on, on camera (laughter) and what were your, you were just, you know- Speaker 2: I had quite a, quite an experience. I remember I grew up in Alabama and went to high school there in a segregated situation, but went to Iowa Central [University, Pella, Iowa] and I was in a totally white situation there. When I had made a decision to go to graduate school, I decided then after the Iowa Central [University] experience that I wanted that experience to be mixed or a black experience. And so, I made a choice between going to either Howard [University, Washington D.C.] or Atlanta University [Georgia]. I had a colleague at Quincy [Public School system, Illinois] who had gone to AU [Atlanta University, Georgia], and he talked about what a great experience it was and so I decided to go to Atlanta University and I did go, and it was what a wonderful experience at the university and in the community. I had never in my life dreamed of or envisioned home ownership on the part of blacks in this country of the likes that I saw in Atlanta [Georgia], just beautiful. Block after block, after block, after block of these beautiful homes that were owned by black people. And the atmosphere on the, on the university campus, the dedication of the professors, the encouragement of the professors it was just a unique learning environment and the city was a unique culturally enriching environment. So, so my Atlanta [University, Georgia] experience was very great. And it was there that I again got encouragement from professors who wanted me to follow in my Master's Degrees there, to go away and get my Ph.D. and come back and join them at Atlanta University and they encouraged that, they facilitated that, and that was the journey that I started on when I left AU [Atlanta University] was to go to University of Chicago [Illinois] and eventually wind up back at AU [Atlanta University], and some interesting things happened along the way. Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what does happen while along the way. Speaker 2: Well along the way, I get, I get immersed into the Chicago [Illinois] school system. I came to Chicago [Illinois] the fall after I had gotten a Master's Degree from AU [Atlanta University]. Speaker 1: Now this is what, what year? Speaker 2: It's '54' [1954]. So, I'm all excited about coming up teaching awhile in Chicago, learning the job, but then entering the University of Chicago [Illinois]. But, along the way I meet my wife, and I meet some people who start convincing me that I had some special gifts as a teacher and as an educator and I really ought to consider public education and public education administration. And that caused me to pause and to pursue an opportunity to try to become a principal in the Chicago [Illinois] school system and I said to my wife I wanna try this before I get back on the returning to the Atlanta University [Georgia] track. And so I got started on that and got so far down the road that I couldn't back off and couldn't return. Story_ID: 61615 Speaker 1: Okay, now all of the drama around the [Benjamin C.] Willis Wagons [Chicago, Illinois public school system] and the superintendent [Benjamin C.] Willis, did you ever once think during that conflict that things would be different if you were the superintendent? Speaker 2: I never, I never thought of that, but one thing did happen. Eventually when I passed the principal's exam it must have been six hundred or seven hundred people taking the examination, there were eighty-nine of us, I believe, who were successful in that examination, five of us were African Americans, one of us was Alonzo Crim who later became superintendent of schools in Atlanta [Georgia]; one of us was Alflorence Cheatham who became superintendent of schools in Boston [Massachusetts], in the Boston area; one of us was [HM] Dr. Barbara Sizemore who became the superintendent of schools in Washington [D.C.] and later Dean of Education at DePaul [University, Chicago]; one of us was Jack Mitchell who became a ranking administrator in the Chicago [Illinois] school system, district superintendent, regional superintendent; and I was the fifth one, and I became an administrator in the school system going from elementary school to high school, special assistant to the superintendent, deputy superintendent, and eventually superintendent of schools. Speaker 1: Okay, it was a struggle to become superintendent in the sense that you were often, you know, the most likely or the most popular candidate, most logical candidate in a lot of senses, but never was allowed to take the, was never chosen by the [Chicago, Illinois] school board. Speaker 2: That, that's right. The school system was slow to come to that and it was slow because I, I believe they were so concerned with the politics of the position I became a special assistant to Jim [James] Redmond who was superintendent who followed [Benjamin C.] Willis and then we'd gone, undergone a reorganization of the school system that recast it, that said the school system was so big and bulky that we should subdivide it administratively so that you had smaller sections, but beyond that there should be a planning arm that's headed by the general superintendent of schools and then there ought to be an operating arm that's headed by the deputy superintendent, the person who's in charge of the day-to-day operations of the school. Booz Allen Hamilton had designed this reorganization and this study, and the school board adopted it, and Jim [James] Redmond was brought in to implement this plan. Well, the first thing the plan called him to do was to pick two special assistants; now he did that. He picked one black and one white. I turned out being that black. The plan called for this naming this deputy, and he was searching far and wide, nationwide to find this chief operating officer and finally one day in (I'd worked for him for about a year) and he came in right after Labor Day in 1968 and said to me what are you doing for, it was early in the morning, and he said, "What are you doing?" I said, "I'm not doing anything." He said, "Well come on and go with me I wanna go out and visit some schools." So, we went out visiting schools, riding and just talking. As far as I was concerned, we were just talking about what problems we should expect at the beginning of school and this was right after Labor Day and so on. So, he came, we came back, and he went to his office and I went to mine and he wasn't over there an hour before he said, "What do you got for lunch? I--do you have a luncheon engagement?" I said yes. He said, "Well I was gonna invite you to lunch," he said, "But you go on with your engagement, but when you get back from lunch call me." And so I did I went to lunch and came back. And when I got over to his office he--there was a board meeting coming up and he had all of these plans, all these papers before him and what he was, what he did customarily was to bounce certain appointments off me, what did I think about them, what did I know about this person and so. And so, he had all these papers of these assignments out. So, he finally came to the position of deputy superintendent. He said, "Yeah but I keep wrestling with this one." I said, "Yeah that's a head knocker you really got yourself a problem with that." He said, "No, but I think I've got it solved." I said, "Oh great." He said, "You ready to go to work?" I said, "What, what are you saying?" He said, "Are you ready to go to work?" I said, "You must be crazy, you must be out of your mind. All these people who want to become deputy superintendent and you talking to me." He said, "No you're the person. We've looked this over and so on, and I said well let's just hold that for a while," and that was right after Labor Day. And I came home I didn't say anything. I didn't say anything to my wife about it, but it disturbed me. I, I couldn't sleep that night that he had approached me. I never even dreamed of that position. I had a candidate. I'd had a person I'd been trying to promote that I thought would make a great deputy superintendent, but I was not that person. But, the shorter story is I became deputy superintendent. So, in November of '68' [1968] when I became the chief operating officer in the Chicago [Illinois] schools, there was no black in America with line responsibility in a, not only a major school system, but not even a minor school system with what I had, so I was clearly, we was clearly on the cutting edge at that time. By having said that, it didn't mean that the powers that be in Chicago [Illinois] were ready for a black superintendent of schools; indeed they were not ready and this became pretty clear in 1975 a few years later when, when [James] Redmond stepped down. Story_ID: 61616 Speaker 1: And what exactly happened? I think that someone else was chosen, I think, and I've read critiquing that selection that suggested that it was because of his, his being hooked up in the Irish political machine. Speaker 2: That's, that's the, that's a rumor a young man of Irish ancestry, very attractive young fellow who had worked in our building department in building schools, a fellow by the name of Joseph Hannon. And out of, out of the blue in terms of responsibilities in the system or educationally elsewhere his credentials didn't seem to compare with, with mine in, in anyway, but anyway Joe [Joseph Hannon] was selected at the time. Now at the time the people made just a slight protest, but they saw the unfairness of it, now with people who came to the board meeting and protested. But, they remembered this a few years later than Hannon stepped down and it was time to pick another superintendent, then they really got up in arms about my superintendency again. Speaker 1: Now this is 19 what? Speaker 2: This 19, started in 19, late 1979, early '80' [1980]. Joe Hannon stepped down in the fall of '79' [1979] and, and an interim superintendent was picked. Let me say this about that, the board indicated that they would, they would select an interim, but to keep me out of that, and I was, I was deputy, a deputy superintendent at the time, but to keep me out of it, out of that mix they indicated that any person that they picked as an interim would not be considered for the superintendency. So, I said well I'm, then I'm not going to get into that and so they picked [Angeline P.] Caruso, and [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Jane Byrne was mayor at the time, and there were some other people heading the board, but clearly that was not their plan. The plan was that if the interim got in and did halfway well in the assignment that they'd keep the interim. But, the politics of the community and the, and the pressure of the community would not let that happen, would not let that happen, so they had to go through the whole search mechanism, bring people up, and the community was saying essentially it was time for a minority superintendent. They were, they were actually saying that. Speaker 1: Okay, now Hannon when he left there was some sort of controversy around. Speaker 2: Well, the bankruptcy. School, school system was short of money, the books had not been kept properly. There were two things that were supposed to have been done. We were supposed to reduce the debt and something else, but we had defaulted on both of those requirements. And we had to go out and borrow some money to bridge us over until the tax collections came. And one of the bank officials at First Chicago [Illinois] took a look at our books and said, "No you, you people aren't whole, that you're in the tank, you're in the tank by plenty," and of course went to the [Chicago, Illinois] mayor [Jane Byrne] and told her that that they could not buy our, our bonds and so forth, and so that, that pressure forced [Joseph] Hannon to resign, forced the president of the board to resign and for [Mayor] Jane Byrne to name a new president, new board member, and, and the interim superintendent as the search continued. Story_ID: 61617 Speaker 1: Okay, now there's probably been tension, I think every fall, in the late 70's [1970s], early 80's [1980s] about whether the schools gonna- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --o, open or not even. Speaker 2: Yes. With the le, the le, with labor, labor strike usually you could cobble together only the resources to do a one year contract and so you once you do that with a struggle sometimes without a strike and once you did that, you were only good for a school year and then go through the efforts all over again. But, the unease of financing behind the school system and the lack of political support in a sense for the, for the system were all, all problems of financing. I recall one of the longest strikes we, the school system ever experienced occurred during my superintendency in '97' [1997] [sic, 1987] just before the late Mayor Harold Washington passed away. Speaker 1: Eighty, '87' [1987] yeah. Speaker 2: '87' [1987] yes, and the, the, the settlement it was a twelve-day plus strike and the settlement eventually amounted to only forty million dollars, but we didn't have the clout and the support to get any support out of Springfield [Illinois] to raise the monies. And I talked to one of the, one of the state senators who was from Chicago [Illinois] during the time who, who had an interesting analysis on this. He said well, "We looked around Manford, and we saw that the head of the, the teacher's union was black, the mayor of the city was black, the head of the school system was black, and we said well, let the blacks settle it," which meant that we had to wrestle with this not all our own and we endured that very long strike. But, fortunately, I think that's the last strike the system has experienced. They found ways to, to for arbitration, fund raising, and some other things to forestall those and since that time school has been more of a certainty than it was prior to that time. Story_ID: 61618 Speaker 1: Okay, now after Hannon resigned you, your name was in the hopper again and you said that- Speaker 2: That was for the interim- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but I was clear I didn't want that. I wanted to go on to the superintendency [Chicago, Illinois public school system superintendent], and I got into that and, but it was pretty obvious that they did not want me and they were trying to avoid me and it was--[Mayor] Jane Byrne had appointed a new school board. The fervor of the community you would have to be, you'd have to be, you would have had to been in the middle of it. This was the very first strong city-wide political expression movement you saw on the part of the people. It was hot. It was across the people demonstrated and the people marched, and I recall at a Dr. Martin Luther King celebration in 1980, I believe it was '80' [1980]; it might have been '81' [1981], but '80' [1980] or '81' [1981] the people gathered in the Daley Center [Chicago, Illinois] for a big demonstration and it must have been fifteen thousand or sixteen thousand people who gathered for that rally. And then after the rally, they marched up the streets and down the streets in the loop [Chicago, Illinois]. But, these were all my supporters saying--now because of that move and the business, businesses were in session that on the nights, that night's news Walter Jacobson announced that the word was out. But, first of all Illinois Governor [James R.] Thompson who was governor announced it. He thought the next superintendent should be black; he came out with it. And then on the night's news during that week, right after that big expression, Walter Jackson announced that the word is out that the next superintendent will be black, but it won't be Manford Byrd, and so that was the next day. So, next there was superintendent will be black and there gonna consider that, but it won't be Manford Byrd. And one of the reasons that the [Mayor] Jane Byrne board appointees had and they said to me, one of them said to me, he said, "As I talk to people there is no way that anyone could have this kind of support from people unless you promised them the world. And so, we cannot have somebody in the superintendency who has promised to give it away if he becomes superintendent." So, they assumed that the support that the people were expressing for me was a quid pro [quo] kind of thing and that I had entered the tank with a lot of promises. And so that was the reason given that they had to turn elsewhere in looking for a superintendent. And so they turned elsewhere and the first person they picked, they wound up--but they tried to get some people to come in here. They tried to get the superintendent of schools from Washington D.C., who was a black man to consider it, and he said, "No I'm happy where I am and besides you've got people in the school system I won't come." They tried to get the superintendent of schools from Detroit [Michigan] to come in who was a black man, and he said now. And then they, they reached out to a man in York, Pennsylvania, a man by the name of Frederick Holiday, and they approached him about coming as superintendent. It's an eleven member board and the board was split on the superintendency. The Hispanic and white members voted for [Frederick] Holiday. The five black members voted against [Frederick] Holiday. So, it would have meant that [Frederick] Holiday would be coming to the school system, a black man, with no black board support and so there were people in the community who met with [Frederick] Holiday who told him this. And although [Frederick] Holiday initially accepted the position, when he found out what the political situation was, he declined and backed out. And then I understand that the political with, within the board operation, I'd mentioned that five of the eleven members were black, three were white, and three were Hispanic. It takes six members to make an election and so I'm told that the, the white board members told the black board members now we're aren't gonna get caught in this bind again. We aren't gonna wind up with six and five, so you'll either, some of you will either wind up and join us on the election of a black, a black of our choice, but if you won't do that, then we will select the interim. If we're gonna go out on a limb with what we've got six with three whites and three Hispanics, we'll pick [Angeline P.] Caruso. And so the blacks had to wrestle with this and so they went out and interviewed some more and came up with [HM] Ruth Love as a nominee, but the agreement was the way that they would do that was that they would have two nominees introduced to the board. The first nominee introduced to the board was Manford Byrd. That motion was made, and I wound up getting five votes, got all the black votes. That failed 'cause you need six votes. The next nominee was made was [HM] Ruth Love. That nominee got eight votes as I recall. It got the three Hispanics, it got the three whites, and it got two blacks, I believe. There were two blacks who continued to vote no and one black, I think the president obtained, and two were supportive of the operation and so that happened at that time. Story_ID: 61619 Speaker 1: Okay, now there was some retribution against some of the black board members as I recall--(unclear)- Speaker 2: Well, it- Speaker 1: It was placed on [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Jane Byrne. Speaker 2: Yes. It was an interesting thing one of the board, two board members, one interesting enough is the present [Chicago, Illinois public school system] board president, Michael Scott, was one of the board members in question. A second was a fellow by the name of Leon Davis, who was an administrator with People's Gas. They had served one year terms and were up for reappointment and so they thought, now Michael [Scott], of course, had been a strong supporter of mine, and he did not vote for the compromise he stayed with me throughout. Leon [Davis], who was with me with the first five votes, but did go, he was one of the two blacks that was a part of the compromise. Shortly after that, [Mayor] Jane Byrne wrote the board members and thanked them for helping get a black appointed superintendent and so on, but then did not rename Leon and Michael, instead replaced them with two white ladies, one from the Northwest Side and one from the Southwest Side. Speaker 1: And the Southwest Sider was one of the--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Yes, one of the--(unclear), Betty Bono, one of the--(unclear)--and the northwest sider was Rosemary Janis and so they, they were named. Community was very upset about that. And in addition when [Angeline P.] Caruso was replaced by [HM Ruth] Love, [Mayor] Jane Byrne named her to the [Chicago] Housing Authority board. All of these just continued to royal the, the community. And as a matter of fact, that unhappiness eventually led to agitation about having somebody running for mayor, boycotting, the Taste of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: The Chicago Fest they call it. Speaker 2: Chicago Fest. Those were the things that, that followed and, and [HM] Lu[trelle] Palmer with C. Buck and others and [Rainbow] PUSH [Coaltition] with [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] kept these, these things stayed on the front burner, they stayed hot and there were meetings in the community, rallies to come up with a candidate that eventually led to the selection of [Mayor] Harold Washington as that candidate, eventually accepted. And the thing that I always thought that politically that was behind the, the mayors at the time avoiding me and it had to do with [Mayor] Richard J. Daley, with Joe [Joseph] Hannon, and [Mayor] Jane Byrne with, with, with [HM] Ruth Love was the feeling that if we give the community, the people can show that they've got enough political clout that they can demand something like that then where are we? If they feel--if this works with the superintendency they'll be, they'll be on to mayor next, and so I often say that while they were trying to avoid something they really led to something. They were trying to avoid a superintendent to keep that from becoming a stepping stone to mayorship, and so the people said well no if we can't have our superintendent we'll just go on right now to the mayorship, and that, that turmoil, that heat continued. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna change tape. Story_ID: 61620 Speaker 1: Yeah now, now yeah the board--let me start with Ruth Love. [HM] Ruth Love is the superintendent cho, chosen by [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Jane Byrne- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and I think we got to the point where [Mayor] Jane Byrne has appointed two new school board members- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and to basically punish the two that, I meant, two that may have voted--(unclear)- Speaker 2: You know it's hard, it's hard to play. It's hard to know just what the reasons were- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because as far as I can tell Leon Davis was supportive of what- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --[Mayor Jane] Byrne was trying to do. Michael Scott was not. That was, that was clear. So, you could understand the one and maybe politically she thought, "Well maybe I can avoid the heat if I don't do just one, but if I do two of them. So, I'll do both, what has been a supporter and an opponent and get both of them off and this also gives me an opportunity to put two of my cohorts on that I have made some promises to." Speaker 1: Well the black community I know felt at that time that it was a slap in the face- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --regardless. That was--it erupted again basically in administrations-- (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Ah, yeah sure, sure. Speaker 1: --leading to the [Alderman] Allan Streeter who had been recently appointed by Mayor [Jane] Byrne as [Chicago, Illinois] alderman of the 17th Ward being put on the spot about his vote in favor or against those two school board selections of [Mayor] Jane Byrnes. He eventually decides to vote against him and is targeted by [Mayor] Jane Byrne which leads her to another big campaign to elect him when the general election took place. Speaker 2: Election comes up, yes. Speaker 1: And that was a hard fought battle as well, but you're in the thick of all this. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now did you--but your still administrator every day and your, your still- Speaker 2: Still going, it's, it's hot, but the people were just great. The people were supportive inside the school system and external to it. So, I--and my poor wife and family were in the midst of all these pressure things, and she has to know some of the things that are boiling inside me and just got to try to keep me even keel and so, and so it was--we--it was, it was a time--I had a friend, Tom Todd, who was my attorney all the time and he just said, "Well you have to bear up, each of us has a time on the cross. This is your, this is your time on the cross, you're bearing the cross," and so we did. Speaker 1: That's an interesting way to put it 'cause I, during the time period I think many pe, pe, people felt that you were sort of on the cross because you didn't seem to be, I mean, you, you were weren't spear-heading these protests or demonstrations- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --you weren't speaking out against the other candidates or any of that, but it was just the idea that you were in the, your name is right in the middle of all of it, you know. Speaker 2: And the people were supportive. You know, the first thing going back to the [Joseph] Hannon thing in seventy, '75' [1975] I mentioned that there was a minor upheaval in protest, but I did not express--as a matter of fact I thought the political thing to do was to get back and sort of discourage it and say let the board handle this, you know, and it will, it will run its course and did not express myself of how supportive and how, how supportive and how, how much I appreciated the expression of the people. I didn't do that in '75' [1975], and I saw that afterwards in retrospect as a deficiency on my part and I said if it ever happens again I'm gonna tell the people I'm proud of it and so forth. So, what they were, what, what they didn't like was that I'd show up at these rallies and I would talk and I'd say yeah I'm qualified I didn't, I didn't stay out of it. I was at, in the middle (laughter) of many, many of them. Oh I can't forget my church, Trinity Church. The people there were very supportive, the minister, [HM] Reverend [Jeremiah] Wright. Rallies were held there and, and churches all around the city. Story_ID: 61621 Speaker 1: You were--I often wondered if you were, I guess proactively challenging the, the administration of the ci, I mean the school administration and, and the, the mayor's office or you were kind of being swept along in a tide, you know, of activity, you know? Speaker 2: Well, well you know and I think both, both insiders and outsiders, the insiders within the school system were not ready for me to become head of it at the time, I mean the whites. I recall that in the close battle--now [Joseph] Hannon, we, we, we kinda pushed over that [Joseph] Hannon became superintendent, but not without a battle. The board could never get six votes in a private session. The Hispanics were holding out. They were trying to bargain with the whites for something else. So, I'm told that when they did the secret balloting internally of the board when just [Joseph] Hannon and I were there in '75' [1975], sometimes [Joseph] Hannon would get six votes and sometimes I'd get six votes. So, they could never come up for sure to know where they were, but they thought they had the votes for [Joseph] Hannon. They, they knew I didn't have them, but they figured if they put some of the people on the spot publically that they could get them for [Joseph] Hannon. So, again, what they had to do unusually in selecting a superintendent at the time of [Joseph] Hannon they had to publically nominate the person out there and see if six votes would come and when they did that they pulled Carmen Velasquez, a Hispanic board member from her being on the fence to the board, and they split the Jewish vote. I wound up with three blacks on the board at that time, and I wound up with the black votes and one of the Jewish votes and one of the Jewish persons who had just been reappointed by Mayor Richard J. Daley, just been reappointed to the board, and Carmen Velasquez switched over with the other five and that gave a seven to four vote for [Joseph] Hannon. But, I had determined that hereafter people expressed some support of me I'm gonna let them know how much I appreciate it, and so that's, so that's why it was a little different than in '80' [1980] and '81' [1981]. Story_ID: 61622 Speaker 1: Okay now in 1984, I hope I'm not skipping over anything, but in '84' [1984] you are finally- Speaker 2: Finally '85' [1985]. Speaker 1: '85' [1985] all right, yeah now how--can you, can you--(simultaneous)-- How did that happen? Speaker 2: --happen, yeah. Speaker 1: It, it's interesting. By now, [HM] Ruth Love is not working out so well. There are people who are disappointed with that. They've been disenchanted. There are board members, now word is coming back board members who had voted for her saying I shouldn't have done it, I should have voted for [Manford] Byrd in the first instance and so on. That's the first for the way the conversation got going. And I could sense there just little feelers of trying to find out where I was in this, this process. Well by now, I have served my time. I'm approaching, I think I've got another year to go and I'm where I want to be pension wise, and so as the time is rolling down a company, a private com, company approached me, approached me about coming a vice president in that coming and joining them and so and so. We're, we're in the process of negotiating the terms of that employment. The biggest hang-up at the moment is that they want me to come to work for them in September of '84' [1984]. For pension purposes, I need to get to December 31, '84' [1984]. So, I'm telling them and I'm trying to not rupture the situation, but I'm trying to say I gotta stay on awhile. In the meantime, [HM] Ruth Love senses that she is los-- is losing some of her support with board members, so she in a sense forces the board to make a decision about her mine months prior to the expiration of that contract. She essentially says to them in the summer of '84' [1984] I gotta know what your intentions are and so on. But, it was, it was thought by everybody that they were gonna renew the contract initially. But, there was someone who came to me and said the board members are interested in whether or not, wha, what are you gonna do? I said well I might leave for private concerns. And there are some people who think that you ought to be a part of the school system. And my answer always was there is no vacancy in the school superintendency. The board has a superintendent and it is improper for me to make a statement on anything about that until there is a vacancy. If there was a vacancy, then I would have some expression to make, and I, that remained my position. It was interesting to me that one of the high-ranking officials in the board invited me and my wife to a dinner at his home with him and his wife, and we had dinner. We had known each other; we had dinner. And following the dinner, Cheri and his wife wandered off and he started talking to me. And I could tell that he was on some kind of mission, and again was trying to find out where I was on this position. My position remained the same, if there was a vacancy. So, that's the way he must have gone back and made a report. I got a call one night in the summer of '84' [1984] from a board member saying to me that they couldn't violate the, the Open Meeting Act. There couldn't be a cluster board members meeting with me, but a couple, a couple of them wanted to talk to me and asked if I could come to talk with them (now it's about eleven o'clock at night when I get this call), and I indicated that yeah I would meet with two of them and we talked. And in that they went on to just talk about how they thought the school system needed to be served, needed to go in a different direction, and there had been a lot of talk and that although he was but one person that he was prepared to say that he represented a whole cluster of votes and that if I would pledge to them that I would accept the superintendency that they would pledge to me that it would be offered and so on. And so I said well this is new I gotta go home and talk to my wife, but I'll talk to you tomorrow. So, I came home and told Cheri I just had this meeting and what they were saying, and I said if you gotta know that if I, if I said yes to this that it meant that, that could be four years of turmoil or whatever, but I would get a chance to try to do some things. Because clearly what, what they, what they had decided was since they had been forced in this position what they were going to do was to say to [HM Ruth] Love no we're not going to renew your contract. But, there concern was not to be able to leave a void, as I gathered, and what they wanted to do at the same meeting was to say no we're not going to renew your contract and furthermore we're gonna hire Manford Byrd. But the board changed some of that and they finally, which was, which was wise in retrospect, and they decided that they would respond to superintendent [HM Ruth] Love, superintendent [HM Ruth] Love's request as to whether or not they were gonna renew her contract and that, that was the issue. The contract was gonna expire on March 24th of '85' [1985], and she wanted to know whether or not it was going to expire or they were gonna renew. And so they said to her in a meeting no we're not going to renew and then took a motion, a vote in that same meeting to start negotiating with me on a contract. Well that, that set off a whole series of events too because I was then accused of being in a conspiracy with board members and I was sued by, and board members were sued, by superintendent [HM Ruth] Love and others and so and so and there was an injunction filed in the courts that restrained the board from proceeding to negotiate with me on a contract. So, all of that then took the place of the remaining summer of '84' [1984], and it wasn't until the fall of '85' that the courts cleared up all the obstacles, and the board can proceed to negotiate with me on a contract and did offer the contract to become effective on March 25th, 1985. Speaker 2: Okay, so finally. Speaker 1: So finally. Speaker 2: Good. Speaker 1: Finally. Story_ID: 61623 Speaker 1: Back tracking a moment, I mean, [HM] Ruth Love really never got support from the black community--(unclear)- Speaker 2: You know interestingly enough, just as a delegation met with Frederick Holiday a group of women, a group of three women from the community went to Oakland to meet with who, superintendent [HM Ruth] Love who was then in Oakland [California public school system] to try to dissuade her from coming here and she listened and I think it was courteous, but eventually said to them in a sense that she understand their position, but she would wind up making up her own mind about it, and she came. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah. Now there was a very strong delegation as I recall. I recall, I, I believe Senator [HM Carol] Moseley Braun was one of them. I believe [HM] Arnette Hubbard was one, and I believe a third was an administrator in the school system, a woman, Roberts, Dr. Roberts. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's clear that people in the city, you know, saw this as, as, as big in terms of superintendent, but much bigger in terms of the--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Much, much bigger, right. Speaker 1: --location so. Speaker 2: Saw them as- Speaker 1: Of control of the black community. Speaker 2: That's correct, that's correct, a circumvention of their wishes. Speaker 1: Yes, right, right. Speaker 2: And put, putting them in an awkward position so that they would have to be supportive of somebody like them and yet having been--(unclear)--in terms of what they saw as their political movement by this. Speaker 1: I guess one of the oddest things I think of in Chicago [Illinois], about Chicago politics--(unclear)--that the idea of the, of a white city administration choosing a black person- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --because we ought to have a black su, su, su superintendent they say, but they choose the one they want for themselves. Speaker 2: They want, right. And the word was sort of out any black but [Manford] Byrd (laughter), that's if they said it. It, it's interesting about superintendent [HM Ruth] Love we had, we had known of each other indirectly prior to this. She worked for the Office of Education in Washington [D.C.] and was a well-thought of administrator there. Oakland [California] had had one of the first black superintendents of a major city school system in the country. They had hired a man out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to come and head the schools, and he served and was a very popular administrator and I think serving effectively, but ran into some problems with one of the political groups out there and was assassinated, was assassinated. Speaker 1: Actually killed. Speaker 2: Actually killed and so Oakland [California] then set out trying to replace this black man who'd been their superintendent, they went out, and they invited me to come out and interview for the position. I went out and talked with them--no, first it was a visit to me here by one board member and then by the president of the board and then they invited me to come to Oakland and to bring my wife. And we went out and they set up a very elaborate reception. It was on the 4th of July weekend right in '84' '[1984] was it, somewhere around there. We went out and they put us up in the, in the presidential suite in one of the hotels in Oakland [California], and they didn't want to violate the Open Meetings Act with their board, so half of the board members, a little less than half, met with us on a Friday night and we made a tour of San Francisco [California] and wound up at one of the very special restaurants and had dinner and so on. The next night we met with the other contingent and did the same thing in Oakland. And then on Sunday morning, they took us of a tour around the city and for us to see this. And then they came back and they met with me--(unclear)--and they extended the job offer to me, and I indicated that we'd think about it and we'd come back and give some consideration. I had kids and they were in elementary and high school and we certainly had to consider this. And we came back and we talked about it and so on, but thought that was not the move for us and so we eventually declined. When I declined, then they went to the Office of Education and picked superintendent [HM Ruth] Love to come to Oakland [California] and she was in Oakland [California] when Chicago [Illinois] then invited her to come to Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 61624 Speaker 1: Right. So, what were the, the, your challenges. The black community achieved success. You were like one of the goals of the black community to get you in office- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and how you, how did you feel, you know, finally coming into office and what were the challenges facing you? Speaker 2: Well, the same basic challenges that would face anyone of trying to come up with an educational plan, trying to get funding to keep the system going and so on. I thought we did some things. As a matter fact if you go back during the term of, of my service, we probably came as close to the national norms in achievement on the Iowa Test than we have in the last twenty-five or thirty years, so we, we were able to do some things, but--as a matter of fact, it was, it was almost, it was an uphill battle. In the press I felt it almost immediately. The feeling is, oh yeah you're making some progress, but when are you going be at national normal? We want to know, we're inpatient. And so, now that you're finally there, you wanted it, and they say this often, yes it's tough, yes it's almost impossible, but he wanted this. He wanted it and now he's got it and now let him deliver. So, that was a lot of that, but I thought we did some things, I thought we, we planned. When I came into the system, into the superintendency, there was a lot of difficulty, a lot of dissatisfaction with the reading program, math program. We revamped all that. We'd started a staff development procedures. We started doing some rehabbing of buildings using the public building commission, so we did some things. Matter of fact, we got out on what was thought to be a role, we just rolled along, but those labor problems, the strikes, this, this hurt us and we didn't have the clout in Springfield [Illinois], didn't have the political clout to raise the monies to give us the support. And I told you what [Alderman John] D'Arco [Sr.] said to me, he looked around- Speaker 1: He's an alderman in--(unclear)--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: He was from the [Chicago, Illinois] 1st ward. I think there was a, there was a--maybe I got the wrong name. It was a senator who ran into some difficulties himself. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--yeah, I always associate him with [Alderman] Fred Roti and [Alderman] John D'Arco. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's right, that's the group down in that 1st ward. So, [Alderman John] D'Arco said to me, he was a very nice senator, he said, "Yeah Manford, we looked around and we saw that the, the union president was black, superintendent was black, the mayo of the city was black, and we said let the blacks settle it. Well, the blacks couldn't settle it without the support of some other people in Springfield [Illinois], and we came up short of the money." But, there was such a ranker in the community that it was tough to, to overcome and unfortunately later after that horrendous strike the mayor expired and didn't stay around, but some of the things he hadn't planned. We did have a big meeting after that strike where there was a plan made to get a, a contingent from the business community, a contingent of parents, and a contingent of school board members and administrators and work together on a plan, a school plan, a new plan for the future, and the mayor promised that whatever came out of that summit, that agreeable summit, he would take as his educational platform and fight to get it supported in Springfield. Well, we died before that summit's work was completed, but the summit did go through. [HM] Eugene Sawyer followed the mayor and did work on some things, but, but had some other issues facing him and we just didn't get rolling all, everything that came out of that summit. And then there was a change in mayors and each of the mayors wanted to put their stamp on whatever it was so, when my contract expired they extended it by a year and in the meantime the new mayor came in and, and so I wound up serving as a, as a consultant to the board the final three or four months of, of that add on year. Story_ID: 61625 Speaker 1: Okay. In the meantime, you, you received I don't know how many awards, it seemed like hundreds of awards- Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: --and so much recognition from the community. Speaker 2: It was, it was truly, it was truly, and it was not just the black community. I wanna say this it was across the city [Chicago, Illinois], Hispanic community, police community, Asian community. All of these pockets had, had educational groups and support groups and I must have been invited to each one of them to come out and make a presence and they recognized me and expressed admiration, glad that I was there and so on. The, the push on me was more political in the end than something else. It wasn't, wasn't expression of appearance. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna change tape again right here and this, this probably will be the last. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think we're trying to wrap up, you know- Story_ID: 61626 Speaker 1: We're rolling again. I just want you to say that again. Your, your sons have- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --become the, the engineer. Speaker 2: The engineers, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well part of we were talking earlier about what my older brother [Ralph Byrd] who was my model wanted to be and never became and I said I wanted to be an engineer and started out and didn't become, but I was saying that we have three sons and each of them became an engineer. Two of them became industrial engineers and one became a civil engineer and two of them went on to business school and are doing some other things now, but they basically are, are engineers. So, that was this feeling early on about engineering. I wonder if they heard the story of my telling it, but it had some impression on them and they became engineers. Story_ID: 61627 Speaker 1: Yes sir, I'd like to ask you about your philosophy of urban education in a city the size of Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, it's a big task, but it's a task that I think can be solved with the community putting its, its mind, its thoughts, and its resources to the task. I think one of the good things that's going on now that everybody talks about education, but there will have to be some concrete steps taken to keep the focus on education to get the resources to do the job. But, one of the keys is to get the commitment, get young people, young talent to come into teaching, want to be there, which means you gotta reward them, you gotta pay them for this, so that you're competitive there, and then you gotta train them. You can't rely on the colleges alone to train them and then go back and wring your hands and bemoan the fact that the colleges have not done a good job. And so, now this all occurred to me long ago and so I went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] in pursuit of a doctorate in administration and I emphasized staff development. And as a matter of fact, back in the mid '70's [1970s] I started working out plans that I thought a big system like Chicago should adopt in order to keep it staff refreshed and updated and keen and well qualified. And to me you must have parental support; that's a must. You must have student interest; that's a must. But, you must have well-qualified caring teachers; that's a super must. And so you've got to see that the, that the teaching staff, the administrative staff have skills that are well honed and that their knowledge base continuous to be broaden. And so I think a system has to work out a plan for recycling its teachers, to pulling them off in groups and making assessments, self-assessments on their part on what is that I need to improve, but the system making some decisions on what they think that this core staff needs to improve itself. And I think no matter how you cut it in the end until a system wrestles with these fundamental issues. The plan is very important, important, it ought to be attractive and supportive. The governance whether or not you got parental control and whatever is operating out in the districts and so on that's important in terms of bringing the schools closer to people and the people think they've got influence, but nothing is so key, nothing is as important as the interaction between learner and teacher; that's key. That basic exchange, that basic interaction is the key to our salvation. So, because of that, you've got to do things to make kids who are the learners, and the learner must learn for himself. Nobody else can learn something for you. But, they've got to have, they've got to have motivation. They've got to have a desire. They've got to have a warmth. And so we should all that we can to see that our kids are motivated and willing and rested and well fed and ready to go and we gotta see that the teaching staff that faces them is top notch. The people who are teaching chemistry are trained in chemistry. People who are teaching mathematics are trained in mathematics, not all certificate. The people who are teaching physics are trained that way. And if we do that, if we can give our youngsters a good generation of top notch teaching we'll close this gap. And you know we talk quite a bit now about the achievement gap between minorities and non-minorities, between Hispanics and blacks and whites and Asians and the others. One if we get a history, once we get a believability there's no question that the kids have the talent, kids have the ability, so you want them giving their all for it and then you want motivated teachers turning them on and caring for them, but not just caring for them having the knowledge to share. The state of the art knowledge and if we do that--and we gotta work on those things. You can break it up into segments of how you gonna attack it, but it boils down to working on those things and doing them well. If we do that, we'll flower, we will flower and urban centers will just grow. Story_ID: 61628 Speaker 1: Now having said that, you should know and we ought to recognize that there are a lot of youngsters flourishing in the urban setting right now, a lot of them. We aren't doing it in quite the percentages and quantities that we like and according to national norming percentages, but there are kids who are achieving nonetheless, and there are people who are doing a good job out there right now, but for improvements to be made, that's what we gotta do. Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems though it's, it's pretty tough for poor kids in a city like Chicago [Illinois] to get a decent education and that there, and there are lots of reasons given people say. Teachers say that it's the parents and you know, parents there's not home tra, training and the- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and the kids say the teachers don't care- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and all of that. There are a lot of different, there's a lot of blaming. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of blaming, a lot of scapegoating, and a lot of scape--you know I think if you accentuate the positive--I, I added that there are a lot of kids who are doing well. You know a lot of people don't understand the national norming scores in the first place. They think that you gotta have a one hundred percent of kids at what they call at the median, well that's impossible. The median means you have fifty percent of your students at or above that point and fifty percent below. And in an entirely normal distribution the mean, median, and the mode are all at the same point so that we may not have fifty percent kids achieving beyond that point you might have thirty-eight or forty the point is, is to emphasize this is where we are. But, we're gonna make a concentrated effort to move from thirty-eight percent achieving to forty-two percent of whatever, but everybody is gonna have a chart of moving. And you think--you see I think if you start letting kids see that they can make, they can make progress and you applaud that they'll feel better. Success begets success. And if teachers see if that can move some kids forward with techniques and by doing this they'll do more of it. I think we all, we should not wallow in our misery and in our sorrow. We should acknowledge were we are and not try to avoid it and speak to it and say yeah we're here seriously and we're here because we've got some people who are teaching physics ought not be teaching physics. And we've got some people who are teaching the sciences or teaching English who ought not be teaching it, but we're going to remedy that situation. The people that we think the best of the group we're gonna train them, so that they are serving our kids. Story_ID: 61629 Speaker 1: Okay, now what about local school councils. What did you think about--what do you think about the local school councils? Speaker 2: It, it, it's okay, it's a help, but that's not your solution. That's a governance mechanism and that's what I was talking about. I think it's, it's good in a sense that people, parents can feel that they have a say about whose gonna lead that neighborhood school, and that person has some obligation, responsibility, and accountability to them; that's good for them to know. It's good for that administrator coming in to saying he can't acknowledge these people, he can look down at them, doesn't have to interact with them at all, but he is their administrator. And they ought to come together agreeing on what they see is good for the children. And there are some things that the parents and administrators can agree we gonna work on together. Attendance, you're gonna get them here, get them well fed, dressed, and so on. We're gonna have them in a uniform and all this. These are good things, but the, but they are peripheral things. The key thing, again, is really the kind of chemistry, kind of explosion, kind of excitement that we have in the classroom and for that you gonna talk about the bonding between the teacher and the learner and the preparation of each of those entities to carry out their respective roles. Kids gotta be well fed and rested and excited and there on time and everyday ready to work and excited about it. The teachers got to be ready, well prepared, with a lesson that opens up the minds of the kid and teaching the kid correctly. If we do that, it's happened. It happened for me. It's happened for others. As I talk to people who have been successful, I don't get very far before they get to a teacher who really excited them and turned them on. I talked about Elbert Spencer. I wanted to be Spencer. But, even later than that I talked about Oran Eagleson [Atlanta University, Georgia] and Paul Clifford [Atlanta University, Georgia] and Bill Vandalut (ph.)and Van Wyck, knowledgeable, would make you do it, make you do it, yeah. Vandalut made me choose between taking an ethics test and going to play a baseball game. Why are you really at college? And so I couldn't get an excuse to go and I didn't go on the baseball trip. But, I later respected that. But, I'm, I am passionate about, about learning. I think it's additional plus if parents could help kids with homework, can help move them along, show them the importance of reading, writing, and reading things. I think that's good. I was able to do that, and we were able to do for, with our kids. But, my parents were able to do that for me. But, they were able to demonstrate that it was important that I got to hone the skills. By the time I was fifth grade, I was the secretary for the family. I wrote the letters to the home loan bank association for the family in meeting its obligation, and I knew the family needed me to carry out that, that responsibility. I was a part of the family, and the family can be that part in helping kids know that they can carry out things and help the family, and you can do it. As I overheard my mother talk about me, I've tried to demonstrate to our kids you can do it, and you will do it and now the grandkids. And I think that is what a family does. If you can help--now let me say this when the kids got into higher mathematics, although I was a, a math major, I didn't help them. I'd say yeah you spend the time. If you need help, go to that source. But, they felt that they had to get it done. So, parents should feel that simply because they can't do it they can't play a role. Story_ID: 61630 Speaker 1: Okay. What, what do you think about the independent education movement, I mean the- Speaker 2: The home teaching, home learning. Speaker 1: Well, yeah that and then I know in the mid '70's [1970s] there were independent black schools set up around the coun, country where may, there's at least fifty--(unclear)--and then there is now what we have the- Speaker 2: The charter schools. Speaker 1: Yeah, and the voucher. Speaker 2: And the voucher. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was gonna say the, the atmosphere now means that we probably are gonna have more of those. There are going to be more charters and it looks like from the recent ruling of the courts there might be some more experimentation with vouchers. But, those clearly are not the answer to healing the public school system. I believe in the public school system. I believe this free society needs a strong viable public school system. And just for emphasis we've always had these independent private side schools to take care of certain special concerns of parents, and yes some of those have been educational. Some of them have been societal, but in the end a free society such as our must have a strong public school system because that's where seventy-five to eighty percent of the students will be always. And therefore if, if it becomes a distraction when we pull off in the voucher experiments or charter school experiments and we lose sight of what we're doing for the seventy-five percent as we address the ten or twenty percent we've missed the boat. We've got to do some substantial basic things addressing the seventy-five to eighty percent, and so I salute the people who believe in charters or whatever. I don't. I believe in a public school system, although I went to a parochial school system, I believe in public education. And I think in the end the, the country will be strongest when it has a very strong and viable system. Now, I know the argument is that the public school system needs to have competition and we will do some of these experiments to, to hone and, and, and to make the competition better. It hasn't worked out that way yet. They're good taking pieces, but it, it isn't going to make public education any cheaper to improve. We're gonna need to do it. We're gonna have to train teachers. We're gonna have to upgrade the plants, and we're gonna have to have state of the art equipment for our youngsters in a public school system, and we've got to come up with the financial means of doing it. It can't be that only the rich communities are the ones who can support these kinds of things, so that an accident of birth determines the quality of education you're gonna get. Free society cannot tolerate that. It's gotta be able to do something different. Story_ID: 61631 Speaker 1: Okay. There's another issue around the independent schools they were created in the '70's [1970s] that they went beyond just quality of education it had to do with the political thrust of it and education and public schools do more than just teach you--(unclear)--they teach your political--(unclear)- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as well and there's a feeling that in the black community we don't get through public education a kind of orientation needing to be politically successful and economically successful in this country--(unclear)- Speaker 2: That's, now that true, that's true that the main curriculum streams in public education have not included the contributions of all the elements of our society, especially the minority contributions. Black people in this country have made great contributions, and some of our people grow up, some of our young people grow up not knowing of these contributions. They're not in the main thrust of the curriculum of the public school systems and ought to be there. Just as I'm speaking of African Americans it's true with Asian Americans. It's true with Hispanic Americans and others. This society is strong because it's been supported by great diversity, and its diversity is its strength, not its weakness. And we ought to, we ought to be able to let each person, each group of people know how their own particular cultural history and culture richness has added to, to this country's strength and what we can do to be represented. I have a feeling that no matter in, in a democracy whatever the arrangements there are that winds up not having the people participating in their rightful numbers has something wrong with it. And whatever means you, you are using to get the representation that gets it skewed is wrong and, and ought to be corrected. Now, yes the independent schools have done a great job of working on these omissions, but the, the trick is to get the base of the public education system broadened sufficiently that all of this is inclusive so that a kid no matter where he or she is in attendance winds up finding about these, these contributions and how his or her ancestors have played a part in this country's development. Story_ID: 61632 Speaker 1: Okay. So, so what do you think your legacy will be? Speaker 2: I, I would hope that it was one of faithfulness and one of staying with it, one of facing frightening odds. I told you of the night that [James] Redmond approached me about coming deputy superintendent, the second in command of the school system, and I was among the youngest of the administrators. I knew a lot of people wanted that position. I knew that I would be second guessed and criticized, and I was afraid of the challenge. But, I eventually came to this conclusion I'm going to take the job and I'm gonna give it all I've got, and I'm gonna make a success of it, and I don't know why they put me in this position, but I'm gonna wind up doing it so well that they will not be able to avoid considering a black to head this system; that's what I thought and that was my legacy. And so, I walked into unchartered waters and worked and built bridges and worked. And I just hope that that becomes a part of it. There will be some other administrative legacies. Sometimes you see some things and you look and smile and you don't speak about them because politically you say well if you say something about it they'll change it. There's a little logo on the school system that's around right now, "Our children, our future." That was created in my administration. It was created back in '85' [1985]. That's still on the delivery trucks today. It hasn't been changed because nobody pointed out this is what Manford Byrd did. If it had done that, they would have erased it long ago (laughter), but it's still there and it's still a part of that operation. So, that's one thing that's still there. Story_ID: 61633 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you, that we haven't asked that you'd like to address? Speaker 2: Well, I, just, just--this has been, this was wonderful for me. I mentioned that serendipity brought me to Chicago [Illinois], but was, but it was a wonderful experience. I didn't get back to AU [Atlanta University, Georgia] to stay. I did go back for a convocation and spoke, and I think [Paul] Clifford and [Oran] Eagleson forgave me for not coming back and understood why I stayed in this community with all these, these young people. But, the system was great to me. I had a wonderful family, wife supporting then. She helped while I was busy and occupied for us to rear three very successful young men, proud, and we've got eight wonderful grandchildren and so life has been great, and I'm seventy-four years old. I've lived a live longer than I ever anticipated I would, I would live and we're able to do some of the things that we enjoy and, and so I am a Chicagoan, I am a Chicago [Illinois] educator, a great believer in the public school system and what its possibilities are, and with everybody working long, it's not gonna be quick. Nobody has a quick thing that gonna change this overnight. We're gonna have to make perceptible moves of advancement in success, and if we do that we'll make more and more of our people successful. Already we've got them doing everything, going into all kinds of professions, and we can do more of that. And I hope that I've been a part of starting that and giving aspirations and hope. One thing more I would want to say the church, because of my struggles and efforts twenty years ago, started a scholarship in my name. It's called the Manford Byrd Award, and it's called a Black Value System Award because they thought that what I did to provide work and family and dedication and so each year it has, most of the years in that twenty, they've given one or two scholarships. Two weeks ago they awarded eight Manford Byrd junior scholarship to young people in college. Eleven thousand dollars worth of scholarships, the church did, and that to me is wonderful that I am inspiring some young people to wanna work and, and they're being helped to do it. Speaker 1: It is wonderful. We thank you Manford Byrd. Story_ID: 61634 Speaker 1: An organization of men in Chicago [Illinois] that I belong to. The organization is called the Royal Coterie of Snakes, and it's an organization that's been around the city since 1922. And this was a picture that was taken a few years back at our 75th [seventy-fifth] anniversary. Speaker 2: 1997. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: May 18th. Speaker 1: That's correct. Speaker 2: There I am back in 1981, August, and I'm receiving this plaque from the minister of Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois] our committee who worked on that celebration of Dr. Manford Byrd Day at the church. They gave me that, that award on that day and established indicated that annually a scholarship would be awarded in my name and over the last twenty years they've awarded clearly thirty or forty scholarships in my name. Speaker 1: Here I'm a member of Trinity United Church [Chicago, Illinois], and that's a part of the United Church of Christ and here I, I was a part of a national group. I was the chairman of the board of World Ministries, and World Ministries had to do with the missionary service of the United Church of Christ nation, internationally. But, years ago the, the United Church of Christ, the predecessor churches of the United Church of Christ participated in the overthrow of the monarchy in Hawaii. And the church got involved in local politics there, and that was wrong. And so the church decided that we should apologize to the native Hawaiians for that participation, and I was named to be a part of the group to go to Hawaii and to meet with the people there and to apologize, and that's a picture of that, of that trip. VIDEOGRAPHER: Had you mentioned the year, sir? Speaker 1: I'm not--is the year there? I don't. Speaker 2: 1996. Speaker 1: It's '96' [1996], that's 1996. Speaker 2: May 1996. Speaker 1: We spend the, my wife and I, spend the winters in Florida right outside Orlando, that's in Lake Mary, Florida. We're a part of a development there called Country Club Oaks, and we are in the yard of our house in Lake Mary, Florida. Last year the, the development makes awards to, to the people in the development who have outstanding yards and gardens and we received the recognition as having the yard of the month and here I and Cheri are standing in the, in the front of our house with the, with the award banner. That's it. That was taken 2001, April 2001, yes. Speaker 2: I mentioned earlier a group called the Royal Coterie of Snakes. The Royal Coterie of Snakes has a spring affair every, every year, the first Saturday in May, and this is a picture of, of me and Cheri at the dinner for The Royal Coterie of Snakes back in May of 2001. Story_ID: 61635 Speaker 1: The president of the [Chicago, Illinois] board [of education], George Munoz, myself, and a representative of, of the Gateway Outdoor Advertising Company and we were promoting stay in school, and the Gateway Company had promised to place this billboard all around the city at several of its outlets and we were kicking that drive off. That had to be in 1986 I would say. Speaker 2: That's taken in, in March of 1985, and that's the president of the board George Munoz and I signing my, my contract with the [Chicago, Illinois] Board of Education. Speaker 1: That's much of the same thing. After we had affixed our signatures, [George] Munoz and I continued to talk as the secretary of the [Chicago, Illinois] board [of education] and the attorney for the board prepared to affix their signatures as well same time. Speaker 2: This is a photo that was taken of me in early March of '85' [1985]. It became my official photograph and my office and the public relationship offices of the board used this and circulated that whenever requests were made for, for my picture. Speaker 1: I happen to be attending an affair with the, with the Tuskegee Airmen Chicago Chapter. They have a name, I think they call themselves the "Dodo Bird", but this group had a meeting and I met with them and they were doing some services for the school system, but I had many true friends who were members of that group. You know that these were the Tuskegee Airmen, men who became outstanding pilots, navigators, during the Second World War [World War II]. Speaker 2: This is the father, my paternal grandfather. His name is Dan Byrd. Dan Byrd was very clannish, and he, he kept us very close as a family. Although he had seven or eight brothers and sister, I never got to meet anyone of them. So, on my, on my father's side all I knew was Dan Byrd's family. Speaker 1: This is my maternal grandfather, John Lovett Turk who group up in Covington County, Alabama, from a big family. The family continues to meet in reunion and as a matter of fact the 2002 family reunion is sched, scheduled for Brewton, Alabama, and Covington County, Alabama, in July of two thou, this month of 2002. Speaker 2: Could you spell Brewton? Speaker 1: B-R-E-W-T-O-N, Alabama. Speaker 2: Here I had some visitors to my office while the superintendent. This occurred in 1987, I, I believe. We had Miss Black America, a candidate from Miss Black America and another candidate with some officials from the [Chicago, Illinois] Board of Education who brought them to the superintendent's office to meet the superintendent as they were making a tour of the city. Speaker 1: There are members of my, there are members of my family. There is a picture of my, my wife with me and my three sons and their wives. Starting to as you're facing this to your right is our middle son, Bradley, his wife Stephanie, our youngest son, Donald, his wife, Julie, and that's Cheri and me and my old son, Carl, and his wife, Beverly. This picture was taken in 1997. Speaker 2: And here's a picture of our family. This is a picture of our sons, their wives, and their children. And I believe they had gathered for my seventy-third birthday to help me celebrate that. But, these are our, our children and we're so proud of them, 2001 right. Speaker 1: Next please. Story_ID: 61636 Speaker 1: I mentioned having a lot of support from, from community groups when I became superintendent and one group who called itself the All Chicago Tribute Committee and they had a reception for me at the South Shore Country Club in April of 1985. And one of the members of that committee put together this little booklet, which is really has the history of my life in it. It was a tremendous undertaking, and it's one of the things that we treasure quite a bit. Speaker 2: I belong to another organization called Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity. The short word for it is the Boule. It's the oldest black fraternity in this country. It was organized, the first Boule of this organization was organized in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in 1904. And Sigma Pi Phi this is the executive committee of that body in a meeting and I'm part of the executive committee and have been for a number of years. This picture goes back to what's the, whatever the year is on that, the back of that. Speaker 1: '96' [1996] Speaker 2: '96' [1996]. VIDEOGRAPHER: Where are you located in that photo? Speaker 2: On the, to my left I'm seated on the left, the first person, here. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with President Ronald Reagan, and it was made in the cabinet room in 1986 or '87' [1987]. There are two photographs that I had made with him in two successive years when I served as the national chairman of the public schools industry in selling savings bonds. I had met with the delegation of businessmen with the secretary of the treasury, made our report, and we had reached our goals and then the secretary of the treasury took this entire assemblage in a, in a parade to the White House to make our report to, to President [Ronald] Reagan. And as I indicated, the president then did an individual photo with all the members of that committee as they served the different industries. Speaker 2: Father, [Joseph] Cardinal Bernardin of the Catholic Archdiocese [Chicago, Illinois] attempted to raise monies to support the great influx of non-Catholic Church members coming to the Catholic school system, and he established that fund to support the education of the, the non-Catholic members in the Catholic schools to the Big Brothers Fund, and he at that fund banquet he invited corporate Chicago [Illinois] and corporate America to make contributions, and he asked us to come and share that evening with him in celebration. And that's a picture of, of Cheri and, and me with Joseph Cardinal Bernardin that I think is '86' [1986] or '87' [1987]. Speaker 1: This is the beginning of what's been a long wonderful experience. This is a picture of me and Cheri on our wedding day, March 31st, 1956 when we were posing with our wedding cake, and this picture remains with us. Speaker 2: This is my mom, Evlyn, Evlyn Byrd Patton. The--this picture was taken in 1988 or '89' [1989] it's a picture of her. She was a great mom, a great inspirer, a great booster, and just made us feel that we could conquer the world. There were three of us. Unfortunately, I'm the only survivor of that family, but there was a lot of love and warmth and caring. And though my dad was always there, that, that firm root and I knew he was there, he was more of the silent one. This was a drum major. This was the one who would get on my case or anybody's case when the situation required. She was great...