 Story_ID: 39801 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Donna Dote Britt, D-O-N-N-A, D-O-T-E, B-R-I-T-T. I don't usually use Dote. My name I was given by my mother because I was to be baptized in a Catholic church, my middle name is Marie. I usually go by that; M-A-R-I-E. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Dote's a family name, my grandmother's nickname. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your place of birth? Speaker 2: Gary, Indiana. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I don't really have one, a title anymore. I'm an author and a writer. So, I was a natural columnist. I've had titles over the years. Right now I don't have a formal-- Speaker 1: Okay, various papers-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --USA Today, Washington Post? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: August 9, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my mom's apartment in Silver Spring, Maryland. Story_ID: 39802 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, before we go into depth there are five light-weight questions we always ask that are kind of a warm-up. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Vanilla Haagen Dazs. (laughing) Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I like to look at blue and I like to wear the color I have on now, which is sort of a corollary(ph), orangie sherbert, orange sherbert color. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Rancho La Puerta. It's a spa in Baha, California, just outside San Diego, it's a paradise. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I know nothing. Story_ID: 39803 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's [Geraldine Mae King Britt] side of the family and your father's side, but separately, and then we'll put them together at some point. So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Geraldine Mae King Britt. G-E-R-A-L-D-I-N-E, M-A-E, K-I-N-G, B-R-I-T-T. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She doesn't like me to give out her date of birth, but she was born in, I think it was Pennsauken, New Jersey. She was-- Speaker 1: Do you know how to spell that, Pennsauken? Speaker 2: --I don't know if there are two Ns or one. We can call her and find out. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: But I do say she was in Jersey. And-- Speaker 1: All right. Okay. So what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: --I can't go back much further than my great-grandmother. I know that they, the family, immigrated from Virginia, but I don't know anything, really, about those relatives. I do know that one was the--was the slave of a doctor, and his master, he was young, he was a boy and he was an assistant and apparently the northern soldiers were coming and the doctor told him to hide in some bushes or some weeds and said when you hear the next group of boots, soldiers boots come up, that's going to be the northern soldiers and you can--you'll be safe with them. And that's what happened and interestingly the men on my mother's side are doctors, two of them are prominent doctors here in Washington, D.C. Their dad was a doctor, their uncle was a doctor, my--my cousin that I played with as a child is a doctor, (unclear) family tradition. Speaker 1: So what are their last names? Speaker 2: Batipps, B-A-T-I-P-P-S. Three of those that I mentioned and their fathers and uncles. Speaker 1: Okay. Now that's interesting. Speaker 2: It is interesting. Speaker 1: Yeah. So any other stories on your mother's side like that that come from that far back? Speaker 2: No nothing that far back. Speaker 1: So after the Civil War at some point, the family moves to New Jersey? Speaker 2: I hope I told it right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To actually Media, Pennsylvania, is where my mom grew up and where my grandmother-- Speaker 1: That's M-E-D-E--? Speaker 2: --Like the media, M-E-D-I-A. Speaker 1: --I-A, okay. All right Media, okay. Where's Media? Speaker 2: It's right outside Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], twenty minute drive. Story_ID: 39804 Speaker 1: All right. What did your grandparents do for a living? Speaker 2: My grandfather was a dentist. My grandmother was--sold insurance as my mom [Geraldine Mae King Britt] did. Before that, as a child, she was a domestic, her mother was a domestic, and as you know, that was a very common profession for black women of their era. It didn't matter how bright you were, how beautiful you were, how talented you were, that was what most people did. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know where your grandfather went to school? Speaker 2: I don't. He's a step grandfather. No, I don't know where he went to school. That's a good question. Story_ID: 39805 Speaker 1: Okay. Did your mother have some stories about growing up? Speaker 2: She talks about--my mother is a very interesting story, and I write about it in detail in my book, "Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving" and she was the child of a rape, a male family member. My grandmother was a teenager and went berry-picking with this trusted relative and that happened and my mom was the product of that and she was--my grandmother was a good church-going girl and my grandmother was appalled and that's why my mother was born in New Jersey, because people couldn't know that this had happened. And so when my grandmother, I guess, started to show, she was spirited away and gave birth in New Jersey and it wasn't until seven years later that my mom moved in with her mother and became a part of her family, because she had been--she was raised in a boarding house in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with a woman who wasn't very warm and wasn't very loving, but who took care of her. There were lots of tortured stories like these back when--when pregnancy--unwed pregnancy had to be hidden. Story_ID: 39806 Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And so going home was magical to her because she--the place she had lived had an outhouse and the food was scarce and not good. You know, she talks about opening the flour and having to pick out bugs and the woman was sometimes cruel and to punish her she once hit her in the face with a slipper and she said she could taste the blood. You know, it was like Dickens [Charles Dickens], it was an awful way for a little girl to grow up and nobody hugged her, but my great-grandmother would come once a week, she would--on her half days, she would take the bus from Media to Philly and visit her and so she knew once a week she was going to get this visit from her great-grandmother and then once a month, this very pretty young stylish woman would come with her and it took her a while to realize that was her mother. And she was so in awe of her, you know, her beauty and her sophistication and so that's her first memory of her mom was her coming to visit her and being struck by--that this sort of amazing creature was her mom. And so the way that she went to turn--the way that she came to live with them in Media [Pennsylvania] was the woman who was taking care of her, her husband was burning trash in the back yard. Apparently people burned trash in the back yard and she had on her favorite dress which is a dotted Swiss dress and she was seven years old and she was playing with the two other kids that boarded there and they were playing chase, and she ran too close to the fire, her dress went up in flames and she felt herself being thrown on the ground and being, you know, hit with clothing, you know, that the fire being put out that she was--she had third degree burns over a large part of her body and so the woman who took care of her put her in up--it was in the summer, put her in an upstairs bedroom and put cottonseed oil on her, didn't take her to a doctor, yet the woman was ignorant, she didn't know any, you know, she was--she wasn't educated, she was just a care-taker for children and so when my grandmother came a few days later for her weekly visit, she saw what had happened, screamed, picked my mother up, ran down the stairs and into the street and stopped the first car she saw, and they took her to the hospital and the doctors--my mother had never seen a doctor, so there were these white men in white coats called doctors. And the doctor said, "I don't know that we can save this child." And she begged them to and--and they did. And she was there for several months, I don't know how many, it's in my book, I don't remember. But Christmas eve she was released and taken to live with her mother and her mother's sister, my Aunt Mae, in their home and it was like a palace to her. It had running water and it had indoor plumbing and it was beautifully lit and it had a piano and well-dressed, well-behaved children and people who fed her well and so she said that when her cousins, whom she'd never met, who didn't even know she existed, came downstairs Christmas morning, she was there, like a present under the tree, and that was the beginning of her new life- Story_ID: 39807 Speaker 1: --Okay-- Speaker 2: --With a family. Speaker 1: --I'm assuming this is in the '30s (1930s) somewhere, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, during the Depression [The Great Depression] years. Well, this is a great story and you said you've written about it, right? Speaker 2: I've written about it. It's in my memoir, lots of great stories in there. I mean, who doesn't have, you know, black folks of that era, we have amazing stories of survival and triumph and wit and, you know, we've survived so much. Speaker 1: Okay. Now your mother was able to go to high school-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --And go to college. Speaker 2: Yeah, she went to school, unlike many kids of her era, she went to school always with white kids, because schools were integrated in Media [Pennsylvania], and so she always had white friends and associates and although-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --I'm sorry? Speaker 1: --So, this would mean also that she's getting the same educational-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Content as the average white kid-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Would. Speaker 2: Which is still rare in some places. Story_ID: 39808 Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so, you know, and she did go to college and she--you know that doesn't mean that it was equal. My grandmother, who went to school in the same circumstances and was a track star from Media High School [Media, Pennsylvania], came on a field trip, a bus trip, to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] And there were a couple of hotels for blacks and one was called or coloreds, as they were called, and one was called the White Law, believe it or not, the White Law Hotel and so that's where she had to stay, because she couldn't stay where the white kids stayed and she remembered that at one point, the bus driver, and this is in my book too, I can't remember the detail, but something happened and the bus driver was trying to single her, the bus white driver, single my grandmother out and her--and telling her to get off the bus, maybe because they were going someplace to eat that was restricted and she wouldn't get off and some of her white classmates supported her. So, you know moms--I went with her to her fiftieth reunion many years back, and you know, my mother looks incredibly young for her age and I remember the warmth that with which she was greeted and how everyone said, "Well wow, you're one of the only people actually looks just like yourself." And she remembers--yeah, it's interesting when you can grow up with white people, you can grow up completely separate from them, but it's--it's, it's rarely the same, certainly not then, you know, and her grandmother worked in service and so she did that as a girl for years. She would go with her to the homes of the rich white people with whom she worked--for whom she worked and went to the beach with them, you know, people would summer at the beach and--so she has lots of memories, you know many of them happy. She said that her grandmother, these things are also in the book, that her grandmother took the opportunity of working with white people to learn what quality was, you know, what kind of silver to buy, what kind of clothes to buy, what she--because everything that she saw her employer buy for her kids, she wanted for my mother for her granddaughter. So my mom learned about the finer things because of that kind of exposure. Story_ID: 39809 Speaker 1: You know, I've asked this question of people who have folks in their family that did service, day work and that sort of thing, as people in my family did, but, and a lot of people don't get that connection that you said without me having to ask about it, did--I ask did a relative brought anything back with them other than money, and I know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, complete sensibility, a sense of a different kind of life and a different kind of world. And just because you weren't an invited part of it, as a participant, as an equal, didn't mean that you weren't soaking it up and you weren't learning what worked and what didn't. And watching--I think one of the things we got from it and it's almost is what my generation got from watching white television that we weren't on for years. You know my kids they can't even imagine that. We got a--you get a sense of that other world that is so powerful and you know them in a way that they don't know you, because they have so few peoples, you know, into our lives that are authentic and that are real, of course, that's a good thing and a bad thing in that--well, I just thought it was very interesting that--and I know as a columnist I was always struck by how many letters I got from white readers who said--who actually thanked me for writing about my sons and writing about our family and writing about out connection because they said "I don't know anything about black families." I think it was part of the reason the "Cosby Show" was so popular was because even though people talked about it being an idealistic representation of family life, it was very much like the family I grew up in. You know the kids argued, the parents worked hard, they--you know, it felt like a real family and when media images of that are so limited, it really is valuable to give people those insights into our--the reality of our lives, because otherwise it's all stereotype and image and "bs". Story_ID: 39810 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where did your mother [Geraldine Mae King Britt] go to college? Speaker 2: She went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did she major in? Speaker 2: She became a dental hygienist. You guys go way back. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this have anything to do with the fact that her stepfather was a dentist? Speaker 2: Probably. I don't know. I don't even know exactly when my grandmother married him, but that whole medical thing is really interesting in our family. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So your mother would be a little bit older than Bill Cosby, right, at Temple, I suppose, I mean-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: --most famous Temple graduate? Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit, because I remember being a girl watching--yeah, a young girl, watching "I Spy" and just being agog (making sounds), wow, and he looked like my brother, Darrell [Darrell Britt], so that was really cool. Story_ID: 39811 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm going to ask about your father's [Thomas Elwood Britt] side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Elwood, E-L-W-O-O-D, Britt, B-R-I-T-T. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was--September 7, 19--I believe it was '25 (1925). Speaker 1: Okay. And where was he born? Speaker 2: In Manakin, Virginia. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: M-A-N-A-K-I-N. He didn't live there long. His family moved to Gary [Indiana]. So he grew up there. Speaker 1: Okay. Once again, how far back can you trace your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: You know, not as far. My dad wasn't really talkative like a lot of brothers of his era. They were more the strong silent type and so. My mother has always been more loquacious and more talkative and dad was more quiet, and so I don't have a lot of stories from his childhood. My mother told me that--and she doesn't have that many either, because he was a just a quiet guy. She remembers him being a little boy and being excited at age five on a trip across the country with his dad, who was also silent and not very affectionate or warm, asked him to help him with street signs, and so he was really excited to do this thing for him. I don't have a lot of stories about-- Speaker 1: So this was an auto trip they took? Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: Across country? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. Do you know the reason why they-- Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: --Went across country? Speaker 2: No, if I--you know--no, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. His dad was driving so I suppose he could-- Speaker 2: No. My dad was five. Speaker 1: --Yeah, I know, but his dad? Speaker 2: His dad, yeah. Speaker 1: So I suppose he could see well enough, but he couldn't read the signs, is that what you're saying? Speaker 2: I think it was to give him something to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, like when we were little, you know, if you look for all the red cars or you look for--so he--that was his assignment. He was five years old, so maybe he was just learning to read. Speaker 1: Keep him from being bored, I guess. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 39812 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So now what did his father do for a living? Speaker 2: He was a bricklayer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's what my dad did. It was a good job to have, you know, it was unionized, very well paid, you know, seasonal, so there were times when he wasn't working. But that was a good job. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So now is there a story about how your father got from Manakin [Virginia] to Gary [Indiana] or why? Speaker 2: I think--I just think his dad must have moved to Gary because it was a place where--It was a brand new city and that was created around the steel mill there and there were lots of well-paying jobs that didn't require a lot of education, and so there were all kinds of immigrants. Lots of black folks from the south also, Poles and Greeks and you know, just you know Spanish, everybody was coming because you could get a great job and you didn't have to have a college education and so you know you got a bustling, vibrant city around that and it's the kind of opportunity that is so hard to find now, you know, you really have to have a college degree, and sometimes that means nothing, but back then you could raise a family, a pretty large family well under those circumstances, same thing with Detroit [Michigan] with the auto industry. Speaker 1: Okay, that's true, Gary was booming. Now, did he have a chance to finish high school in Gary? Speaker 2: Yeah, he did, and he went to FAMU, Florida A&M University [Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was in the Navy during World War II. Speaker 1: Now, what high school did he come out of in Gary, and was it-- Speaker 2: Gary Roosevelt [Gary Roosevelt High School, Gary Indiana]. Speaker 1: --Okay. Now was that-- Speaker 2: He was a basketball player, he was the star. Speaker 1: Now, is this an all black school or was it-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Okay. I thought so because of some things I've heard about Gary. Speaker 2: Now Gary was pretty segregated. It wasn't official. It wasn't a legal thing, it was voluntary, it's what people did. Speaker 1: They called de facto segregation. Speaker 2: Yes, de facto. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I went to a pretty much all black, well black and some Hispanic school myself. Speaker 1: --So I take it he attended FAMU but he didn't finish? Speaker 2: I think he did. No, maybe the war--I'm actually not sure about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I know the war interfered, and I don't-- Speaker 1: So he served in World War II? Speaker 2: --He did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --On a boat in the Navy. He actually played basketball for the Navy. Speaker 1: Now that's a better job than-- Speaker 2: Well he also--he had the--he did the whole swabbing thing, but you know there are worse ways to spend the war. Speaker 1: --Right. The Navy is particularly rough on black-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know that he had a really bad experience. Like I said I think he was a little protected because of his talent. Story_ID: 39813 Speaker 1: --Okay. All right. Is there a story about how your parents met-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --We don't have to call mother out here? Speaker 2: No that's in "Brothers (and me)" [Brothers (and me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving] too. It's cute. My mother is diminutive. She's petite and very cute. So she had just moved to Gary [Indiana] as a Dental Hygienist at Gary Roosevelt High School, and she was walking down the street with a friend, and she had on what they called an Eisenhower jacket, which is a little short jacket with the buttons and her friend said, "Oh, here comes the guy I want you to meet." And she looked and she saw this tall really good looking guy. He had hazel brownish, light brown eyes. And she was eating an ice cream cone, and she knows she was small, she was afraid that she would look like a little girl, so she just sort of surreptitiously got rid of the ice cream cone and presented her grown-up self to him, and they started dating. They got married quickly, you know, in less than six months. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was that before the war [World War II] or after? Speaker 2: It was after. Speaker 1: All right, so he had just come back. So he just went back to bricklaying, I mean, or just continued-- Speaker 2: He went back to Gary and, yeah, and started his career. Speaker 1: --Okay so did his father have a business that they were both involved in? Speaker 2: No. They basically worked a lot for the mills. They built homes, you know, they were basically contractors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he didn't have his own shingle, as it were. Story_ID: 39814 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is a question we always ask. When you consider your parents' personalities-- Speaker 2: Uh'huh. Speaker 1: --Their stature, the way they walk, talk, sense of humor, their talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: More my mom [Geraldine Mae King Britt]. She's more outgoing, she's more talkative, she's--I mean, I have some of my dad's [Thomas Elwood Britt]--I'm not taciturn but I do observe, I watch, and he does that. She's more out there. So I'd say more of my mother with some a little bit of my dad thrown in. Story_ID: 39815 Speaker 1: All right. Okay, now, you have like one sibling, or-- Speaker 2: No, I have three. Speaker 1: --Three, okay. Speaker 2: I have three brothers. Speaker 1: Well, can you name your brothers and sisters and put yourself in the lineup for us? Speaker 2: My oldest brother, Steven, he's since changed his name to Melik, Darrell is after him then me, I'm the third, and then my youngest brother Bruce. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So the household consisted of you and your mother [Geraldine Mae King Britt] and father [Thomas Elwood Britt] and you and your three siblings? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, were there any other relatives living with you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Can you describe--was there a name for your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Tolleston [Gary, Indiana]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: T-O-L-L-E-S-T-0-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the neighborhood we moved to when I was in the fourth grade. I'm not sure of the name of the neighborhood before that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is in Gary, itself, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 39816 Speaker 1: Okay. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Gary [Indiana]? Speaker 2: A lot of people would drive through Gary and talk about the smell, because they smelled the mill. But you didn't smell that on the streets, you just didn't. Gary was a busy place, and I lived in a neighborhood where, you know, I talked about the segregation. I had white teachers, but white people didn't live in our neighborhood and you didn't miss them, you know, there was no sense of depravation because of that, and I'm sure a lot of people talked about this, about how far back in the day, all the black folks lived in essentially the same neighborhood, so you had--you had working class and poor and upper class, you had wealthy, you had everybody in a much more limited space and so, you know, there was a--there was a lot of life going on and it didn't feel deprived, it didn't feel like we were lacking anything, you know, that sense of, you know, we were blessed, and we didn't have--Gary was doing well, because the mills were doing well, so it was a vibrant community. So lots of stores, you know, retail, you know, good schools, we--you know, it was a good place to grow up. Story_ID: 39817 Speaker 1: What was the main street running through your neighborhood? Speaker 2: I lived off Chase Street. The main street in Gary was Broadway, which divided East Gary from West. And I don't mean to suggest that there weren't poor people, there were, but there was a sense of connection between all of the black community and I'm not sure it exists in the same way today because people don't live as close to each other. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's more separation. Speaker 1: All right. Did you go to black doctors in Gary? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah, we knew--yeah, I mean I had--yeah, everybody knew everybody. You know you didn't live--my dad was a builder so we lived on a house with--and back then the upper echelon of society a lot of times were teachers. Teachers, doctors, some lawyers, some businessmen, not--you didn't have the Colin Powells [Colin Luther Powell] and the--you know, my husband's [Kevin Merida] a managing editor of the Washington Post. You didn't have people like that, you know, people who would be going to the White House to visit, you didn't have that kind of high society, but you had--you had very well to-do people and who had busy social lives and it was a full life. Speaker 1: Okay. I've often been impressed by the actors that came out of Gary because they--they're not just actors, but they seemed to have a classical education. This includes William Marshall, you mentioned Avery Brooks. I didn't even know from Gary. Speaker 2: He was a neighbor. Speaker 1: --Another fellow I know name Darrell Robinson, does Shakespeare in Chicago Public Schools, you know, I said, where are they-- Speaker 2: You know I really don't know where that came from. It probably came from some very interested--maybe even just one teacher could do that, could influence, a teacher who really had a Shakespearian sort of interest could have that effect. Speaker 1: And I've often thought about the story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know about this third person, I didn't know about Darrell. Speaker 1: --It should be a story there, you know-- Speaker 2: Probably is. Speaker 1: --About why that's true. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Of course, the Jackson Five growing up there sort of blew all that away. They became "The" people from Gary. Story_ID: 39818 Speaker 1: Now, you grew up during the '60s (1960s), I guess, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, '60s (1960s), yeah, mostly. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: During the '60s (1960s) and in the '60s (1960s) Gary is on the rise. I guess it reaches its peak or something? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, probably. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I left in the early '70s (1970s) to go to college and it's--I remember where they had the first--Richard Hatcher [Mayor Richard G. Hatcher] being elected one of the first prominent black mayors. And at my high school there would be major meetings of prominent black folks. They had a huge meeting there, and I can't remember the name of it, people who were into the civil rights movement and into that whole sort of moving on up. They would know what this meeting was, but it was really big. And I remember at my--my high school had the biggest auditorium in the city and so major acts would come through at our school, and I was in this group that would sell popcorn and do--so Sammy Davis, Jr. performed at my high school in hot pants and the Five Stair Steps performed there and they had this big political confab there. My husband [Kevin Merida] could tell you what it was. Story_ID: 39819 Speaker 1: Can you tell us where you started in kindergarten or the first grade? Speaker 2: Kindergarten was at Garnett [Garnett Elementary School, Gary, Indiana]. Garnett, which was really close to where the Jacksons actually grew up. They were on Jackson Street, believe it or not. Speaker 1: This is Garnett Elementary? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And Garnett was right sort of kiddie corner to there, not far from there. Speaker 1: Now is this the name for Henry Highland Garnett? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a black hero from the 19th century, I don't know. Was it traditionally a black school? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As far as I know. It was a very solidly established black neighborhood. You know, I should have boned up on my childhood before I saw you. Speaker 1: There's a Garnett Elementary here in D.C.-- Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Speaker 1: --Named for him. Speaker 2: Okay, cool. You know, it very well could be. That would make sense. Speaker 1: So you were there until, you said, until about fourth grade or something? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went to Ernie Pyle, moved across town to Ernie Pyle Elementary School, named after the World War II journalist. Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we get you there-- Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 39820 Speaker 1: --What were you like as a little kid, from kindergarten to fourth grade? Speaker 2: I was really popular and well liked. It was a time when the fact that I was book-smart was celebrated. You know, you hear a lot about kids being rejected and having to hide that. The kids at my school liked for kids to be smart and were proud of them and--so I had a great time at Garnett [Garnett Elementary School, Gary, Indiana]. I had really good friends and you know it was just a--it was a good time. I was happy and the teachers, I felt, very encouraged in my education. I loved to read, and the teachers appreciated that and my fellow-students appreciated that. I could draw. My mom and my dad--my dad is a draftsman and knew how to draw up architectural plans and so I could--inherited their talent. In fact, all of our family could draw and that's how the kids would spend time. We would just sit around the table, everybody drawing pictures. My brothers would draw kids, you know, cowboys and Indians, and they would draw people sword fighting like the Error Flynn kind of movies that we would see on TV and I would draw ballerinas and girls. And my classmates, I would draw pictures for them, maybe that's why I was popular because they would like that I would draw pictures for them. So that was a great time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was pretty confident then. Speaker 1: Okay, so you liked to read too? Speaker 2: I loved it. Speaker 1: All right. Did you have a good library in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I remember thinking that was the coolest place on earth, just to be surrounded by all these books and everywhere you go, you could pick one off and get lost in it. Speaker 1: So did the library have black librarians when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. That's my memory. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in our black neighborhood, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I could be wrong, but that's what I remember. Speaker 1: Well, you're probably right, because I had them in my neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Growing up in Ohio. But just asking because you hear stories, people growing up and they can't go to a library, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't at all like that. I remember when Gary built a new, brand new downtown library, and I just thought it was the most fabulous place on earth. It was brand new and shiny and smelled good and all these books and glass and it was like Oz. Story_ID: 39821 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was church a major part of growing up? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah, I went to St. Timothy's Community Church. So it's nondenominational, gifted, fiery minister, Reverend Lowery(ph) and his daughter, Jan and I were friends. She's a little younger, about my age. Speaker 1: So Reverend Lowery(ph)? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Who was you know really eloquent and passionate and you know gave really good engaging sermons and they never lasted too long because he was really popular, so that was sort of a cool church. There were two churches, that one and First Baptist that people went to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I really liked my church. Speaker 1: Was Reverend Lowery related to the Reverend Lowery of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]? Speaker 2: I don't think so. They don't look anything alike. Our Reverend Lowery was very fair-skinned and I don't think so, I never heard that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I had to ask. Speaker 2: You never know. I don't know. You know, my mom's in the other room, she could let you know about--I wish she was in here, you know, she should do the HistoryMakers with her. Speaker 1: So did you have roles as a youth in church to play? Speaker 2: --Uh-uh. I just went to Sunday school. It wasn't like Catholic Church, where you know you had altar boys and all these kinds of things, we just-- Speaker 1: I just want to--choir or did you do-- Speaker 2: --I don't remember doing that. Speaker 1: --Presentations on Easter and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. I'm sure we probably did little skits and stuff like that, but I don't really remember those. Story_ID: 39822 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. What was your favorite literature to read or did you just like everything? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved Louisa May Alcott the 19th century abolitionist's daughter. She moved in circles with Emerson [Ralph Waldo Emerson] and, I think, Thoreau [Henry David Thoreau], and her dad was a famous Massachusetts philosopher. So she wrote little, all these books that were--that are classics, "Little Women", "Little Men", "Old Fashion Girl", "Joe's Boys", and how they grew up, all these books, and I read all of them. And my mother [Geraldine Mae King Britt] had really beautifully bound illustrated copies that I just destroyed, because I just read them over and over and over again, so they're spaghetti stains on them and food and I just loved them, and so she was my favorite author. She was, I'm sure, you know, she was--she never married, writing became her life and I'm sure she was an influence. The idea that I could write books like she did was exciting that I could write. Speaker 1: Did you know about any black writers growing up? Speaker 2: No, you know, what I remember about black writers was, and I don't even know that these writers were black. Remember the books that, you know, the "Mandingo" and you know, those books about slave tales and all those sort of-- Speaker 1: Now, Kyle Onstott was not black. Speaker 2: Right. I didn't think so. Speaker 1: Frank Yerby, who wrote some of those kinds of books, was. Speaker 2: Onstott. Is that his name Onstott? Speaker 1: Kyle Onstott. Speaker 2: Kyle. Yeah, he's the one that I think may have been the most popular, because I just remember all those titles, and I even remember the characters. That stuff was really vivid. I don't know that it was well written at all, but it was--and it was incredibly violent and, you know, probably stuff that I shouldn't have been reading, but anything that came in the house was fair game for me, because I was insatiable, I couldn't get enough reading. Story_ID: 39823 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about TV, movies? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I loved TV, I loved movies. I became a movie critic. Yeah, we watched the stuff that every kid my age watched, you know, Patty Duke Show, where she played twins and I remember being really little and watching "Make Room For Daddy" and thinking Angela Cartwright was his daughter, and she had this really pretty long hair. And, you know, and like I said these seismic affect of Bill Cosby on "I Spy." You know that there was an actual smart urbane, attractive, funny, black man on TV was like a thunderbolt. Because before that any black person that appeared on TV, the streets would empty, because you just didn't see it. So, you know, everybody would be on the street, you know, people washing their cars, having conversations, whatever, and somebody would throw open the door and say, "Harry Belafonte's on Ed Sullivan". Nobody would be on the street, because you had to rush into your house and gather around the TV and look at the miracle of this black face on TV, you know, Nat King Cole. People would never believe that it was such a big deal to be able to see somebody who looked like us. But it didn't--that didn't keep us from watching and loving the same shows that everybody else did. My brothers and I, Johnny Quest, you remember that one? And, you know, and then as a teenager, as a young adult, I guess as a teen watching Mary Tyler Moore and Rhoda and as a young woman, and you know, these, all these people, these shows, you know, and just loving movies. In fact, the other thing I wanted to do is be a film critic and I did do that later in USA Today because I love movies so much. Speaker 1: Okay. I know one Gary hero was William Marshall, played Blacula. The first time I saw him he was on Star Trek. Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't a Star Trek person. I knew he was doing that. You know, I wasn't a Trekkie, but everybody was proud of him that he--you know he was so--had so much dignity. He's one of those people who's doing the right thing and doing it well, with that voice. Speaker 1: Who could imagine that someone could dignify a character called Blacula? Speaker 2: I know. The irony of having a Shakespearean actor do that and then do it with such aplomb, interesting. Story_ID: 39824 Speaker 1: Interesting, yeah. So, at any rate, so you were there, you were at Garnett until fourth grade when your family moved, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, were there any special teachers at Garnett that you remember before we move on? Speaker 2: I remember liking the librarian there, and I can't remember her name right now. She had a daughter, Jane. I wish I had studied up before. I didn't know how these interviews would be so incredibly in depth. And there was a teacher there I loved, and I can't remember her name. My mom knows her, loved her. Speaker 1: Was she your classroom teacher? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Loved her. She was so encouraging and so warm. Story_ID: 39825 Speaker 1: This is the first, I think the first journalist who went to a school named after a journalist. So was Ernie Pyle an integrated school? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean, you know, you had a smattering, but I mean, it was mostly black. We had white teachers, not all of them, but we had some. Speaker 1: All right. So, you continued to make good grades, I assume? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there any major adjustment you had to make? Speaker 2: There was already a smart girl set when I got there. And so the sort of easy, not having to think about it popularity and comfort level that I had at Garnett was gone and that was needing to, you know, I had to make new friends and I had to, and I did, but I remember my second year there, not, I think, you know, when girls that age, you know there's a set clique and it was hard, you know, so people, I thought were my friends, sometimes they were, sometimes they weren't, it was hard. I didn't--that was an adjustment because it had been so easy at Garnett and it wasn't as easy there. And maybe it was just a matter of the age, you know, who knows, I could have gotten a little older at Garnett and had the same thing happen, had people turn on me, you know. Human relationships are fascinating. Speaker 1: That's true. Subjects for writing? Speaker 2: Yes. We are an endlessly fascinating species. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you're in the fifth grade, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Ten years old? Speaker 2: Yeah, I started at Mr. McCloud's class in the fourth grade, and then I went to Mrs. Lewis' class in the fifth grade, another teacher I adored. Mr. McCloud was really cool too. Story_ID: 39826 Speaker 1: Okay. Now were your parents involved in civil rights' activities? Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember being frightened for Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you hear the march on Washington [March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom] speech on TV? Speaker 2: I think I did. You know it's one of those speeches that's so iconic and so familiar that it's, for me, it's hard for me to remember the first time I did hear it. You know, after you hear it so many times, it resonates with you each time. So I don't remember the first time. If I'd only heard it once, it would be easier to say. Story_ID: 39827 Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up, did your family go on trips in the summertime? Speaker 2: We never went south because we didn't really have any roots there. Most of my friends would go down south, and I used to envy them and fear for them because all I knew about the South was these frightening images from the Civil Rights Movement with hoses and German Shepherds and people screaming and the idea that people would voluntarily pack up their cars and drive down there was astonishing to me. And the weird thing was they came back with these great stories. They had so much fun down south. So I didn't quite know what to make of that, and I had no one to visit. Speaker 1: Okay. So your car trips would be to go to Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yeah, we would go to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So we would pack up the car and drive from, you know, Gary through Ohio into the, you know, to the end of Pennsylvania. So we would go through under mountains, the Blue Mountains and all these--I remember the tunnels cut through mountains, my favorite part, it would get really dark. We would leave in the morning and we'd drive and then we'd wake up and then we'd be there, at grandma--at mom mommy King's house, mom mommy. She didn't want to be grand mom, so she was mom's mommy. So my cousin called her Miami King just for short. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Were there any other significant trips when you were growing up? I mean, did you all go out to California or do anything like that? Speaker 2: No. Although if we did, no, we just went to Pennsylvania. We went to Chicago [Illinoia] a lot for entertainment, because that was just, you know, half hour down the road. That's where--you know Chicago was the special place to go because that's where the museums were, the Museum of Science and Industry and Soldier Field and the Aquarium and you know the Lake [Lake Michigan], and it--it was and is an incredibly beautiful city and that was the location. And you would go at Christmas because Marshall Field and Carson Pirie Scott would have these stunning Christmas decorations with trains and you know moving figures and it was amazing. And so that was just a tremendous treat at Christmas every year to go see what they put out this year. Speaker 1: Did you go for the Thanksgiving Parade? Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember doing that. I remember every year watching it, but no, I don't remember ever going to see it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was a big deal for it to see that on TV. Story_ID: 39828 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, now, did you have a middle school after the fifth-- Speaker 2: I went to--I was bussed across town to Emerson [The Ralph Waldo Emerson School, Gary, Indiana], because, you know, that was the era of bussing and so Gary [Indiana] was redressing it's segregated schools, de facto segregated schools that way and so I was bussed away from a lot of people who were good friends of mine. Speaker 1: This is 1965 or so? Is this middle school or-- Speaker 2: This is, I was in seventh grade when-- Speaker 1: --The junior high school? Speaker 2: --Yeah, junior high. We didn't call it middle school in the Midwest, we called it junior high. Speaker 1: Junior High, okay. Okay, Junior High School. So this is Emerson Junior High School? Speaker 2: A little later than '65 (1965), I think, but late '60s (1960s). Speaker 1: So you would have been like what grade? Speaker 2: I was in seventh grade when I went to Emerson. Speaker 1: So this was about '66 (1966), I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, around then. Story_ID: 39829 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, was Gary [Indiana] like--I know some of the cities had riots starting in '66 (1966), '67 (1967), Detroit, Los Angeles. Did Gary have anything like that in those days? Speaker 2: You know, I don't--it seems like they did, but I think I must have shut that out, because I don't remember. I remember--yeah, I don't remember. I just remember--I remember for years having white mayors and some--this seismic shift and suddenly, you know, we had this really dynamic, charismatic black mayor, Mayor Hatcher [Mayor Richard G. Hatcher]. Speaker 1: He was elected, I know it was after '68 (1968), but I'm not-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know year, but whatever happened, I don't remember it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --It's somewhere between '68 (1968) and '72 (1972), because he had the convention in '72 (1972) and-- Speaker 2: And I remember the convention. But you know it's so funny, part of the reason I don't remember it is the Democratic National Convention because I worked it. I was working as somebody who was selling popcorn and you know and just looking you know and wearing hot pants and being a kid and just being so blown away by all the famous people who were in town and so it seemed more like entertainment than politics to me. Story_ID: 39830 Speaker 1: Did you get periodicals in your household, growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Jet, Ebony, Cosmo, my mom [Geraldine Mae King Britt] liked to buy that and I loved it, you know, because I couldn't fancy being a Cosmo girl, you know, sophisticated in my own apartment and you know really cool clothes, all the, you know, Red Book, Good Housekeeping, all the women's magazines mostly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I do remember seeing GQ and Esquire, my brothers and Sports Illustrated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the hidden Playboys, of course, that every house had. Story_ID: 39831 Speaker 1: Okay. So you go to Emerson Junior High School? Now was there anything significant about high school-- Speaker 2: Well, Emerson High School, but I went to junior high there and then I went to--I got transferred back--closer to my neighborhood, west, because Emerson was east of Broadway, west, even to where I lived to go to Westside High School, which was brand new high school. Speaker 1: --Westside High School. Now what was the racial make-up-- Speaker 2: That was also mostly black, but it had more Hispanics and a few whites. Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: Huge school. Speaker 1: So this would be 1967? Speaker 2: No. by that time '69 (1969). Speaker 1: Sixty-nine, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Nineteen Sixty-nine, all right. Speaker 2: Because I came out in '72 (1972). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you're starting off in tenth grade, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Seventh, eigth, ninth, maybe ninth. I can't remember if it's ninth or tenth. Speaker 1: All right. Now in this period of time of '68 (1968), was the year that Carl Stokes was elected mayor of Cleveland, that's the first black mayor. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I think the next year or the year after is when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think Hatcher [Mayor Richard G. Hatcher] was right after that, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --Is when Richard Hatcher was, yeah. So he was in the pages of Jet. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, oh yeah, it's a big deal. Speaker 1: It was a big thing. Then the assassination of Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '68 (1968). Were there riots in Gary [Indiana]? Speaker 2: Like I told you if there were--it seems like there were, it seems like there were, but I don't have any memory of that. So, I could be wrong. I just remember I was more--whatever happened in Gary wasn't like what happened, if anything happened at all, it wasn't like what happened in Detroit and then here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] And you know, so my memories of riots were from TV, not from anything that I saw or heard about locally. It was these--in L.A. You know just these big scary images from television. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were in high school-- Speaker 2: I could be way wrong, but you're asking about my memory, so. Story_ID: 39832 Speaker 1: Had your brothers gone off to college at this point when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, my brothers went--Darrell went to IU, Indiana University [Indiana University-Bloomington] and my brother Steve, who turned into Melik, went to Indiana State [Indiana State University]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And so in high school, were you, I suppose you were a popular young lady in high school too, I guess. Speaker 2: Reasonably. I mean, I wasn't one of--like my best friend, Gail, was really beautiful and became an Ebony Fashion Fair model, she was really popular, one of my best friends in sharing. We were popular, but it wasn't like it was--it's never going to be like it was in Garnett (unclear), but, yeah, we were--I had my friends and we had a great time. Speaker 1: Did you run for class officer or anything? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. I wasn't the type. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I just want to know, clubs and activities in high school. Speaker 2: We were in Photo Rama City, which was a--which is part of the reason why we were able to go to all these events, because we--Mr. Stuart, our teacher, the arts/photographer teacher, started a photo business with students, because we had this great dark room. And so we would go to different dances and concerts and take pictures and develop them for the yearbook and for sale and, you know, so that's the main thing I did. You know I always had a decent singing voice. I would be in choirs and stuff, but I wasn't that much of a joiner. Story_ID: 39833 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, in high school, what point in high school, or was there a point where you decided you were going--well, was there a point when you chose your future profession? Speaker 2: I always thought, well, because I could draw, I thought I'd either be--and I could write. You know I'd always gotten lots of praise for my writing. I knew I was going to do one of those two things. For a long time I thought I'd really be a fashion designer, because I loved clothes, I loved drawing them. But I guess I thought that I could survive with writing more than--there just weren't that many role models. You know I was very aware that I was a black girl or a Negro girl, which we thought before mid to late '60s (1960s) and I didn't know about any black designers. You know I did know at that point about black writers. The idea of doing that just seemed to be more practical, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did the Ebony Fashion Fair come through? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. It came through, yeah. It went to all the cities, all the big cities, major cities. Story_ID: 39834 Speaker 1: All right. So, '69 (1969) is about the year that the Jackson Five hits the-- Speaker 2: I remember seeing them the first time at Gilroy Stadium [Gary, Indiana], which was the big stadium not far from Indiana University's extension, and if the extension was even there at that point, and seeing these kids and--the thing about it is I'd seen them before then, actually. Any talent show, any school talent show, you knew that the Jackson Five or Denise Williams, who was Denise Chandler, actually, she lived two blocks down the street from me. You knew that one of them would win, because they were just so talented. And sure enough they both became--they all became--you know, they all became famous. Speaker 1: --Yeah, Denise Williams is a big star. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: She's a big star, yeah. Speaker 2: So at one point we had both of them, you know, being really prominent. And I remember my first time I saw Michael Jackson. He was this adorable little boy, and he could sing, and you know his moves were like Sammy Davis' and you heard all this stuff about him. And I remember him back then, you know, there'd be a show and it was Memorial Auditorium. I don't know if you remember this, but sometimes the groups would run in from the back, run down the aisles and then jump upon the stage and start to play, and I remember at one point--this wasn't--this was in a school gym, and I can't remember which school it was. And I remember him running through the crowd and this grown woman or maybe 15, because I was young, and she looked old to me, grabbing him up and just covering him with kisses, and you saw these little legs flailing. And I just felt he was so scared and I just remember in many ways frightened and troubled man that he became. I always remembered that image. And as a kid seeing that someone could have that powerful an effect--an effect on someone so much older than them where she would be kissing this little boy and he's clearly not prepared for that and this is an image I never forgot, especially in the context of what he became. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's hard to envision that now. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know I've had three sons, and I just think of how horrified they would have been if they were five years old and someone picked them up and started kissing them in that way, a stranger, and grasping them so hard. Story_ID: 39835 Speaker 1: Yes, that's something. So, and this is before they started making their records, right or was it after? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, it was before. Speaker 1: Before? Speaker 2: They were singing the Temptations' hits and the Impressions and you know all the Motown stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were they still living in Gary [Indiana] when their hit came out? Speaker 2: No. They were spirited away to LA [Los Angeles, California] to put out that first album. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember they came home for a concert and at this point I'm in high school, and we all had the ones we had crushes on. And so I remember it was a freezing, freezing night, and we knew where their party was going to be--that they were going to be, and they were going to be at this house in the basement and so my best friend and I, you know, got our afros picked out, and our cutest hot pants and we just really wanted to meet them, you know, because they were--wanted get them to be our boyfriends or just to see them, to be in the same room with them, you know, of course they wouldn't. And so we stood outside and this--whoever this person was just never had the good grace to say go home little girls, just go home. And so we froze our butts off, you know, looking cute, trying to get into this party that we thought we could see them, you know, screaming, you know, with the shades parted a little bit, one of my more foolish episodes. But we tried. Speaker 1: Was one of them about your age? Speaker 2: Jermaine [Jermaine Jackson]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Jermaine, okay. Speaker 2: He was the cutest. He was destined to be mine--not. Story_ID: 39836 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you graduated in '72 (1972). Now, was anything special about graduation? Speaker 2: Not really. I was ready to go. I just remembered being ready. Speaker 1: What kind of counseling did you have about college? Speaker 2: Almost none. I wasn't even sure what counselors did. It was one of those things where I remember vaguely sitting down with a counselor and because I was so sure I was going to college, and I was--then getting in wasn't going to be an issue, I was a national merit semifinalist, and I think, I just remember the sense that the counselor felt like I really don't need to talk to her because she's somebody who is directed, she wants to go, she's going to go, she has a scholarship, and sort of feeling like it was an unnecessary conversation. And so I'm sure this was somebody who was really trying to guide kids to make that choice and I had already made it. Speaker 1: Okay. But how did you make your choice? Now, you went to Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: How did you make that choice, what factors? Speaker 2: You know I had--I really wanted to learn more about black people, to learn more about black folks who were not from Gary, to find out more about our own diversity. And it seemed like a black college would be the best place to do that, so I applied--only applied to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and to Hampton, and they both accepted me and they both offered me scholarships, although Howard offered me more. And in retrospect in some ways that would have been a better fit, I think. But a friend of mine had gone to Hampton and fell in love with it and described it so glowingly that I just sort of--I never visited, which is astonishing now, because we took all of our sons to different colleges. But it wasn't always done that way. You just sort of picked from the literature and so I went to Hampton based pretty much on her description. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you get any special honors (unclear) for being a merit scholar and all that? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I mean it was an honor to be that. That's a ticket to scholarships, big universities and I just wasn't that interested. I just wanted to explore other, you know, the breadth of us as a people, because I--I just wanted to learn more about who we were and what made us tick. And so my thought about Hampton would be that it would be a place where there'd be all this talking about blackness and about, you know, in thinking about ways to advance us as a people and you know lots of discussions about culture and all that, and I was surprised at how many kids weren't really interested in that. You know, they were there to have a good time, you know, to get educated and so I didn't find this sort of group of passionate scholars that I thought I would find. Story_ID: 39837 Speaker 1: Okay. Just for history was that same spring that you graduated, I guess, the National Black Political Convention was held in Gary [Indiana]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And you said you were there in the convention center selling popcorn, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, potato chips, just sort of and you know and check out looking at the celebrities and being excited. Speaker 1: Okay. So just about every black political activist in the country showed up-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --And their students. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was wild. Speaker 1: I think your brother was a part of that? Speaker 2: I don't remember him being a part it. Story_ID: 39838 Speaker 1: Okay, well, he discussed it with you or something. Well, you were saying that one of your brothers-- Speaker 2: He talked about it--we talked about the stuff a lot and about, you know, I mean, I remember it was a big deal for me to get an afro, for me to you know wash--have my cousin, Joanne, wash my hair and pick it out and get a fro, because my mother didn't want me to do that. And I was surprised, and she was surprised that she liked it. I mean that was a radical act. Speaker 1: How old were you then? Were you a senior? Speaker 2: No. I was probably about fifteen when I got my fro and maybe sixteen. And you know it was just, you know, the embrace of your own stuff when so many of us had been raised to reject so much of ourselves. You know, our noses were too wide, our lips were too big, and you didn't want to be shiny and you know you didn't want to have nappy hair and you wanted to, you know, the whole light-skinned thing. It was so oppressive and so life-denying. And even for the years that we accepted it, you knew that it was wrong and there was that nothing good came from that and yet it was accepted. It was almost just like it was written, these things are good and these things are bad. And so to have that challenge and to have that stomped on and rejected, it was so empowering. And I mean to this day black people struggle with those images and with those horrible, you know, limiting, and you know, I guess their life-denying tenets that were based on nothing real. It's just tragic to me that people could be taught to hate themselves. And so to me the Black Power Movement was so much about self love, about even the notion of self love felt radical, because we've been taught so deeply. I mean as an adult I ran into people who weren't taught that, who were, you know, I met black girls whose, dark-skinned black girls, whose father told them they were beautiful and who had a completely different mindset from the other girls who were told there was something wrong with them. And the majority of us were taught that there was something wrong. So I loved that there was this ideology that was liberating. You know for me the liberation was less about economics and about--for me it was about self-realization and self-love and self acceptance. And not just for me, but for us as a people and embrace of ourselves after all those years of rejection. Story_ID: 39839 Speaker 1: Okay. Now I think it's about 1969 that pretty much everybody in the country was referring to themselves as being black. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: I mean before that in '68 (1968)-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was a terrible thing to call somebody, "You black this". Speaker 1: --Yeah, but by '69 (1969) everybody was black, or saying they were black. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And we were Negros in the press, in the media-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it took a while for newspapers and magazines to embrace it because for so long it had been foreboding, you couldn't say that. It was demeaning. Speaker 1: --Now I noticed when I came in, now were you reading anything by Malcolm X, because I know he's got about three pictures of him in here? Speaker 2: I think I was in college. I don't remember reading him in high school. I think it was college when I finally read him. Story_ID: 39840 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So now did you work during the summer after you graduated? Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked at a local recreation center. I worked at--I had a summer--I wrote in high school for Info, which is the local black Gary [Indiana] newspaper. Yeah, and I worked at--I had a job as an intern during college at Burson Marsteller in Chicago [Illinois], the PR agency. And I got an internship at Redbook Magazine while I was at Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. And that was huge, because I lived out in Greenwich Village on NYU's [New York University, New York, New York] campus and worked for Fran Ruffin(ph) who was the article's editor and then for this really cool sister, can't remember her name in the beauty department and then in fiction, and so I got to--it was the most amazing summer to be in New York [New York, New York]. It was sort of like my Mary Tyler Moore fantasy come true. Speaker 1: This is in '73 (1973), '74 (1974)? Speaker 2: Seventy-four or five. Story_ID: 39841 Speaker 1: Seventy-four or five, okay. Now, who was the chair in the journalism department? Speaker 2: Oh, he was Mr.--Doctor, it's in my book. The guy scared the bejesus out of me. (laughing) Yeah, I'm just blanking because it's-- Speaker 1: Is this an African American? Speaker 2: --Oh, yeah. He had one of those William Marshall kind of voices and he had this very sort of regal bearing and sort of ken--ken--what's his name? Oh, my friends are going to crack up that I'm blanking on it. It's just the--I can't believe all the names I'm forgetting just because of the setting. I hope I'm not the only person this happens to. Speaker 1: Well, it will come to you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you had a good-- Speaker 2: He was so--I remember my first day in my first class him saying, so he was asking students, you know, these different questions and tripping them up, and they would answer wrongly, and he would sort of dismiss them and put them down. And he got to me, he said what is your purpose, Ms. Britt, and I'm a "B" so I'm high up the list in the alphabet. He said what is your purpose in life? And I said I have no purpose in life, because I just didn't even want to go there and boy did that set him off. If you have no purpose in life, why don't you just jump off the belltower and (unclear). Maybe that's why I'm blanking on his name, it begins with a "K". It's not Kinsey, but anyway. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm trying-- Speaker 2: It's okay. All these things I know and they're in my book. So buy my book. Anyone who's reading this, check it out. Speaker 1: --So you had a chance for summer internships, which is a good thing. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And you said you were looking for--you thought that Hampton would be some kind of bastion of identity. Would you say that was not the case, right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or not what you expected? Speaker 2: Not what I expected, but it was, you know, our home by the sea. It was right by the water, very pretty, very family like, nurturing, but I really did want something different. I really think I would have been happier at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] because it was urban and because there was more of that--that kind of energy, although I'm sure, you know, I mean, my wonderful friend Jeff Rivers and you know, my great roommate Pam Bowler(ph) and I mean, you know, I had--I made good friends and had a good time. Story_ID: 39842 Speaker 1: Okay, did you join a sorority or anything? Speaker 2: Not me. Speaker 1: Did they have a black student organization? Speaker 2: You know, not that I remember. I'm sure they did, but it didn't seem--that didn't seem what Hampton was about. And maybe it's me, I mean, everything is through your own filter, but no. Speaker 1: Did you have any organization affiliations at all? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: Did you write for the school paper? Speaker 2: Not really. (laughing) Yeah, I had to--yeah, I didn't--I just did my work and you know had social stuff and wanted, you know, main thing, it wasn't what I expected, and the main thing I wanted was a boyfriend. And so I, you know, dated several guys, had a few of those. Yeah, I wasn't as active as you would have thought I would be. I just didn't--yeah it was mostly about--and I wasn't a partier, really. Speaker 1: Any other favorite teachers there? Speaker 2: You know, we all enjoyed Lottie Night, she was one of our journalism teachers. William--why can't I remember his name? Kearney, Dr. Kearney. Speaker 1: Okay. K-E-- Speaker 2: A-R-N-E-Y. Speaker 1: --N-E-Y. Okay. All right. Speaker 2: You know and we had Colonel Cook was one of our teachers. Speaker 1: Who's that? Speaker 2: Colonel Cook, a white guy, and I'm not sure what the Colonel part was about. There was another teacher whose name I can't quite remember. Story_ID: 39843 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, did you write anything that you really liked when you-- Speaker 2: I remember there was some sort of a contest, and I can't remember what the prize was. And I knew I could write, but whatever the prize was, I wanted it. And so, and it was some Native American because it had been a powerful Native American Presence at Hampton. Whatever this contest was they wanted you to write about the Indians who had lived there, who had matriculated there. And I remember not having time to do this right, and so I just wrote something very evocative. And I remember whoever the judge was who said this is not what you were supposed to do because she wanted historical references, you know, some more scholarly researched paper. But she said, you know, you really can write. This is--you're not going to win, but you really can write and you should do that, and I never forgot that. Speaker 1: --Okay. Is Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] family there's a school for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Emancipated slaves and Indians, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --Negroes and Indians, yeah. A lot of people don't realize that. Speaker 2: Well, there were--yeah, you know when I read about--the stuff that I read about the founding, of course, focused much more on the black students on the emancipated slaves. Story_ID: 39844 Speaker 1: Right. Okay, so after four years at Hampton, was there anything special about graduation? Speaker 2: Yeah, glad to be out. Graduation was mostly like (indicating bye) for me. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what was your plan? Speaker 2: Well, I had been offered a job at Double Day as an editor and for almost no money and I was probably going to take that, and I remember walking through the journalism department and seeing a flyer about a program at the University, The Booth Scholars Program at the University of Michigan [The University of Michigan-Ann Arbor], and if you got in, you would have a free ride for graduate school, well, not a free ride because you became a teaching assistant, you would teach freshman. And I thought, you know, it's a big ten school, and I thought, okay I didn't get the big school experience at Hampton--Michigan, hmmm. So I applied for that and I got it and so I went to U of M [The University of Michigan-Ann Arbor] for a couple of years. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you graduated '75 (1975) so you go back-- Speaker 2: Seventy-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, was that '75 (1975)? Speaker 2: --I graduated in '72 (1972), oh yeah, '76 (1976) from-- Speaker 1: Seventy-six, okay. Speaker 2: --Yeah, four years later, yeah. Speaker 1: Seventy-six from Hampton? Now, BA [Bachelor of Arts] in journalism, I guess, right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Then you go on to the University of Michigan? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So who was your advisor at the University of Michigan? Speaker 2: Charles Eisendraft(ph) was running our masters program. Speaker 1: And you know was it a valuable experience? Speaker 2: It was great. It was--I just saw Garth Crewal(ph), who was one of my fellow students, who was a journalist in Northern Michigan for a long time. You know, there were two other Booth scholars, they were black women, we were the three black people in the program and everybody else was white, but it was--it felt like a really intimate and warm connection between us, you know, we were always together, and so we go, travel to different news events or places where we wrote, you know, to the Upper Peninsula or--yeah, we were always together, so we had all these amazing conversations about race and about culture and about our personal histories and about the world. I just found it a very stimulating and exciting place. Ann Arbor [Michigan] is a fun, safe, just alive city. It was so many students and so many, you know and numerous film collectives and, you know lectures and it was just ideal. You know, great food and I became a resident director at a dorm, at Helen Newberry Dorm and so--and I remember being happy about that because I finally had a bunch of little sisters, because I'd always wanted a sister, surrounded by boys my whole life and--yes, so Michigan was good. Story_ID: 39845 Speaker 1: All right. Now, did you get involved in any activist type activities? Speaker 2: Not that I remember. Yeah, it was Michigan in the '70s (1970s). There's lots of meetings and lots of stuff to drop in on and taste and partake of, but I wasn't an activist by any means. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So what kind of journalism were you really thinking about? Speaker 2: Feature writing. You know, I always liked features, because that's where you're going to get--that's the kind of writing where you burrow underneath the surface and where you talk to people at length about their lives and about what's really happening. You know news just didn't interest me as much as features. And I loved that you could write with vividness and color. So that's what I wanted to do. Speaker 1: So what was your thesis about? Speaker 2: You know we didn't do theses at Michigan. That was a-- Speaker 1: Now, you know, that seems funny that a writing, I mean a journalism-- Speaker 2: Oh, you know what, I don't--my brother was killed while I was at Michigan, and so I don't remember. I barely remember. I mean I completed my courses and did fine, apparently, but I just have no memory--I have so little memory of that last year. It's a blur. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So if I wrote--I don't know what we did that served as a thesis. Maybe I did write a thesis, I just--you know that consumed everything. Story_ID: 39846 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us what happened. This is in 1977? Speaker 2: I was the "RD" Resident Director at Helen Newberry, and I was talking to my mother [Geraldine Mae King Britt] on the phone, and somebody interrupted, and the voice said this is the coroner, is this Geraldine Britt, and she, yes, you know, agitated because it's the coroner--coroner's office. And she says--and I'd say where's Bruce, you know, which is my little brother. And growing up Darrell had been my favorite. And he was three years older than me, and he was, to me, he was perfect. He was--he's the one that looks like Bill Cosby, and he was so funny and dynamic and he was an athlete and he--he was concerned and compassionate, he adored me. And that someone so exalted and so perfect, could let alone--could just notice me, let alone think that I was great, he was so special to me, and he went--when he went to IU [Indiana University-Bloomington], I got closer to my little brother, Bruce, and I'm somebody who always had someone close and Bruce became that person. And so when I found out that it was Darrell who'd been shot, and by the time I had said where's Bruce, he was gone, and I felt like he could have heard that, that I was more concerned about Bruce than about him. You know, so much of what I'm gonna say about this period isn't really rational and it isn't sensible, it's just heartfelt. It's just what we've been talking about, the circuitous, hidden, inexplicable places that people go when the inexplicable happens. Story_ID: 39847 Speaker 1: And I just remember feeling tremendously guilty about having said, "where's Bruce" and it was Darrell, because we hadn't been as close. And I had lamented that I felt bad about that because--because he had been so important to me, and I knew the trajectory, I knew what would happen, we would become adults and we would get close again, because my father and his sisters would see, you know, we would go over to their homes and we would--and their kids, you know, my cousins, we were all friends. And I knew that would be what would happen with us. I didn't worry so much about us not being close. And with him gone there was no way to repair that and--and that's when, you know, I decided on some level that I should have protected him. You know it's not a sane, like I said, it's not rational, the hearts not a rational organ. But I just remember feeling so much guilt that he had been killed and that because when, and my book is about this, about you know I don't call it survivor guilt, but it's you know when you lose someone in a way that doesn't make any sense, you blame yourself, it's like kids who blame themselves, little kids for their parents' divorce even maybe even big kids. And when he had been--when we had been close and we were in touch everyday and I knew his secrets and he knew mine, he was safe. And when I let him get away from me, you know, out of my sight, that's when this terrible thing happened. Story_ID: 39848 Speaker 1: Now he [Darrell Britt] was shot by Gary [Indiana] police? Speaker 2: Yeah, under very suspicious circumstances. I don't know what happened. You know, maybe the story they tell is true. I don't know. It doesn't comport with anything I know about my brother. I mean I--but I marvel at human behavior every day, I mean, we are--people are capable of anything, so what they're saying could be true, but they said that, I don't believe it. Most of the people who--I don't know anyone who knew Darrell who believes the story they told. They said that there was a man in Miller [Gary, Indiana]. It was a neighborhood that had once been all white, upper upscale, very close to Lake Michigan, nice homes, a place we used to go, to go to the beach where there'd be parties out there, fancy parties. And he was living and he had an apartment there and it was turning from mostly white to mostly black, so there was some tension. A white homeowner looked outside and saw my brother and said that he was trying to open his truck door and came out and said, what are you doing, and this is the way he told it. He said that my brother [Darrell Britt] said, I have to get home, will you take me home, and he seemed agitated. And the guy said, and as I remember it from the reports that I read, he said, wait here, you know I'll take you home. And he went inside and called the police and said I'm holding someone who tried to steal my truck. And so that's the expectation that the police came with. And when they came, they said they found Darrell across the street in a ditch and that he was--he had, I believe it was a plastic baseball bat, a brick and a length of chain. I don't even know how you carry all those things. And they said he had a cooking pot, an aluminum cooking pot on his head. And that he attacked them. So this is the story. I'm in my dorm in Michigan. This is, you know, when--when I've heard that a brother has been shot then I immediately think it's going to be my oldest brother, Steve, because he was the wild one, he was the outlaw, the one who, you know, wore the, you know the big platforms and the pimp hat and the chain with the coke spoon, you know, he was the cool, hip, more out there one. And Darrell didn't live dangerously, you know, as far as I knew. And so when we heard the story, you know, this is--so it was inexplicable that he'd been shot. So then you hear the story which makes it--takes it from inexplicable to surreal. And so the assumption is that he has to have been high, because that's the only explanation for that kind of behavior, and this is the '70s (1970s). And the toxicology, you know, autopsy reports come back no drugs, no liquor. So to this day I don't know what happened in that ditch, or why it happened. You know I've heard, you know, there are people who say he was--that he was shot. There's the cops' account, there's all these rumors. I have no idea what happened. Story_ID: 39849 Speaker 1: So nobody else saw it or stepped forward to say that-- Speaker 2: No. And so, you know, it's been very--we just had the Trayvon Martin verdict. And when that happened, you know, every killing like that evokes my brother for me. And that one--and I remember feeling just wishing that his parents could know that in the midst of this unimaginably, tragic event that the good thing was that it was the age of technology and there was the phone recording and there was the friend who heard, that there was some record to refute what the official record was going to be. It clearly wasn't enough because of the laws in Florida. I just, you know when you're left with nothing, nothing except an official report that makes no sense, and I wasn't special, you know, they're countless black families and brown families that are presented with a story that doesn't comport with anything they know about the person that's been killed and so you know I just felt for them, you know, for Trayvon's mother and father. At least you have that. And you have--because of the clear problematic nature of a 17 year old being stalked by someone who's what eight, nine years older and outweighs him by 30 pounds and who follows him, despite being told not to, you have a tremendous, huge outpouring of empathy and sympathy and support. Whereas most families are like mine, you're just left bewildered and confused and you know forever mystified. And you know and those things in addition to the grief at losing someone whose beautiful and promising and who you'll never get over. Speaker 1: So police inquiry into this ended up exonerating the officers, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But then later-- Speaker 2: They were both kicked off the force for things unrelated to this. The next day after Darrell was killed, one of the cops beat up an Hispanic suspect and explained it by saying he was upset because he had never killed anybody, and so one was kicked off the force for burglary and the other for child molestation. Speaker 1: So these two cops weren't the best balanced cops-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know that people would say they were Gary's [Indiana] finest. I know very little about them. Story_ID: 39850 Speaker 1: --So, you wrote about this some years later? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I wrote about it in a Pulitzer-nominated, you know, my paper put it up for the Pulitzer. It was the first thing I'd ever written about Darrell [Darrell Britt]. It was twelve years after he died. I just couldn't--you know, when I talked about not knowing what--whether I even wrote a thesis, you know, those next years--you know that's the thing. You know when these kinds of tragedies happen, there's a lot of focus on the victim. But when you take this living piece of the puzzle that is your life, you know, this part of the tapestry that is your family, you snatch it out of there like that. You know, what's left behind isn't neat or whole and you know Darrell's death affected and changed everything. You know, it has everything to do with the pieces that I write today and with my--the woman that I am today. And you know it affected all of us differently. And so when you think about all these stories, all these cutouts from all these family tapestries, you know the effect of that on a community, you know, and on, especially the women left behind has been a subject that I've often explored. Story_ID: 39851 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, we'll come back to it at a certain point, I guess, when we get to 12 years later. But was this on your mind? You work for the Detroit Free Press, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So how did that position come about? Speaker 2: Neal Shine was the, I think, manager editor of the Detroit Free Press. And nobody--you know, the Free Press was considered the better paper by most, not everybody, obviously, but most Detroiters. The more, you know, the one with the better, we thought better writers, because Betty Deramus was an amazing writer for-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --You know about her, yeah for the news and some others, Denise Crittendon and--but the Freep [Detroit Free Press] was a get that nobody had gotten out of our program and everybody would have loved to work there. And Neal Shine came to speak to our Masters Program, and I just remember him. You know, once Darrell had been killed, I was sort of fearless and I--you know in some ways I wasn't, I mean in some ways I was more terrified than I had ever been in my life because, look at what happened, but another way I just remember shooting off all these really tough questions and afterward him asking Eisendraft about me and me being invited for an interview. And I got the job and it was, you know, astonishing and incredibly empowering to be offered a job at the Freep [Detroit Free Press], you know, the exalted, in my eyes, Free Press. And so I went there and wrote you know for what was the metro section for style and became a fashion writer too. Story_ID: 39852 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So remember any of your articles from those days what you were writing about in terms of style? Speaker 2: I remember on the news desk writing about Ebonics, about black English, and that there was a famous sort of trial about--about whether this was a legitimate language. And that was an interesting thing to write about. Speaker 1: I believe-- Speaker 2: Geneva Smitherman-- Speaker 1: --Yes. Speaker 2: --Was the--was the educator who was--sang, talking about this language and its vibrancy and its legitimacy and whether or not this trial that was going to determine whether or not that was true. So that was fun to cover. Speaker 1: She taught at Wayne State, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, that's my memory. Speaker 1: Well, what did you say about, I mean, what was your take on it? Speaker 2: I just remembered trying to write in Ebonics and it looking like a Kyle Onstott novel, and it just looking ridiculous and the difficulty as a journalist to try to write that. And I remember going to schools and talking to kids and trying to transcribe language in a way I never had before, because what you do with, you know, reflexively with most language is clean up a little bit. You know, no matter who it is. And the whole idea was not cleaning it up. And just the difficulty of trying to--it would be difficult to write--you know, it almost doesn't matter who it is. Very few people speak in perfectly formed sentences without flourishes and without accents and without things that if you were writing it verbatim and trying to describe those little nuances, it would be weird. You know, writing in dialect is hard, which is why a lot of books that are written in dialect can be tough going. And so trying to do this for a newspaper, I just remember that being so hard. Speaker 1: So the position of Geneva Smitherman was that children should be allowed to use Ebonics in classrooms? Speaker 2: As I recall it was more complicated than that. And I don't remember the fine points of it right now. I just remember it was about the legitimacy. Because you know back then, everything was about so much, like I talked about before, so much about us had been deemed illegitimate that the idea that our language like our hair and our skin and our noses and our relationships and all these other things that there was a reason we spoke that way and there was poetry and beauty in that even if was--it could be difficult to understand and so just--but how do you teach if that's your model. So it was really a fascinating back and forth. Story_ID: 39853 Speaker 1: Now, what were you taught in terms of how to speak? Speaker 2: Oh, proper. Are you kidding me, Geraldine Britt's daughter, who grew up around all those white people and who--who had been made because of her position in life to feel like she wasn't as good. And because, you know, I mean, most middle black kids--middle class black kids were taught to speak correctly to--to not use too much slang, to not--you know, to use proper grammar, because it was important. We were the ones who were going to make it all right. We were the ones who were going to prove even more than they did the worthiness of people of color. And so we had to be better. The idea was we would be better than white people so there could be no question of our worth. And I mean--and I know a lot of my peers were taught that. And when I--I remember as a kid, you know, it was okay to leave--just to say "goin" and everybody, you know, "I'm goin to the store" and not make it so sharp. But once that I knew that when I got around white people that I had to up that game and make it more crisp and make it more to perfected, because I--all of us--we were representatives. We weren't kids, you know, we weren't teenagers, we weren't students, we were representatives. And that's a double-edge sword. You know, it can help you to succeed and to be accepted and to work harder to earn whatever it is you're after, but it can also make you incredibly tough on yourself and a perfectionist and other things that aren't fun to be. And it's not like necessarily that it's driven from your own sense of excellence, so much of it is trying to disprove other people's bad notions about you. So in that little--that little distinction is everything. So it's not so much that, and I can only speak for myself, you know, other parents may have framed it differently, other kids may have taken it differently, but it felt to me like it was--I had to represent the race. I had to because, you know, we all felt that. I think in some ways. Because if something bad happened the first thought was, "Oh, I hope a black person didn't do it." You know somebody climbs up on a bell tower and shooting people, don't let it be a black person, because they already think that we're so bad. So, the main problem with that is that no human being is perfect. No human being is going to live a disappointment free life. And it's tough enough being human and making mistakes and hurting people and hurting yourself. It's worse when you feel like you've let the race down. Now you haven't just let your family down and your friends and your community whoever you are, but you've proven them in a small way, right, that they, you know, they can look at you and feed their fantasies of your inferiority. That's not a fun place to be. Story_ID: 39854 Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is the '70s (1970s), mid to late '70s (1970s), I guess, was the last part of the Black Arts Movement where there was a flurry of black books, a lot of black poetry, movies and so far Blaxploitation movies were out, fun music was the king of the music and all of this is going on up until, I guess, it kind of starts waning in 1980, I guess. So I'm just putting it back. Do you have any favorite stories in that era? Speaker 2: You know, I was inculcated. You know, I was in that camp of let's represent the best. And so Blaxploitation didn't appeal to me because it was so much cursing and drugs and sex, you know, that wasn't about love and romance and so all that stuff didn't really excite me because it just seemed street. And I had been raised, you know, to be higher than that. You know to be really more and not so much scholarly or intellectual, but more--I was just more mainstream, I was a pretty mainstream kid and young woman. And so that stuff was interesting and exotic, but it didn't reflect me. So I didn't identify with it. You know, I identified with the clothes and the fashions and the, you know, the snap and the sizzle of it but not--I didn't feel like, you know, the gangster thing and all the, you know, things like "Coffee" and you know Pam Greer and you know "Super Fly" and all the drugs and--that just wasn't me. You know, I was a good girl. From the time I was a little girl I mean that was just my whole persona. I embraced that. So I was interested by that, but I was as much repelled by it, because it was sort of scary to me and then it felt to me like that stuff we didn't want to be identified with. Story_ID: 39855 Speaker 1: Now did you live in Detroit during this period of time that you worked for the Free Press? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Although I think--by that time I was more of an adult and I had--you know, I'm thinking more college and maybe, more college and even before that as a high schooler, looking at those kinds of images and being fascinated but being repelled, because it was just too harsh for me. That wasn't who I was. Speaker 1: Okay. The country shifted a little bit towards the time that you were in Detroit-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Seventy-eight, '79 (1979), '80 (1980), I guess. So, you were at the Free Press for how long, was that until '82' (1982), is that right? That's what we have here. Speaker 2: When I left to go to--did I leave there to go to USA Today, is that right? Yeah, I did. That's right, USA Today, which was brand new. And the industry didn't know what to make of it because it was short writing and lots of color. You know newspapers were in black and white forever, and suddenly there's this paper every day with color pictures and really short stories and, you know, lots of splash and so it was radical. And by that point I was married and had a son, a small son, and my marriage was falling apart because my husband got caught up in coke, which a lot of young men do. I don't know that--people don't remember that there was a time when even news organizations used to report that it wasn't addictive. They said coke was the perfect drug because it was clean and you know made you work harder and it wasn't addictive. And it was one of the most addictive substances known to man. And so many people got caught up and he was one of them. And you know, perfectly good guy, and we weren't a good match at all. I just--I think after Darrell [Darrell Britt] died, I really wanted some stability and wanted to feel connected and to get my life in that way going. And he was an executive for an automaker and had a good job, great car, right, you know, middle class guy, suits, the whole presentation. In some ways reminded me of my dad. He was quiet, you know, even physically a little reminiscent of my dad in that, you know, slim. And so it wasn't a really good match, but by the time I got an offer, my friend Joe Urschel(ph) who had been a co-worker at the Free Press [Detroit Free Press] had gone there as an editor, and his wife, Donna, had been one of my best friends. And so when he called me and said we'd like to hire you, you can be an editor, you can be a writer, just we'd like you to come, it just felt like a gift from God because my marriage was dying and I didn't know how to help my husband and it was clear that I needed to leave and get my--and I had--at that point I had a baby. Story_ID: 39856 Speaker 1: All right. So 1982 USA Today, now, did you relocate to Florida? Speaker 2: It was based here. That's how I got to Washington-- Speaker 1: Okay, Washington. Speaker 2: --It was in Rosslyn, Virginia. Speaker 1: So you know he got started in Florida, I heard, anyway? Speaker 2: Maybe, but he opened the main offices here. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So were you a staff writer at USA today? Speaker 2: I was an editor. Speaker 1: Editor, okay? Speaker 2: For the life section. I figured I'd been a writer all my years in journalism. I want to try editing and just see what that--the idea of writing for a paper where stories were eight inches long just wasn't that appealing to me. I mean in the course of being here a couple of years, like a year and half into my tenure, I went to Los Angeles [California] to be the LA Bureau Chief and a back-up film critic and so I had that and so I did become a writer eventually. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And I did features. You know I got to interview stars, you know, Kevin Costner and Don Johnson and Elizabeth McGovern. It was really cool. It was a fun job. Speaker 1: Okay. This is all during the '80s (1980s)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean Don Johnson, Miami Vice was at its height. The one we wanted to get most was Eddy Murphy but couldn't get him. He was too big. Speaker 1: Too big to do an interview with USA Today? Speaker 2: He was too big. He was so--he wouldn't talk to anybody except--I don't know what the criteria was to talk to him. Speaker 1: Now this is the era when Spike Lee's movies are starting. Speaker 2: Yeah. I interviewed Spike several times. You know, lots of really, you know, Forest Whitaker and lots of interesting people. Story_ID: 39857 Speaker 1: Is there a favorite story from this era, or a good story from some interview that you did? Speaker 2: My favorite story from the era was a quote that I never forgot, and it was--I was interviewing Barry Manilow. This is at the height of his fame. And we meet at a restaurant and he's a very nice guy. And I remember asking him, "So are you really a nice guy?" And he said, "I'm as nice as anyone can be who gets his ass kissed twenty four hours a day." Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And that's one of the best quotes I ever heard. Because if anything's going to make you not behave like a nice guy as athletes and entertainers and celebrities and politician show, day after day after day is getting your butt kissed twenty four hours a day. So that was an incredibly wonderful answer. Speaker 1: That is. That's a thoughtful answer. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Do you have a formula for interviewing a celebrity? Speaker 2: You know it's like with anyone else, you try to find the common ground. I remember being assigned an interview with Pee Wee Herman [Paul Reubens]. And this is, you know, when Pee Wee's Playhouse is huge, but my kids don't really watch it, and I don't really know much about him. I just know he's--you know, I've seen pictures. I know he's a strange looking guy and I don't with the pancake makeup and the little suits, and I just didn't know much about him, and I got this interview at sort of the last minute. So I'm going out to interview him and the traffic is terrible and I get there late, which is--which you never want to happen. And so he's clearly miffed because he's had to wait, and nobody wants that. And it's clear that I don't know nearly as much as I should to be conducting an interview. It was just one of those horrible moments as an interviewer. You feel like I should have had my stuff together somehow even though I don't know how I would of, you know, feeling really terrible. And so I ask him, and I say, well, I haven't--clearly haven't seen the show as much as I wish I had, but what strikes me about it is the diversity on it. And as someone who grew up not seeing enough of that, especially as a small child it's so cool to me that to know that little kids who watch your show are going to see this world where there all these different colors and kinds of people, you know, starting with you, because he's so clearly different. And you know and Larry Fishburne, I think, was one of the cast then and-- Speaker 1: Right, he was a cowboy-- Speaker 2: --And this guy who had been sullen and uncommunicative, lit up and it was like I found the common ground. It was clearly a sincere question. It's one of my questions sort of tipped off that I really didn't know my ground, but that I did know. And he talked about growing up as a kid and not feeling as safe and as one of the, you know, one of the regular people and how--then that taught him the importance of diversity. And so it's always been, especially since then, but that was a really good lesson about just find whatever that common ground is. Because people want to tell their stories, you know, we want to do that, and if you give them a safe place to do that, you know, a lot of them will. Story_ID: 39858 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: With celebrities the hard part is that their interviewed so much and that they will come up with canned answers. They don't really have to think. And you could always tell when you're getting that. There's a blankness or a deadness and trying to get--to push people past that to ask a question in a way that gets you something a little surprising and spontaneous and more genuine. Speaker 1: Okay. The '80s (1980s) saw of the rise of Denzel Washington too. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So did you ever get a chance to interview him? Speaker 2: I interviewed Denz [Denzel Washington] for the Post [The Washington Post] for the style section. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was almost like Eddy in that he was so popular that it was hard to get him. And I remember I really wanted to talk to him, and so I had--the fourth piece I wrote when I came to the Post [The Washington Post] was I told you about my brother. It was about the value of a black life and how's Darrell's [Darrell Britt] death, you know, way before Treyvon Martin, taught me the lesson value, and I sent that to his publicist who sent it to him, and so he consented to meet with me. And I remember him asking me about that piece in a very engaged and interested way and liking him and finding him thoughtful. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 39859 Speaker 1: So what got you to leave Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] for Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: Style section of the Washington Post. It was the Holy Grail, if you're a feature writer. You know it had this national--this international reputation as a place that wrote with verve and insight and reverence and wit. And you know winning prizes, and it was sort of considered the best feature section in the country. And so the idea of writing for that was, you know, I really wanted that. And so when I got a job offer to go there, it was no way I was turning that down. Speaker 1: Well let me ask you, we discussed this before we started the interview, but I guess the same year that you started with USA Today was the year or maybe within a year of what happened to Janet Cooke with the Post [The Washington Post], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--I just remember when she won the Pulitzer for "Jimmy's World" for that story. And she was about my age and she was in her early twenties. She was smart and attractive and wrote, you know, with imagination and flare, and I just felt a kinship to her, like she's, I want to be her, I want to be like her, and so, and I think--and so many black journalists were so proud of her because no one had won that prize. And so when she crashed and burned like that, it was like, you know, once you hitch your wagon to somebody's star, that star falls, you're dragged down with it, and it was just devastating. And once again it was that sense of "how could she let us down." How could you squander all that good will and that treasured hard to get award. And it was just awful. And so when the Post was interviewing me, I remember going into--being interviewed by Lynn Downing(ph), who was the managing editor, and you know the famed Ben Bradlee, you know, of Watergate fame, and you know, the interview's going okay, but it's not setting anything on fire, you know, any fires or anything. I'm feeling like it's going pretty well, but I--and I remember Bradlee asking me if I had anything I wanted to ask him, and I said, "Well, as somebody who was really hurt by Janet Cooke's--by the revelations about her, I can't help but wonder, you know, I'm a young black woman, she was a young black woman, did her bad example leave a bad taste in your mouth? You know, how do you look at black journalists now?" And so what had been a sort of standard issue, not very exciting interview, suddenly shifted, and he said--he said that may be the most painful experience in my life and just talking about the sense of betrayal and of the pain of his beloved Washington Post being besmirched by this story and you know all the examinations and you know the chortling. You know there're people who enjoy, you know, the high and mighty being brought down. And he said later, told somebody that that's what got me the job, that I asked that question and that we'd had that discussion. Story_ID: 39860 Speaker 1: That's interesting. Okay. So you started the Washington Post in 1989, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, the story about your brother was nominated for a Putlizer Prize? Speaker 2: By the Post [The Washington Post], uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It wasn't finalist, but it was, yeah, that was such an honor. And it was a really good piece. I'm really proud of that piece. It stands up pretty well. Speaker 1: Okay, that's 1990-- Speaker 2: I'm hard on myself. So when I like a piece, it's usually really good. Speaker 1: --Okay. At some point it says that you became a metro columnist, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--I kept writing opinion pieces, because I couldn't help myself. I always would see something happen. And I remember writing about the Clarence Thomas confirmation. I always want to call it trial, because it felt like a trial. And just the controversy about it and it had all these senators acting astonished, shocked, shocked that--that men came onto women, you know, during work, and it was just--it was so--nowadays, you know, we have a scandal a week. Back then it was more, you know, the senate, there weren't any women. And it was, you know, this bastion of basic white maleness. And we know what, you know, that much maleness means anywhere. You know there's going to be some of that stuff just because of human nature and these senators acting so agog at the idea that, you know, of sexual harassment. And it just felt like the height of hypocrisy. And I just remember watching it. It was like watching a soap opera. And so I wrote about that, you know, I wrote about black men in basketball, because I'd written about my dad. And I just wrote all these opinion pieces, and I just--but I was still amazed when Milton Coleman asked me if I wanted to be a metro columnist, cause, I mean, it was a dream come true had I dared to dream it. I didn't--the idea of writing opinion every day, you know, or twice a week was terrifying, because it meant putting myself out there and exposing myself. And I knew that I wasn't going to write the typical metro column with distance, because I really didn't know how to write like that, not opinion, it has to be personal, it has to be intimate. And there was nobody writing that column that I was reading. And I remember thinking, okay, I'll just tell him, you know, I want to write a weird column that goes to all these different places that nobody goes. He says you can write about whatever you want. I was like, dag(ph). He wasn't going to give me that out. And I was dating my husband at that point, who was also a journalist, and I remember telling him, he was at the Dallas Morning News, and telling him, you know what happened, Milton Coleman wants me to write a column. And he said that you were born to write a column, what are you talking about. And so I had to take it, because I knew the only thing--the only reason not to take it was just terror. So I took it. Story_ID: 39861 Speaker 1: Okay. So you said you wrote about Clarence Thomas. That's one of the columns, right? Speaker 2: I'm sure I wrote about him. And what I wrote about him before was an essay. I mean during his tenure, I'm sure I must have written about him. Speaker 1: Did you write about Mike Tyson. Well, that happened about the same Time? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I wrote about Tyson, I wrote about O.J. [O.J. Simpson] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Mike Tyson was accused of raping a young lady in Indianapolis [Indiana], I guess, at the Expo [Indiana Black Expo]? Speaker 2: --Yeah, the girl was, you know, an eighteen year old Sunday school teacher, a virgin. And I remember how there were all these black women who came out in support of Tyson. And I--it's a phenomena that I came to understand. You know Darrell's death in some ways made that understandable for me because of--there's this innate and reflexive need to protect black men because of our history, because ours are the men that get dragged into the night. I mean, we have that history from slavery and Jim Crow, and from, you know, my brother [Darrell Britt]. And so the idea that we have to protect black men and we have to support them no matter what, even in a situation like that where, you know, Mike Tyson had a history of violent behavior. You know with--because at that point, he'd been with Robin Givens and that didn't go well, and that people supported him, women supported him was wild. It just shows you, I think, how deep this protective impulse goes, how deep that history goes. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Marion Barry, wrote about him. You know there's always lots of stuff (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, in the early '90s (1990s) that's when Marion Barry's videotaped trying crack and-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, in the '90s (1990s) that was-- Speaker 1: --O.J. Simpson. Speaker 2: --O.J., wow. Talk about a great source of columns. Speaker 1: How many columns did you write about O.J.? Speaker 2: I have no idea. More than one. Story_ID: 39862 Speaker 1: Did you have an opinion, I mean, an upshot of what all that was about? Speaker 2: You know, so much of it is identity and, you know, race and you look at the reactions. I remember, you know, a lot of people talk about when the verdict was announced, because the buildup to it was unbelievable. It was almost like a pressure cooker, because it was so much tension and, you know, the trial was being examined in its most minute detail. And I remember that people felt that his guilt was a foregone conclusion. But my mom was watching it on TV and she said--and she was saying they aren't proving this case. And I'm like, of course he's gonna, sort of like with Treyvon Martin, the flip. A lot of people felt, of course Zimmerman [George Zimmerman] will be convicted, because he shot him and look at all--there's this and there's this and there's this. But you have to prove the case. And so when--when the verdict was announced, there was lots talked about and written about, about how in areas of the, you know, black areas there were cheers and there was just jubilation and white people were--white groups were astonished and bewildered and angry and that division--I remember when it was announced. I burst into tears. It just felt like a release. And I didn't know I had so many mixed feelings. And I remember talking to somebody who said that where she worked, this is a black woman, the division wasn't between black and white, it was between the, you know, economic and social classes in the workplace. So the people who were staff support, who were cooks, janitors, you know, lower-level assistants, they were the ones that were happy, and it was the managers, no matter what color they were who were more, (making a sound) surprised and bewildered. So that was interesting. Yeah, I mean that was just such an interesting--you know, anything, any major event, the divisions between the reaction are fascinating, you know, depending on who you identify with and why. Story_ID: 39863 Speaker 1: Okay. This is early '90s (1990s) also saw the release of Nelson Mandela, did you write about that? Speaker 2: I'm sure I did. I don't remember what I wrote. I just, "wow" what an inspiring walk. Remember that walk, where you just see him and he had so much dignity and so much humanity and so much warmth. And just to understand, you know that he was alive at all, and I don't know how he survived. And that he survived intact, you know, with his, not just physically intact, but with his soul intact, it was a miracle, and so inspiring and, you know, and I knew Randall Robinson who was--you know, trans-Africa was significant in the bringing down apartheid and in his release and he was a friend. You know I was just so proud of everyone who helped that to happen, and then to be able to be so proud of this amazing man. Story_ID: 39864 Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, you did write about him. They have an article here. You wrote an article about the widening gulf between middle class and the poor? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What were your thoughts? Speaker 2: I think that piece was about the every-day poor. Is that it? Is that the one? Speaker 1: Yes. The "Run of the Mill Poor." Speaker 2: "Run of the Mill Poor" and you know I remember I was in my car and a guy sort of stumbled in front of the car, and he was--I didn't know if he was drunk or if he was mentally ill, and I remember telling a friend about him, and my friend was saying, oh, yeah, the run of the mill poor, you know the ones who--it's okay for people to ignore. You know it's not the adorable children with the you know wide-eyed and, you know, it's the people who don't necessarily engender the sympathy, you know, the poor people who--whose suffering is just as real, you know, as sort of the more model poor. You know the ones who are struggling, working--it was just--I remember liking that column. I need to read it again. But I've never seen as many--you know, I've lived in Washington [Washington D.C.], as you say, since the Washington era, since the '80s (1980s), and I've never seen so many people on the street asking for money as today. And if I start writing a regular column again, that's definitely something I'm going to explore. Speaker 1: I know the early '90s (1990s), late '80s (1980s) actually, leading into the early '90s (1990s), saw a rise that crack epidemic in D.C. which was devastating. Speaker 2: Yeah. I've just never seen as many people, and maybe it's just where I live in Maryland, but they're at every corner, you know, so many busy corners now. You have multiple people. You know I always saw them in D.C. [Washington D.C.], but now it's a suburban phenomenon too, in a way it wasn't. Story_ID: 39865 Speaker 1: Okay. There's another column that got a lot of attention that focused on a Dr. Lee, George Bush's physician, right? Speaker 2: Wow. Oh, my gosh, I forgot--oh, my gosh, I haven't thought about that in years. Speaker 1: Tell that story. Now this is a personal story that you wrote about. Speaker 2: Man, I don't think I was--was I a columnist at that point? I think I was still in Style. Speaker 1: No, this was in '91 (1991). You were a columnist. Speaker 2: I think I became a columnist in '93 (1993). No, no, maybe I was. Anyway, I was at the, I think it was the White House Correspondents Dinner, and it was some major dinner, and you know, and I had--I'm feeling grown up and special and I'd gotten away from my kids and so it's a festive occasion and so I'm standing there talking to somebody and I'm suddenly off my feet, and I'm in somebody's lap, and I turn around and I'm thinking it's going to be a friend, somebody who I know. And I'm looking into the face of a stranger, you know, and even more weird, a white stranger. Because you know if it had been a black guy, I would think it was somebody who thought he knew me or--but this guy--and he was laughing and it was so bizarre, and I got away from him and stumbled away and said who was that? And somebody said that's the president's physician. I'm like "what?" And it was so bizarre. And I guess he was attracted to me and I don't know if it was a flirtatious move, I never understood quite what it was, if he--so I'm thinking did he think I was someone else and yeah, I was just basically--it was really disconcerting because I was swept off my feet and you know on one hand you're feeling in control and you know, and attractive and you're having that engaged kind of fun experience and then the next, you're sitting in a stranger's lap and so that whole sense of empowerment and adulthood and being in control is just gone, and it's like it was so weird. And so I just wrote about the weirdness of it. And I remember getting sort of a stilted apology that wasn't really an apology from him. Speaker 1: What did he say? Speaker 2: I just--you know, as I remember it, it was one of those, I'm sorry if you were offended kind of thing, you know, it wasn't you know, "I'm so" an abject--the kind of apology, I guess, I felt was warranted because I--it wasn't that I was hurt, I was just so shocked and so, you know, it was embarrassing. Speaker 1: I have a quote here from Dr. Lee. He said that around the white house, "The guys all think it's funny that I'm basically a minor-league hero. The women are all concerned that I'll be labeled a bad guy, but it's not going to happen. I had a perfectly good time." Speaker 2: See, I've--this is who I--I'm a nice person, and I made him nicer than he was. What a jerk. Yeah, he had a perfectly good time. But he did send me some sort of a note, again, one of those things, you know, sorry if--you know if somebody's sorry, if you were offended, they're not really sorry. And that note, you know, that quote shows that he wasn't sorry at all. He was a minor league hero for dropping a woman he doesn't know into his lap. Speaker 1: Okay. Not a big deal. Speaker 2: Not a big deal. Story_ID: 39866 Speaker 1: Okay. So anything else from--now you were at the Post [The Washing Post] until? Speaker 2: Oh my gosh-- Speaker 1: For a long time. Speaker 2: --Until four years ago. I was there forever. Speaker 1: Now, while you were there, there's the Rodney King incident out in L.A., as well, that's before O.J. and the subsequent riots out there. Did you have any special feelings for that story because you had lived out there for so long? Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember what I wrote. Race--writing about race, writing about the schisms and the connections between whites and blacks it really fascinates me, because it's really hard to do. And not a lot of people, to my mind, do it well. Because the impulse is to have a sort of armed camps, you know, bad guys, good guys. Usually that means black people, good guys, white people, racists, bad guys. And that's just to me life is--human beings are too complicated for that simplistic a response to be true, because there are black people who do, you know, who are intolerant and who behave badly, and there are white people who are generous to a fault and who--I mean, I had a neighbor, not a neighbor, but a good friend at USA Today, Anita Manning. She told me this story, and she was embarrassed to tell me the story. She has neighbors, a neighbor who had several kids. And the kids were in and out of her house and she saw them all the time. And so another person had said well we're doing a story, we need to talk to some black kids. And she said well, you know, do you know any? And she said I really don't. And they said your neighbors are black. And she said they are? And Anita's white, and she just hadn't noticed that the kids were black. Of the things that she noticed about them, you know, this one's tall and that one is funny, and that's the one who's an athlete. It just didn't register that they were black. I never forgot that. And I remember my friend, Donna's little girl, who became outraged when her mother referred to one of her friends as black and she's like, no he isn't. And she said, yes he is, and she said no, he's light brown, said, no, no, no--trying to explain this insane concept that--and so there are people who really believe that's not a--what Anita said couldn't be true, because they think it's so overwhelming and so limiting and that it makes people so narrow that the possibility that someone would notice, but I know her and she's a really good heart. And she was embarrassed even to tell me this. It wasn't she told me this was pride like she was bragging. Story_ID: 39867 Speaker 1: So in this world where human beings are capable of so many off the chart wonderful and horrific things, anything's possible. And so to write about race in very, limited, narrow ways, to me, feels like a missed opportunity. So I want to write about it, or I'd like to write about it with as much nuance and subtlety and open-heartedness as possible. So when you ask me about pieces that's always my goal is to write about it in unexpected and fresh ways that acknowledges the humanity of everybody involved, and that doesn't--you know, I don't think to pretend, you know, that racism doesn't exist is ridiculous. What doesn't get written about as much as how black people have absorbed it and how we, you know, how we so often reject our own and about how, in ourselves, you know the kids who still think they have bad hair. I'm parsing the term racism, but prejudice against the characteristics that make us black. You know there are things that can make you believe that we don't value ourselves as much as we should. We worry a lot about how we're valued or devalued by white people, and you know most--and I cannot say that we don't care about that, but I think a lot--some people are way more focused on their prejudice than how it affects us, how we absorb it, how we treat ourselves, how we treat our families, how we treat each other. So nothing in human life is simple. And so race is as complicated as everything else. Story_ID: 39868 Speaker 1: Okay, so go ahead and tell us about the photos. Speaker 2: This is Donna about age eight. Speaker 1: Nine. Speaker 2: Nine, okay. Speaker 1: Sixteen, fifteen, fourteen, what do you think? Speaker 2: I think you were about 15 then. Speaker 1: Okay. That's my mom. Speaker 2: That's me. You don't want that. Speaker 1: That's you when I was growing up. They talk about you, they talk about you. Speaker 2: Give her full name so we know? Speaker 1: Geraldine Britt. Speaker 2: That makes sense. I was how old there? Speaker 1: Well, she was about, what? Mom [Geraldine Britt] looked so young. Speaker 2: Don't put that in. I don't want that in. Speaker 1: You don't want this in? Speaker 2: Yeah, you looked about-- Speaker 1: I think I was, let me see, that was in 1980s. So how old was I in the '80s (1980s)? Speaker 2: You may have been in your late forties, in your forties? Speaker 1: In the '80' (1980s)? Speaker 2: You don't--you look like you're--no, you couldn't have been 60, though, may have been in your 50s. You looked incredibly young your whole life. Speaker 1: That's me in about-- Speaker 2: That's when you got married. Speaker 1: --So around '92-4 (1992-1994). I got married in '93 (1993). Speaker 2: Okay, '94 (1994), okay. Speaker 1: Ninety-five. Speaker 2: That's Donna. Ninety-four. Speaker 1: Probably later than that. Speaker 2: Oh, now, you have to tell me, Donna. Speaker 1: That's fourth grade. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. So what were you then? Speaker 1: So, ten, eleven? Speaker 2: And this is Angela Davis. Speaker 1: That's my high school graduation. So I'm eighteen. Speaker 2: That senior picture, so eighteen there. Afros were in then. Speaker 1: And that's me with my sons, Hamani. That's Hamani, H-A-M-A-N-I, and Darrell, D-A-R-R-E-L-L, and they were--he was about four. Wait, this was in Detroit, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: He's around five months, so that means he was three. Speaker 2: Three, uh-huh. Oh, that's me, when I got--that's me, that's me-- Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-six. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's 1946. Speaker 1: That's when you met dad. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I keep telling that story, so. Speaker 2: They ought to have a picture of her father, he was handsome. He was an extremely good-looking man. Speaker 1: So that's my grandmother, great-grandmother-- Speaker 2: Great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Nana. And I talk about her. Speaker 2: That's Nana, and these are-- Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh, that's Joe Davidson. Speaker 2: --Is that who that is? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Joe. And that's Kevin, my husband. Speaker 2: And me, Geraldine Britt. Speaker 1: And that's my mom and my dad. So that's Geraldine [Geraldine Britt] and Elwood [Thomas Elwood Britt]. Speaker 2: But that's not the picture I wanted. You the picture I wanted, Donna, the one that-- Speaker 1: Well, there's pictures-- Speaker 2: --We have when we were married. Speaker 1: --You know what you really should get a copy of my book and there's good pictures in there. Speaker 2: Who's on the upper left. Speaker 1: Oh, that's me with her two oldest brothers. Don't put that in, that's too washed out. Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear). This is me when I won best column for that one you were going to ask me about-- Speaker 1: NABJ[National Association of Black Journalists]? Speaker 2: The NABJ Convention. Speaker 1: Oh, that's at the World's Fair. Okay, that was nineteen-- Speaker 2: That's mom [Geraldine Britt]. Speaker 1: --That's me. Speaker 2: Me and Darrell. Speaker 1: All right, Darrell [Darrell Britt] was what? Speaker 2: He's looks about five. Speaker 1: Okay, well, he was born in what year? Speaker 2: He was born in '85 (1985). So about '90' (1990), before I got married. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm in my what there, 60s, yeah? Speaker 2: Well, they can tell. That's me in college. Speaker 1: Oh, that's a college picture? And that's Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. That's me and my best friend, Gayle, the one who's--I mentioned her, she was the Ebony Fashion Fair Model, Gayle King. Speaker 1: Donna and Gail. Speaker 2: G-A-Y-L-E, King. Just like Oprah's friend. Speaker 1: I was going to say-- Speaker 2: That's a Martian child. Speaker 1: All right, that's Donna at about three months or four months. Let's say four months, she's about four months there. Speaker 2: That's me about seventeen. Speaker 1: Oh, wait a minute, Donna, wasn't that the year that Darrell died? That's '76 (1976). Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear sentence) Speaker 1: Probably, '76 (1976). Speaker 2: Okay. That's my brother, Bruce, mom, me in about what 10 years ago? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's in the 1990s. We already did that one. Speaker 2: That's me and Darrell again. Darrell's a little boy. He's about a year, right. Speaker 1: That was taken when you went up there to see, who was your friend, he was a (unclear), he used to be in Michigan. That was taken in Michigan. What's his name, Donna, older man, who was so fund of you? Speaker 2: Oh, Dale Sullivan? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, Dr. Sullivan. That's Kevin [Kevin Merida] and me with our-- Speaker 1: First child. Speaker 2: Well, my third, actually. Speaker 1: This son, Skye. Speaker 2: He's Skye, S-K-Y-E. Speaker 1: That's Sky Merida. Speaker 2: M-E-R-I-D-A. We haven't gotten to Kevin yet. Speaker 1: Kevin Merida. That's Donna and her oldest son. Speaker 2: That's mine. Speaker 1: Yeah. Isn't that mine? No, that's Darrell. Sorry about that, that's Darrell. Yeah, that's Darrell. Speaker 2: That's me and you. Speaker 1: That is not. That's Hamani, Donna. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. Speaker 1: That's Hamani. That's a beautiful girl named Britt (unclear sentence). Speaker 2: I got these shoes in Paris [France]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the one. I like that one. Speaker 2: That Skye. Speaker 1: That's Donna and her third son, Skye Merida. Speaker 2: He was so adorable. He's such a cutie. Speaker 1: This is Hamani. Speaker 2: This is good, because I talk about you being under the tree, you know, about you having this new life and how you grew up among white people. This is you in high school, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. I was about fourteen there. Speaker 2: Almost like Rachel (ph). Speaker 1: All right. That's it. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 674036 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Donna Britt, D-O-N-N-A, B-R-I-T-T. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 7th, 1954, Gary, Indiana (laughter). Speaker 1: And, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a writer and author. I don't really have a title these days (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Okay, and we are--oh, oh, what is today's date? Speaker 2: March 20th, yeah, 2014. Speaker 1: First day of spring. Speaker 2: That's what they tell us (laughter). Speaker 1: And, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my mom's [Geraldine Mae King Britt] living room in Silver Spring, Maryland. Story_ID: 674037 Speaker 1: We are continuing an interview that we started last summer-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and we, we were--we left off around 1995 or '96 [1996]. So I'm going to ask you about the big story of that era, the O.J. Simpson trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]. So, we'll start there and like, you wrote many columns about the O.J. trial, so-- Speaker 2: Everyone did. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It was irresistible. Speaker 1: Right, so just, just kind of summarize what happened and what your reaction was initially to it. Speaker 2: To summarize everyone's reaction, it's important to put (clears throat) O.J. in context and I don't know if I already did that but, I remember having conversations with friends about him being one of the three, four black people in this country that had transcended blackness, meaning, he was, he was truly beloved and I think people forget that in the context of all that's happened since and so--since he's become almost a villainous figure in a lot of people's eyes and, but then, between his good looks and his sterling career as a, as an athlete, his successful foray into films, his, the films, everyone in my generation, the commercials, everybody remembers of him running through the airport to get to the plane on time and he was just really a beloved figure. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'The Naked Gun' films-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he made fun of himself (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --where he plays Nordberg [Officer Nordberg] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was really on a roll and he was with, like a Diana Ross, was one of those people who was just beloved and so we could count on one hand who those people were. And so when it, when the news broke that there'd, his wife [Nicole Brown Simpson] had been discovered murdered and that there was this chase on the highway in this white car [Ford Bronco], I can't remember the make of the car, and the film of it, people were astonished and there were people lined up waving signs, supporting him, you know, on the belief that something, that he was being framed, not knowing what had happened but just letting them know, you know, sign, "We love you, O.J.," stuff that's almost inconceivable now since he's been so roundly rejected. And so part of it was just, everyone was stunned and watching this--what could be more dramatic, a major athlete slash Hollywood star, the two most iconic things you can be in this culture, being chased by police after the murder of his beautiful wife. It was not to be believed, it was cinematic (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And his wife was a blond-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a blue eyed blond, beautiful. So you had, you had race issues. You had sex. You had fame. You had sports. There was nothing this story didn't have and I was struck, initially, by the outpouring of support for someone who had--really did appear he must have killed his wife, which was further proof of how much he was loved. So as the weeks went by, and, you know, and more and more was found out, you know, the victims became less props and more human beings. You know, the friend who wasn't a lover but who had been perceived as one and who may have been killed because it was considered that he was one. You know, the, the wife who handled so much abuse, apparently, at his hands, and on and on, and the families of the victims and his, you know, and learning more about his family. So it became less cinematic and more an actual human tragic story, and I'm just talking about in the zeitgeist, and the way people--zeitgeist, and the way people looked at things, and it was just, I mean, and it continued to be an irresistible drama for people that kept building and building. Story_ID: 674038 Speaker 1: The trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995], my mom [Geraldine Mae King Britt] watched the whole trial and, you know, as people who went to work, like I did every day and who were, you know, I was raising a family and doing all the things that real people do, we tunneled into it through the news and what was reported. So when it came time for, and all this is building, you know, 'cause there's so much drama, so much discussion, you know, water coolers, everywhere, everybody's talking about this endlessly, and it's almost like a tension is building and not know--you know without us even understanding that, but you can't talk about something passionately for that long without that happening, whether you're aware of it or not. So when it came time for the, for the verdict, everyone was on edge, every television turned to this. You know, people at their jobs were not at their desks, it was an event, you know, to, not to just, you know, not to belittle the importance to the families, but it was almost like an event, the way the Super Bowl or something else is an event. And so when--and my mom had told me, "I don't think they're going to convict him [O.J. Simpson]," and that was not what was thought was going to happen by most people. The, the impression was, because there seemed to be a lot of evidence because there was no other suspect, because of lots of different reasons that he would be convicted. She says, "I watched it." She said, "I saw it, I don't think they're going to be able to convict him on the evidence." And I was like, "Oh, yeah, right." And so when it happened, after all this tension, when it was announced that he had been, that he had been exonerated, that he was not guilty, I burst into tears and, and that, at that point I realized how powerfully drawn into this I had been. Speaker 2: What--where were you when you heard that--about the verdict? Speaker 1: I was home that day and I was watching it on television because I was dividing my time between the office and home at that point because I had, you know, small kids at home, and I remembered hearing, you know, I wasn't at one of those work places where there was, and there was so much written about this, about the people who, about at work places where black and white staff people were in the same room and the white people groaned. It, you know--surprised with--and dismayed and black people cheered and what that suggested about divisions across race lines in America. I wasn't in one of those places and I remember later hearing about, from a middle class black woman, being in a similar room except everybody in the room was black and half of the people were administrators and executives and the other half were more work, you know, what do you call it, you know, staffers, you know, secretarial, janitorial, you know, more working class as opposed to more manager class, and there was a division then in those groups because she said that the black people who were managers were like, "Wow, I don't believe it." The others were like, "Yay," you know, the whole, "Whoa, he got off," and so there was so, it was so telling and so people had a field day with that story and with so many different interpretations about what it all meant. You know to this day, you can still get into a passionate discussion about that. Story_ID: 674039 Speaker 1: What did you think at the time, time? Speaker 2: Well I, I, you know, I burst into tears maybe three times in my life and that a celebrity trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] would bring that to me--so I was really struck by how, by what I was carrying and I think part of it was that I'm the sister of a brother who was killed. And so, as that person, I couldn't just be a black person and look at it as, and through those eyes, I also looked at it through the eyes of someone who was connected to someone who'd been taken in ways that were unfair and violent. And I think that's why it was so powerful for me, was because I could see both sides of it. You know, I'll never believe that Darrell [Darrell Britt] would have been killed under those circumstances had he not been black. So, I have personal experience with what feels like, you know, racism in the criminal justice system, but I also know what that death did to me and to my family and there's no discounting what those people, you know, who were killed, whether by O.J. [O.J. Simpson], you know, to this day who knows exactly what happened, but that loss is real and I, there's no way I could be dismissive of it. And so I felt so much tension and so I didn't feel happy and I didn't feel sad, I just felt, you know, I mean it's, I just felt, just awful, I just felt neither joy nor chagrin, just sort of a real, a deep sort of sadness over all that it did me, you know, all, the separations that it reckon- that it shone a light on, on the loss that everybody experienced, you know, including, you know, this, you know, O.J. was a--who, who's more entitled than a handsome athlete slash actor, and you know, this is somebody whose whole life has been spent being told how amazing, how wonderful he is and if he, you know, it was, it was, you know, tragic if, especially if he didn't do it. I mean, who knows. It just felt horrible for everybody. Speaker 1: But I think like as you, as you said in the beginning, he was a person who had, basically, alienated himself from the black community. Speaker 2: He had. Speaker 1: He would not be a spokesman for any black issue-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or would he, or would he, I don't think if invited would show up to speak to any during the height of his career and yet, black people were-- Speaker 2: I was so struck by that. Speaker 1: --overwhelmingly overjoyed when he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But this is what happens. It doesn't matter who the, you know, Clarence Thomas had actively distanced himself from the black community by--and during that, during his confirmation hearings, his sponsor, chief sponsor was white. His white--wife [Virginia Thomas] was, his wife was white. All the people who were rallying around him were white and yet many black people came forward to support him on the notion that he's going to, you know, his blackness will kick in, that it will be revealed that he has the same sort of cultural heritage that's so powerful for us, it has to be powerful for him and so we want him in there. And also the idea that he was, that people were trying to push him back. That, that raises something visceral in black people. The idea of rejection like that, because we feel so rejected so often, even on a daily basis, and historically rejected that when we see a black person being rejected, it, it, there's a visceral sense of protection. And so, and I mean and that happened with O.J., which was, really something to see, to see that this community that he had rejected--now I remember reading that when there was, I think it was the jury or some group of people that was influential in the trial was touring his home and how somebody put props of black photographs in the house, 'cause there weren't any (laughter), you know, and I don't know that this was, maybe this is an apocryphal tale but I remember reading that, and that, it didn't surprise me 'cause the only black people who'd be in that house were his kids, that I could think of. Story_ID: 674040 Speaker 1: Now this is something that I remember from the, from the era, earlier in the decade, we had the trial of, the Rodney King trial-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --white police officers put on trial for beating Rodney King, and it wasn't a rumor, you could see the video-- Speaker 2: Right, you could see it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --of them beating up a defenseless man over and over and over again and, you know, he couldn't even, you know, he couldn't get up. Every time he would roll over, he was beaten up on the sidewalk (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was doing, he was not resisting at all. Speaker 1: --and them being exonerated by the Southern California courts. So do you think in some ways that the trial was a, and this is an incident, I mean, you know, there's a, I think, one of Malcolm X's earliest quoted speeches when he's in California showing the body of a brother who was shot by the police, just stitches all the way down his body and that, I mean Southern California has a history of this, do you think that black folks were looking at it, I mean on the surface of the O.J. trial, but it seemed to me that they were looking at it as Johnnie Cochran versus the, the justice (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The white establishment. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Southern California especially. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. And not just Southern California, you know, it felt like, you know, for, for black people, often it feels like the entire country is on trial at moments like that and the thing about it is it's rarely the people who we're looking at, as iconic as, as O.J. Simpson was, at that point, he became a black man, not to, to black people who, who previously might have been put off by him or disgusted by his courting of white America, suddenly he became a brother and to white people who had held him to their hearts and loved him, as more and more was revealed, suddenly he became a black man in the way that all these other black men were, you know, with the same stereotypes, the same problems, the same issues. So, it was really interesting to watch him almost become not, you know, less and less himself and more and more a symbol to the point that when they did the cover--do you remember the, the infamous cover of Time magazine where they actually made his skin darker? It was just fascinating on so many levels. Like I said, it was irresistible to write about and to, to think about. Story_ID: 674041 Speaker 1: Yeah, the verdict [of People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] is in 1997 [sic. 1995] and, now I don't know, I don't have a sense of what happened for the rest of the '90s [1990s] here but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --(unclear), but in 2000, you basically take a break from writing. Speaker 2: From writing? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Said you're taking a writing break and you took a little hiatus just before the Bush [President George Walker Bush], Gore [Al Gore] election. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I'm wondering if that's, yeah, my, my son [Justin Britt-Gibson] graduated from, my first son graduated and I wanted to spend time with him before he went to college, and so I did take a break, but it wasn't a long one. That was a brief hiatus just to--now my youngest [Skye Merida] is about to go to college so it's a whole another (laughter), yeah, those kinds of things can be very, those kinds of moments can be very reflective for moms. Speaker 1: Did, did you write about the Monica Lewinsky case? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure I did, oh yeah. Speaker 1: What, what are your, what are your reflections about what happened to Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]? That I, that dominated the news for months and months. Speaker 2: You know, I tend to look at these things as more human, it's a human mess, you know, and I'm always interested when people act astonished when any human being gets caught up in a human mess. You know, so, like when, again, with the Clarence Thomas confirmation hearings and the [U.S.] Senate, which at that point was all male. You know, you have a hundred men professing complete and utter astonishment that someone, that, that, that there's harassment going on. It's like, what? What, there are men who say, you know, untoward things to women and, you're just watching that going like, wow, you know, what utter BS. And so, you know, Clinton, again, you know, he's a guy, a guy who's entitled, a guy who's used to, you know, who clearly had some issues with, with women and him getting caught up in something that we all knew that he was, it wasn't like, I mean, on the campaign trail, there were stories and scandals and so there was, it wasn't that big a surprise. I just remember being, again there're--all these stories, there's so many layers. There's the, the young girl who, who refuses to understand how she's viewed, who actually thinks she matters to this, to this guy, to this power- to the world's most powerful man. She actually thinks she matters and her saving address with, you know, and the wife [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. Oh my gosh, always the wife, and her steely determination to stick by him and just the palpable tension between them and what that had to do to her self image. Knowing that you're watching something that's going to be with her for the rest of her life. So, just so many layers of stuff. You know, the guy who has, what's considered a typical, certain kind of guy problem and how he, and his, the way he's trying to frame it in ways so it looks like something else. "I did not have sex with that woman, or intercourse, with that woman." So everyone's going, "Oh so, hm, what does that mean?" And you know, just so many interesting layers. So, there was a lot to write about there too. Story_ID: 674042 Speaker 1: It seemed like in the '90s [1990s], the country was taking a conservative shift. Ninety-four [1994] is the Newt Gingrich, Republican Revolution when they take over [U.S.] Congress and then the persecution of, I mean the prosecution of Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], who the black folks had called the first black president-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, until we got a black-- Speaker 2: An actual one (laughter). That was so inconceivable that we had to embrace Bill because no- nobody saw Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] coming. Speaker 1: So, which leads us to 2000 in the Bush [President George Walker Bush], Gore [Al Gore] election. Now you wrote about that with a lot of conviction about what should happen. Speaker 2: Yeah, I just, it was hard for me to see Bush as presidential material, you know, to this day. That's just my personal take on it. You know, if you're a columnist you know everybody, you know, the opinions are like, they say opinions are like everybody has one. I say, navels, because that's a better part of the body to site (laughter), but everybody has one and mine was that I just didn't see that and I thought, I thought Gore was a much better candidate. Speaker 1: Here's something that it just popped in my head based on your book ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt]. The diehards in Congress, the people that stood by Gore's--you know, that, that were against the [U.S.] Supreme Court-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --making a decision, the ones who stood by him. The toughest were the black women in Congress. The TV images of, you know, at the podium, almost refusing to stand down until the very, until he finally had to call them off. Speaker 2: Right. You know, I'm, I'm basically a conciliatory person. And so I actually understood his doing that and it wasn't until after he did that that I so regretted that he had done that. I had no idea what the consequences of that would be with, with getting Bush in office, with, with Iraq, with, with so many issues that were important to me that it, that he was, that Bush was in office and not Gore. You know it seemed at the time that it was, it was tearing the country apart and so as someone who doesn't like that kind of psychic violence, you know, the gracious sort of giving in in some ways made sense to me. I understood the impulse to that but it wasn't until later that I really felt, oh my god, he shouldn't have done that, he should never have done it, and that's, that's a moment that makes me look at those kinds of things differently. And I'm, I understand, and I don't know what it is, those black women understood that I didn't, you know, why they stood there and said, "No," you know, 'cause now I would say no, having watched what happened. Speaker 1: And they were closer to the, to what was going on than you or I but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm being guided by, you know, any, you know, I work for the media and I know that anyone who's guided, you know, the very best, most unbiased, most honest media, there's still things that, that we don't know and that we can't account for and today, with the Internet, you know, you have so much that's not unbiased, so much that's weighted and, and freighted and, I mean, I guess it's always been like that but you'd never really know all that's happening but, yeah, they knew more than I did and they were reacting on that knowledge. Story_ID: 674043 Speaker 1: 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. What was your, what did you, what was your take on 9/11? Speaker 2: I was, again, it was one of the days when I was working from home and I just remember looking at, you know, when you first heard the image, saw the image of a plane plowing into that tower [World Trade Center, New York, New York], you're thinking, somebody had a heart attack at the--something went wrong with the plane. And then it happens again and you're, and you're realizing we're under attack. You know, this is, this is terrorism and I just remember finding out where my kids [Justin Britt-Gibson, Darrell Britt-Gibson and Skye Merida] were, getting my little boy, my youngest, and just making sure everybody was safe and, you know, it's one of those things, one of those moments you'll never forget and, you know, and knowing that you're seeing, you're watching something that's changing everything, you don't have, there aren't that many moments like that. I remember being in the fourth grade and hearing that President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been killed and knowing, even as a little girl, this is one of those things that changes everything, 'cause I saw my teacher cry. I don't know if I mentioned that and I didn't know teachers could cry. So watching this and--you know, to this day, you know, the amount of time it takes, the most simple and maybe shallow consequences, how long it takes to get through the airport. Yeah, I remember living a half an hour from an airport. I can leave my house, you know--no, no, I lived eight minutes from National Airport [Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Arlington, Virginia], and I could leave my house a half an hour before my flight, get there, park, rush to the gate and get on the plane. That's inconceivable now, that you could leave thirty, forty minutes before a flight and get on. You know, it doesn't work like that anymore because of 9/11. So many--everything changed. People became more paranoid. The government became more paranoid. People who look a certain way and have a certain background, suddenly became much more suspect. Everything changed in ways that, though subtle and not so subtle. So that's what struck me was the, the amping up of fear, not that it didn't already exist, but to heightened levels, and I'm not sure how much, you know, it's leveled off but there's still residue from that. Story_ID: 674044 Speaker 1: Oh Iraq, yeah. Well, let's talk about Iraq for a minute. What, what were your feelings about the Iraq invasion? Speaker 2: That was an example when the, when the mainstream media seemed confused to me, and it was, I wasn't sure what to believe. And so it was, I, maybe I don't know if there were a lot of people who felt like me but I didn't know quite what to believe, you know, because, and this was early, you know, in the Bush [President George Walker Bush], you know, you're still hoping to believe your president. You're still hoping that the, that the country is moving in a, is making decisions that makes sense but I never, ever want American soldiers going, you know, so I was just, I just remember being confused and not, not liking it at all and feeling like this is a mistake but wondering if I was wrong. Speaker 1: Well, the two prominent black figures in that drama, the Iraq War drama, were General Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], who was secretary of the state then, and Condoleezza Rice (simultaneous). Speaker 2: And eminently, yeah, an eminently trustworthy man, and, you know, this is--the other things you talked about I felt much more certain writing about. This, but this was for me, and I don't know what was happening in my personal life because I'm always, no matter, if I'm writing, I'm still a mother. I still have kids [Justin Britt-Gibson, Darrell Britt-Gibson and Skye Merida] at home, I still have all the stuff to do that a mom does and so I'm, in those years, I'm very much depending on what I'm reading and what I'm hearing on the news and I just remember being confused by it. So, I didn't write about, about Iraq as much as I wrote about all these other things. Story_ID: 674045 Speaker 1: The average person doesn't--I mean, well a lot of people, well let's say this, a lot of people in the community, you go, in the black community, if you go in the barbershops and on the streets and stuff they, they don't, it's often, they often say that they don't trust what's in the newspapers. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They don't, you know, they don't-- Speaker 2: I know that, and I always found that so sad because as someone who worked for a newspaper and who tried so hard to tell the truth, and I was surrounded by people who worked really hard to tell the truth and to, and especially my minority colleagues, you know, to try to tell the truth about the black community and that was so much a part of the reason that I was writing and that I felt it was important that I write because I wanted to give a realistic and honest and authentic representation of what people who looked like me felt. And so every time I heard that it was like a dagger and, but, but, you know, I was someone who was, they say, you know, you never want to see the sausage getting made, right (laughter). And I know that, you know, I know enough about the media and not just at The Washington Post, I've worked at lots of different places and I know lots of journalists who are at other places, I just know that anything that any news, news organ gives you is going to be limited because people are limited, but I also knew that The Washington Post was trying its very best to give as authentic and true a portrait as it could and so to hear that always made me a little sad. I mean I understood it, I understood it, it's, you know, especially from people who have the history that we have. Story_ID: 674046 Speaker 1: All right, in terms of the Iraq War-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and, and, well other things that come out of the, came out of the Bush administration [President George Walker Bush], I mean a lot of people, you know, in the black community distrusted what they heard, but as we were saying before we had this little break, that a lot of people routinely say they don't trust the press and stuff and black people work in the press know that that's not quite the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what they want to hear but at the same time they understand why people don't (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I absolutely understand it. I totally understand it. How could, as a reporter who works hard to keep her biases, her concerns, her issues, her stuff out of her work in ways that will make me unfairly perceive anybody--as a columnist, I'm allowed to think whatever I want to think and to write pretty much what I want to write, but I know that I've read stuff that was colored by other people's biases and because how, how, how clean is anybody when it comes to that. We all have opinions that inform what we do, what we think, what we say, how we walk, how we stand, everything. And so, even the best journalists can't wash all that stuff out. So I know that and I know as a black person, I understand the unconscious biases and blindnesses that affect most Americans, black and white. So the expectation that, that the media that comes from largely white sources is going to be clean of that is ridiculous. There's no way I could expect that kind of purity. At the same time, I'm a journalist who's trying so hard and who's working around a lot of other people who are trying really hard to give people the best purest possible journalism. So, it puts me at a push, pull situation. So when it comes to some complex issues like Iraq where I'm wondering, okay, so is this, how much of this is about George, Jr. [sic.] or, you know, one, whatever number he is, wanting to fight his daddy's [President George Herbert Walker Bush] war, you know, his problems with Hussein [Saddam Hussein] and how much of this--but are there weapons of mass destruction and there's conflicting reports about that. So I'm, I'm also a mom who wants her kids [Justin Britt-Gibson, Darrell Britt-Gibson and Skye Merida] to be safe and her family to be safe and her country to be safe. So I didn't write about it that much because I didn't quite, because of my confusion about it. Speaker 1: You think of-- Speaker 2: And more about my, and the fact that I'm not a historically political sort of writer. I can write about the, when it comes to the nuances of politics, I'm cool, but when it comes to those hard facts about how things happened and when they happened, I'm not as, that's not my area. Speaker 1: I think of what--what I hear you saying is that the general, I guess, American culture in general, basically, was a overriding factor in how the media reported what was going on to the extent that almost every, I can, other than Amy Goodman or maybe The Nation or something, everybody was saying, "Well, we've got to go over there, if we have to do it, let's go, support the president, let's--," you know, Democrat and Republican, whoever. Speaker 2: Yeah, but then, but your gut is saying, what is, is this really the way it's been, being presented to me and that's a hard thing and, you know, I, I wonder if there was a time, I'm sure there was, when you really could believe what a president told you. You really could believe that the story--but you felt you could, I'm not saying you actually could, you felt you could trust that and now (laughter), you find out about so many truths about the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], about, you know, about Vietnam [Vietnam War]. I mean stuff that we never knew that, because it wasn't reported. And so now, everybody's mistrustful because we know we can't believe, or we wonder what we can believe, you know, and I, I feel blessed that, that I, that, you know, I'm still associated with The Post [The Washington Post] through my husband [HistoryMaker Kevin Merida] and I still feel like they do the best they can do and a lot of people aren't even trying that, you know. So, it's, it's, it's an interesting time for journalism. Story_ID: 674047 Speaker 1: Here's an issue that you would be more involved in, and in fact you did write about, that's the Bill Cosby issue, the Pound Cake speech-- Speaker 2: Okay, you've got to remind me of the Pound Cake speech. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was when Bill Cosby spoke before the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] on the fiftieth anniversary of Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and he, basically, criticized the black poor for a failure to take advantage of certain responsibilities and activities that they-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember all that, I just didn't remember the pound cake allusion. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was something about the, the guy stole a piece of pound cake. I don't know why he picked the pound cake, and he's rolling down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh my, yeah, Bill Cosby, oh my gosh. Bill Cosby, when he was young, he looked so much like my brother Darrell [Darrell Britt], who was killed, and so, and not only that, he was, he was so funny and so--again, he's one of those transcended blackness people who was beloved by everybody. And so he just had a special place in my heart and that, and his show, you know, the Bill Cos- 'The Cosby Show' was an amazing step, culturally, for black people because the man that the United States of America saw as the perfect picture of fatherhood was a black man. I mean, just saying that gives me chills 'cause that was, that was one of those things, almost like, like Barack Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] election, that was not to be believed. People would think black, a black man, a brother was the best possible, funniest, warmest, coolest, cutest, most connected to his kids, dad. So I love that on every level because it represented millions of really good black fathers who had gotten no kinds of, no kind of recognition for that. And so when he says something like that, you know, it's heartbreaking because--on a lot of different levels. And I, I think people forget or discount that Bill Cosby--you know, and again, so much goes back to Darrell. Bill Cosby lost his only son [Ennis Cosby] to violence and actually racial violence, though the guy that killed him was a, was a, from all that I understand, was a racist white guy who saw a black kid on the road--in his car, and, and killed him, and, you know, he's like Michael Jordan, you know, someone else who has, has that iconic sort of stature beloved by everybody who has a close relative murdered by people who don't know that they're killing, you know, this, somebody connected to somebody they actually might care about, that they might give a damn about. Having watched what losing my brother did to my family, and he wasn't the only boy, you know, so to be Bill Cosby and to have your only son murdered and, you know, you're, you're, and this son was, by all accounts, an amazing kid, I just think that hardened him and this is me, you know, you know how people do--how we all do that. We look at stars and we think we know something about them but what I knew about him was that he had experienced this loss and I just felt like it made him less patient, less compassionate, less, and he, I think he just didn't have very much patience with failure. Speaker 1: It seems to me, at the time, what I remember is that there seemed to be a generational divide on what he said. A lot of older black people, people our age even, you know, didn't see anything wrong with what he said. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And where a younger generation, Michael Eric Dyson and some of the other younger writers were extremely, I think, upset (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't know if Michael Eric Dyson is that much younger but I, I felt divided myself because, you know, I did think he spoke for a lot of black people, middle class, upper class black people who are impatient with those other black people and who wish they would, you know, do the right thing and who feel, this is really important, who feel dragged down by them, who feel like their accomplishments get lost in their, the other group's failures and challenges. And so, but, but, at the same time, it's, it's too easy, it's too easy to say, to point fingers and to, and to--I have no idea who I'd be if I grew up under the circumstances that a lot of young black people grow up under. You know, I, I grew up in a two parent household, college educated parents [Geraldine Mae King Britt and Thomas Elwood Britt], reading books, given everything, you know, given great nutrition, education, everything I needed, so how, how can I judge someone who's growing up with none of those things and so to me to, some of what he said I was absolutely down with, but it was the tone and sort of the, the complete, almost the dismissiveness of how people get to where they are. And so, you know, a stern scolding, to me, isn't as helpful as a, as an engagement. It didn't feel like it engaged people. It felt more like judgment and I'm just never--that just, I just don't think that works. Shouldn't we be about what helps and who knows, maybe there are people who heard, heard that sort of scolding and were moved and who thought about it and who were affected by it in a positive way, I just, that's just not going to be my way. Story_ID: 674048 Speaker 1: Do you remember a column you wrote called, 'Cosby Becomes the Grandpa of Tough Love,' [Donna Britt] about Cosby's interaction with a columnist from the Milwaukee Sentinel [sic. Milwaukee Journal Sentinel], named Eugene Kane-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, Eugene Kane's a friend. No, I don't remember the column. You remind me what I said (laughter). Speaker 1: Well it's about, it's about this, this meeting that Cosby, Cosby after reading Kane's criticism of him in the Milwaukee Sentinel-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I guess somebody showed it to him, he invited Kane to a meeting in Newark, New Jersey he was having with the members of the Crips and Bloods. Speaker 2: Oh, wow, I really don't remember that, wow (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And Bill Cosby is, he, he basically gives the same speech to the leaders of the Crips and Bloods and talks to them and they, they seem to interact with him like he's their granddaddy-- Speaker 2: I love it. Speaker 1: --which is, which is-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) See, you should have warned me about these things. I could have read up on this stuff and then prepared for you. Speaker 1: Yeah, which is, he says here, he said, "If it had been Chris Rock or somebody, the response might have been different," Kane said, "but Cosby took on this fatherly, even grandfatherly role. Men, who are like the gang members, don't care about pretending, they seem to crave that kind of discipline and chastising." Speaker 2: Wow. So that's, but see that's an engagement, that's real and so it's one thing for me to write in The Washing- this is the difference. It's one thing for me to write in The Washington Post about young girls who have sex with guys who don't care about them and have babies with them. It's one thing for me to do it from that forum, sort of on high. It's another thing for me to go to a neighborhood center where there's a, there's a group of girls like that and to talk to them personally and to talk about what engenders respect in a man, what engenders self love in you. It's one thing to do it for--it's the podium. And so, the parts of me that love what Bill Cosby was saying, aren't as enamored of the way he's saying it and that he's saying it in a podium where it, that encourages more finger pointing and more judgment. These are people who get enough judgment and enough finger pointing, enough that they can dismiss it entirely. I, you know, I want to be heard. And so to go to, to talk to those people and to be engaged with them, that's exactly what I'm talking about. And so that's going to be a whole lot more effective. Speaker 1: Okay, there are some would argue that Cosby was stereotyping the black community on a level but, now he's always, according to Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint], he's always careful not to do that in this, in the scripts for his show ['The Cosby Show']-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, I mean he's aware-- Speaker 2: Oh my gosh, the show was amazing. It's, and it holds up, and it was, for me, it was huge because I saw a family so much like mine. You know, my, my parents [Geraldine Mae King Britt and Thomas Elwood Britt] weren't doctors, you know, but, you know, we, we were close knit and my parents were demanding of us and, you know, the kids on that show actually came to blows with each other. No one had ever showed what a real family looked like. You know, they, they actually fought and interacted in ways and people say it was an idealized family. I don't believe that. I think it was very real 'cause it reminded me very much of my own. So, again, when Cosby sort of, from on high, castigates and scolds people, it doesn't feel right to me because I want it to be more personal. To me it's always about the personal. Story_ID: 674049 Speaker 1: I guess in two thousand- well, let's talk about the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] campaign. Now this had, this is something that really resonated through the black community, the white community, I mean, it's something that nobody, well everybody saw it coming at a distance and it kept coming but nobody expected it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Nobody believed it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I didn't believe it. Who could believe it? You know, we, we would talk in terms of a black president happening in, not before 2025 or whatever, it just didn't seem possible. And so, I remember my first Obama gathering was at a white friend's house, you know, who just, everything she'd read about him moved her and she believed that he was, he was a good candidate to, to follow, and I had seen his wonderful speech at that convention [2008 Democratic National Convention, Denver, Colorado], that, that got, put everybody on notice about this guy but she actually thought that he could do it and that he should do it and that it could happen. And so, that's one of the ironies of life in the United States is to have a white person give me just that glimmer, that, wow, this could happen. And I'll nev- I also remember years before that, a white Virginia man, southern, you know, southerner, who said, "I wish Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] would run for president." I'm going, "Really?" And he, and he explained it and it, you know, was stuff that transcended a race, you know, so this, nothing is simple. You know, any time we try to make things simple, we're making fools of ourselves. So, watching Obama's ascendency and watching him get closer and closer to the nomination and watching Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], whom I admired, respond to that in ways that I didn't admire so much, you know, and remember she gave a speech where she accidentally said, "You good white people," or, you know, just watching people's racial stuff come up, you know, so fascinating and, and so telling. So I remember when, when he won and I was home in my, and this is what I wrote about, it's one of my favorite columns. When he won, I went downstairs and my son, Darrell [Darrell Britt-Gibson], who's my tough, most macho son, was down there with a bunch of his friends and I came down and it flashed that he had won and Darrell burst into tears, or went to that, you know, immediate emotional place, ran out of the room, and it was cold outside, it's November, ran out of the house and just, and I'm looking like whoa, and another friend of his like sort of crumpled to the ground and another one was just standing there rocking and this--and it was a bunch of young black men and there is no more stoic, tough, show no emotion group, more macho group, than young black men in their early twenties (laughter), you know, and I was just blown away by how blown away they were and with my son sobbing with me, I just realized that it felt like a validation of their existence, that they'd never ever thought they could experience because a young black man, you know, older than them, obviously, but someone who looked like them, who, who represented them, who carried himself proudly as a black man. He didn't make race a big part of his campaign, but he didn't hide from it either. He had a beautiful black wife, family, that he could be embraced by this nation that had felt so rejecting of them. You know, young black men they get stopped by cops all the time. You know, women hold their purses closer as they approach. You know, people look at them with fear so, so this kind of public national embrace, it was, it was too much to bear. It was so meaningful and so fulfilling and, and it meant so much to me and, obviously, to them. Story_ID: 674050 Speaker 1: There was concern when Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], in the black community there was concern about whether he was black enough. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't really have that concern. I think, I had just felt like he didn't, he didn't seem to me like someone, I'd spent a lifetime watching people who ran from their blackness. I knew what that looked like. It would have been nice for him to have been more vocal about his blackness, I guess, but I didn't require that because he didn't seem to be running from it. He, you know, I don't know that we exist, that most of us exist in ways that we're waving flags all the time, I'm black, I'm black, I'm black. Most of us are living our lives and he felt to me like someone who was living his life, embracing his blackness without making a big deal about it, and he was trying to get elected president of the United States and in some sort of huge embrace, wrapping himself in a, in those issues and in, seemed like a sure way not to get elected, and this is, you know, all in retrospect how I looked at it at the time. So, no, I didn't have those issues. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, at one point even Joseph Biden [Joe Biden], when, when he was in the primary running against Obama, and all the rest of the candidates said that Obama was a nice, clean, well spoken-- Speaker 2: Right (laughter), eloquent, eloquent, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --eloquent black, black, and, you know, that's what his opinion was-- Speaker 2: That's the word, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I said, you know, hey, race makes everybody crazy. That's one of my favorite quotes, you know, that's mine, "Race makes everybody crazy." It makes white people crazy, it makes black people crazy, it makes everybody crazy because-- Speaker 1: That's funny, of course, that didn't do Biden any good just to say that but-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --at the same time, I think everybody kind of felt this-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. They felt the same way but you can't, you know, think of the thousands of things you think every day that you think are utterly true and that everybody agrees with but you can't say them. Speaker 1: Then, well, what about, now the idea that he was beyond race was challenged by his pastor, Reverend Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.], what did you think about that incident or did you write about that? Speaker 2: Well the whole thing about chickens come home to roost and, again, it's, it's, there's the public face and the private face and how many, how many good, upright, taxpaying rational black folks are in meetings where people say things like that? You know, how many of us don't harbor our own sense of resentment and anger over how our people, you know, have been treated, over how other people of color around the globe have been treated by our country. You know, that's, that's our reality and when we hear people express anger and resentment about our reality, we understand that, you know, and so for his pastor to say something like that, and for him not to have stormed the gates or left in a huff, every black person understands that. You know, we've all been in those situations. We've all felt things that we could never express, just like every white person has felt things about race, you know, about family, about gender, about, that they, you can't express. So I just felt it was BS, you know, it's just, it's just, it's just stuff to try to manipulate people into doing one thing or another and it's politics. Story_ID: 674051 Speaker 1: Now this is a dynamic that I'm sure you probably addressed, but, you know, the black community, the political community was very committed to the Clintons and here comes Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. So that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, that didn't affect me at all. As much as I liked Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and I liked Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], I, I felt actually that Obama was speaking more to me and more to what I personally wanted, and I actually, you know, I loved that he was mixed race because I think that, that we're all mixed race, whether we know it or not. You know, you're three shades lighter than me and there are people who think that's significant, maybe two (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Just, just one and a half. Speaker 2: One and a half (laughter), yeah, and, you know, Lupita Nyong'o, who just won the, the Oscar [Academy Award] for Best Supporting Actress, is five shades blacker than me and it doesn't matter and the guy who's doing the film here [Matthew Hickey] is white, so he's, I don't know how many shades whiter than me he is but it doesn't matter 'cause, you know, I have, I have Dutch blood in me and I have Indian [Native American] blood in me and I have African American, it doesn't matter, you know, and the idea that even if it matters societally, and if it matters culturally, and if it matters in how people are treated, I, the, at the soul deep level, it doesn't matter. And so, to me, Obama represented that truth and, like I said, he wasn't running away from it. So, the Clintons, you know, they're, they're so political and, you know, this is eight years, you know, how many seven, how many years later are we? Six years later? Speaker 1: Almost eight years later. Speaker 2: Almost eight years later (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Almost, yeah, six, well, yeah, six. Speaker 2: Six years, 'cause we're in the middle of his second term but the idealism and the excitement with which the nation looked at this man. You know, people like me, certainly, because he had just represented the best in us. You know, what was, what seemed possible for us and, you know, no offense to the Clintons, but that was a much more compelling narrative and personality for me. I, I loved that, all that he was representing, or most of what he was representing. Story_ID: 674052 Speaker 1: Do you think that, I mean, what role did, I guess, Michelle Obama play in the, and the family play in his election (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved her. I still do. I just feel like she's at least as smart as he is, at least, maybe more. I loved, I wrote about, in my book ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt], about her honesty, about having to take a back seat to a husband who is brilliant and wonderful but she's brilliant and wonderful and what that meant to her and about her speaking to women about what it's like trying to support someone like that, trying, at the same time, while you're trying to take care of a family and maintain a home and be, and have your own job and your own responsibilities for yourself and the near impossibility of doing that with any kind of grace and efficiency. And I loved her being honest about that because that's, that's something that every woman who's got a family and a husband and a job faces. So, I, I adore her. I mean I'm not some--I'm not worshipful and I don't know that she can't make mistakes but I like her candor about things that a lot of people weren't candid about, certainly no, no first lady I'd heard before-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or someone vying to be first lady since we're talking pro- pre election. Speaker 1: Do you think that, well this is a silly question, but do you think President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] would have been elected had he had a white wife and family? Speaker 2: That is a silly question, although I don't, how, what can, how can I know. I didn't think, I didn't see him getting elected so who knows. It's quite possible, anything can happen. My family, I have nothing but boys, nothing but sons [Justin Britt-Gibson, Darrell Britt-Gibson and Skye Merida], and they're obsessed with sports and the one thing I've learned from sports is anything can happen. You know, you think, you know, okay, so now we're, we're at the start of the, of March Madness, and there's a million dollar, a billion dollar, have you heard about this? A billion dollar thing where if you can guess all the different races, all the different contests correctly, you'll-- Warren Buffett and Quicken Loans [Quicken Loans, Inc., Detroit, Michigan] will give you a billion dollars and that's based on--but, hey, you know, anything can happen. I watch, you know, I watch 'The Prognosticators,' you know, I watch, 'Mike and Mike,' I watch because I have a eighteen year old son who's listening to all this stuff and I hear people know exactly what's going to happen and they never know, they're always wrong, they're worse than weather people, you know. So, maybe with a white wife he could have won, what do I know? I doubt it, but I didn't think he could be elected. Speaker 1: Okay, you think he would have had the same support from the black community that he ended up having had that been the case? Speaker 2: Voting wise, probably, talk wise, maybe not as much, I don't know. I think, we're pretty, you know, black people are pretty loyal. You know, we take anybody back, you know. You know Michael Jordan--Michael Jackson had little boys in his bed, apparently, you know. Talked about Clarence Thomas. You know, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, you know, "Bitch set me up." You know, it doesn't--Mike Tyson, great example. You know, the guy rapes an eighteen year old virgin, Sunday School teacher and all these black women are, you know, "Free Mike," you know, we, we are a very, I think we've been through as a people so much that we, it takes a lot to permanently separate us and I don't, in fact, I don't know that I've seen that yet. I don't know what you'd have to do for the black (laughter) community not to take you back. Speaker 1: I think Clarence Thomas may have achieved that, but then again-- Speaker 2: But he hasn't, you know, if in his dotage, dotage, however you say that word, he says, "You know, I was wrong and I really love my--," somebody will take him back (laughter), you know, somebody will. Story_ID: 674053 Speaker 1: (Background noise) I know a lot of black women that are columnists or men too, they, well, most of the women, they really reveal who they are now, I mean, Mary-- Speaker 2: Mary Curtis [HistoryMaker Mary C. Curtis]? Speaker 1: Well, I know Mary, yeah, Mary Curtis. I didn't realize-- Speaker 2: I don't know how that many people do it the way I do it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you still have your microphone on? Speaker 2: Yeah, but, who is it, you know, Betty DeRamus in Detroit [Michigan] and-- Speaker 1: Oh, Betty's amazing. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, they kind of-- Speaker 1: Not like I do though, trust me on this. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And, 'cause one of the first things people say to me is, "I don't know how you do it. I don't know if I would be able to reveal as much as you do," and certainly that's true about the book ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, but it's true about my column, too. I kind of don't believe in secrets. Story_ID: 674054 Speaker 1: We were talking about the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] presidency before but did--how do you feel about his performance as president in light of criticism that he receives from black civil rights activists and politicians, that he's, that they would get more out of a white president because he tends to avoid dealing with racial issues (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I would love, have loved for him to have been a more progressive president than he's been, not just on racial issues but just, you know, when it comes to the environment, when it comes to his choices for his cabinet. I mean, from the very beginning, I was struck by how establishment his choices were, starting with Joe Biden. My expectation from his campaign was that he would be more progressive, more, a little more different, a little more challenging and it seems to me like in some ways he's, he decided that his mere presence was so challenging, that to do more would be too much and, and it's hard to judge his presidency objectively because he's been so hamstrung by the opposition, by an unprecedented level of hatred and animosity and enmity and a complete rejection of almost everything he presents, even if it's their stuff. And so, like a lot of, you know I'm--like many people, I'm a mix of liberal and conservative and progressive and, you know, and high bound and, but it's just been incredibly frustrating to see the complete and total rejection of everything that he puts forth by se- you know, a certain, most of the reject--of the Republican party, which feels, to me as a black person, so much of it seems, you know, racially based, you know, and the, some of the rude response, you know, the shouting out liar at that speech, one of the--a member of [U.S.] Congress did. Just countless examples of disrespect. And I know, you know, I've been around long enough to know that politics is an incredibly animus filled (laughter) phenomena but it just seemed, it had seemed over the past six years just off the charts and it's really sad and maddening. So, I, again, I would, I would have liked him to have been more progressive in lots of different ways but he, you know, even when he's, he's a conciliator, he's a mediator and I think he's also someone who's accustomed to having his personal charm and magnetism and brilliance overcome the opposition in ways that it just hasn't happened. And so, he's, I think he's given up more than he should have given up to the opposition over the years. That's my sense of it. Story_ID: 674055 Speaker 1: On that same, on that same track, what, what is the most impressive thing about the Obama administration [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]? Speaker 2: That it exists (laughter). That, that it exists. That he, (pause) you know, this is, it's hard to answer because I don't, I'm going to know better in a few years, you know, once he's not president anymore, I'll have a better sense of what he meant but the fact that the nation, you know, and with my son, that the fact that the nation in its sense of challenge and need, embraced him and, or at least accepted him and voted him into office, I'll never forget that. That'll never not be meaningful to me and we're still finding out what it ultimately means but that's the most impressive thing to me. That he stepped out there for healthcare, for, I think, out of a desire really and true--I think that's one of the most sincere of his, I think it's one of the most authentic things he's done. I think he really wanted everybody to have that opportunity for, for healthcare and, and he went for that and put himself out there and did that and, you know, the battles over it are ongoing. You know, who knows when, if, they'll--when and if they'll end but that's probably going to end up being his legacy. But I think even more important than that is that he's a black man who became president of the United States. He was not a descendant of slaves but he, that's what everybody sees. You know, they don't see a mixed race guy, they see a black man because that's what he looks like and he can't step far enough away from that and not that I'm, and like I said, I don't know that he's stepping away from that but he--there's no way to step far enough away that's not going to be what he represents. So that's what impresses me most, that he exists 'cause no one thought he could exist. Speaker 1: Well, our community's kind of torn between him being a symbol of achievement and a change agent, a real agent of change (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And there's some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And sometimes you don't get both, you know, and sometimes you don't know what you're looking at, which is why I say, you can take time to know what something means. Those people who were cheering for O.J. [O.J. Simpson], you know, "Go, O.J.," da, da, da, da, you know, probably 90 percent of them despise him now 'cause they didn't, you don't know what you're looking at and I don't know what his presidency means yet, none of us do. Story_ID: 674056 Speaker 1: You think we're close to electing a woman as president of the United States? Speaker 2: Um-hm, I think it's, I think, he [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was a game changer and that anything can happen. Gay people can get married in most places in the United States. Did you see that coming? (Laughter) I mean, I mean, recently, but ten years ago, I remember when I was in grad school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], a friend of mine saying that one day there'll be--we were looking at an ad, what do you call it, in a store window. You know, how they have the mannequins arranged in a certain way and the way these mannequins were arranged, there were these two guys that looked like they were really good friends and I said, "You know, you could look at that and you could almost think they were gay." We laughed, and he said, "You know but one day, you're going to be able to see mannequins arranged like that," and they're gay, I'm like, "(makes sound) no, never, no, it's not going to happen." And, you know, every TV show has gay characters, every movie, you know what I mean? It's like it's a whole different world of acceptance that I could not have dreamed of, so a woman president is not that big a leap for me and I don't think it's as big a leap for Americans anymore. Nobody talks about the 2016 election without talking about Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], nobody, and, you know, and people are looking at other women, you know, as possible game changers. I think we will at least have a woman vice president. I think that's almost a given. I could be wrong. I think that's going to happen really fast. I could be wrong but that's my guess. Story_ID: 674057 Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you about the book-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: 'Brothers and Me'-- Speaker 2: Can I show it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --'A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt] sure. Just hold it up a little higher, there it is. Speaker 2: That's my book. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm really proud of it. Speaker 1: Okay, now you, this was published in 2011. Tell us what the book was about and what the reception of the book was. Speaker 2: The book is about two things. It's about Darrell's [Britt's brother, Darrell Britt] death and how his loss affected me, my family and changed us. And it's also about women and giving, about how much women give, how often we give, how completely, especially to the men in our lives, even when it doesn't seem to comport with our own best interest. And those two things are actually connected because Darrell's death introduced me to my giving in a way that surprised me and the book recounts a moment, I am a meditator, I like to meditate with my best friend in the morning and back when my son Darrell [Darrell Britt-Gibson], who's an actor now, lives in Los Angeles [California], he's doing really well--was in, was still in our home before he went there, I remember he, he's been my, he's my challenging son. He was the one that gave me the hard time. Everybody has one of those if you have three or more kids, and I remember this day he asked me to do something at the very last minute that I had no time to do. And so, of course, I'm trying to figure out how do I get this done. So I go into meditation with my friend, 'cause I--this is our morning ritual, it helps me to start the day in a calm, peaceful, semi centered way, and while I was in this peaceful place, a voice, you know, I'm sort of, I'm sort of at the same time going over my to do list and a voice says about Darrell's request, you've got to do this or he'll die. And so I actually came out of that sort of peaceful place and said, "What?" So if I don't run an errand for my son, he's going to die and, and I realized that I was not at that moment of sort of primal consciousness thinking about my son, I was thinking about my brother, Darrell, who my son Darrell was named after and, and I realized that for all those years, for decades, I'd been feeling like if I had been there for him he might not have died and I don't know if I talked about that before. Yeah, so the book is about that revelation and, and realizing that I wasn't the only black woman, you know, the only woman really but the on- certainly the only black woman who carried that, that sense of responsibility and that sense of ownership of our men's pain and their being victimized which, again, explains the Clarence Thomas', you know, the women responding in the way they do to the O.J.s [O.J. Simpson], to these men who, who don't care that much about us but we have to care about them because we have this historic connection and, and we've seen them taken away from us. Story_ID: 674058 Speaker 1: So the book ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt] is about that and I think I talked about that before but it, but it's also about the effect of these kinds of losses on, on families. You know, you, you can read statistics about, about, you know, murder and death in the black community and, you know, and everybody knows the vast majority of those killings are enacted by other, other black men, but it doesn't matter, you know, that the loss is the same and the devastating effect on the community is the same, no matter who takes us, you know, we're, we're still taken. And so the book is about those two things and the challenge of writing it was bringing those things together, seamlessly, in a way that, that it's not just about Donna [HistoryMaker Donna Britt] and her story but it's about so many other women, and not, not all of them who have, who have had tragedies like mine happen, but just our connection to the men in our lives. Any honest man, to my mind, would have to acknowledge amazing (laughter) acts of generosity by the women in his lives because of, I just think we, I don't know if it's in our DNA but we, I--and it actually makes sense for it to be in our DNA because we are mothers and, you know, the species isn't going to survive if women don't take care with their whole hearts and souls and bodies of babies. You know, we have statistics that show something like 70 percent of men don't contribute, you know, who are of, separated from their children, don't pay support, a huge number. I mean, it's a crazy number like that, 60 to 70 percent and that shows that, that many men are able to have some sense of disconnect from their kids. I don't know that women, you know, we--have that same capability, not most of us. You can always point to an incredibly generous man. I know some and I'm grateful to know them and you can, you can always point to some incredibly selfish women who don't give a damn about their kids, but I'm speaking here in generalities and so the book is speaking to women about looking at our giving, examining it, celebrating it, 'cause I don't think the species would survive without it and certainly life would be a much harder, who wants to be in a world without women's giving, you know, this would be a hard, ugly place if, if, if we didn't have that but it's about governing it and not letting it control you. So it's about a lot of different things and I really am happy with how I pulled those things together. Story_ID: 674059 Speaker 1: You were interviewed by Oprah Winfrey-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: This is, was this, had you met her before or-- Speaker 2: No, it was huge. I was at, my favorite place in the world is Rancho La Puerta, it's a spa in Mexico [Tecate, Mexico] and Deborah Szekely, the owner, became friends of mine after I wrote about her, and I was there for a getaway from my kids [Justin Britt-Gibson, Darrell Britt-Gibson and Skye Merida]. At that point I had all three of them in the house and another one, I had, kids just come to me and I had a Costa Rican exchange student, too many people, too many kids. And so I, my husband [HistoryMaker Kevin Merida] was sending me there as a, for a break and the Oprah show called the ranch and said, "Do you have any women there who are escaping their kids?" And somebody at the ranch knew I was there and said, "Well, we have [HistoryMaker] Donna Britt." And so they said, "Do you want to go on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show'? You know, they'll fly you first class, you know, they put you up in a nice hotel." I'm like, "Are you kidding me, of course I'll go, but I want you to, I have a requirement. I want to be able to take my son, Darrell [Darrell Britt-Gibson]," 'cause he wanted to be an actor and I wanted him to see, you know, just sort of a TV show how it works. And I was able to take our Costa Rican exchange student just 'cause it would be like such a kick for her and so they said, "Sure, you can bring them." So I was on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' it was so cool and she was really cool. I liked her a lot and I felt very comfortable. I was surprised at how comfortable I felt and I talked about, basically, about women and giving. I talked about the difficulty of trying to be everything for everybody, for your kids, for your husband, for yourself, which is what so many women do and get so little credit for. Speaker 1: Okay, and your book, like, made her top ten list, I think, in O Magazine? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was cited by the magazine as one of ten titles to pick up right now, which was really cool and it was also excerpted in Essence which was lovely and, you know, I had write ups in Time and Huff Po [Huffington Post] and other, you know, I got an amazing review from Boston Globe [The Boston Globe] and it was, it was a lovely time. Speaker 1: Yeah, and apparently Oprah read the book, 'cause she asked you questions about the book in the interview. Speaker 2: No, she didn't. Speaker 1: She didn't? Speaker 2: This was before that. No, unfortunately, gosh, that would have been so huge (laughter). Speaker 1: So she did ask about it but-- Speaker 2: No, no she didn't 'cause my being on there was before that so your notes are off. Oh, I would have loved for her to have read it. She would have loved it. That was, I felt bad 'cause I don't think she did get to read it. I'm going to take a sip of water. Speaker 1: Okay. Your, the question here that says, "Much of 'Brothers and Me' ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt] deals with the death of your brother, Darrell [Darrell Britt]. Can you talk about your writing process as a form of therapy" (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Oh, oh, okay, that was O Magazine, asked me those questions, not Oprah personally (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay, not Oprah personally okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, unfortunately. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So that's interest--okay, that's interesting. I was, somebody the other day was referencing Oprah Winfrey as having a place in La Porte, Indiana, which is very near Gary [Indiana], which I, I just thought about that just now. Speaker 2: You know, she has so many Chicago [Illinois] roots and she probably, that's really close to Chicago and so she, and it's (background noise) probably on the water. You can get something really beautiful and really big in those kinds of areas so I'm not surprised to hear that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I've never been. Story_ID: 674060 Speaker 1: I guess the next big story is the Trayvon Martin story--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --from 2012. Tell us, kind of summarize what happened and what your columns were about. Speaker 2: I can't think of a story that hit closer to home than Trayvon because I'm the mother of sons [Justin Britt-Gibson, Darrell Britt-Gibson and Skye Merida] and he was a seventeen year old, sports loving kid who was killed. I had a seventeen year old sports loving kid in my home. And he was beautiful and he, he was a regular kid and to have, again, you, it's easy to forget, when you have a news story there's the first reports and then you have the progression, just like with O.J. [O.J. Simpson], and the reports of him--and when I first saw him and I heard about Zimmerman [George Zimmerman], the man who shot him because he said he felt threatened by him, what made me, what was satisfying about it was the idea that this is an unimpeachable wrong. There's no way that anyone could, could say that this was right and, boy was I wrong. It started with the picture. One of the things I wrote about was trying to separate myself. When I heard that a seventeen year old kid had been killed by a white guy who stalked him in that, I, I said, I looked at his name and I said, it's Trayvon, it's one of those made up names. You know, it's one of those class things. I'm thinking, well, okay, 'cause I didn't want him to be too much like me 'cause I've already experienced that kind of loss and I have sons his age, I just couldn't handle it and I saw his face, and this is, again, one of the other times when I burst into tears, I said, this happened to me four times in my life, I saw his face and I cried because I felt so bad about having tried to put some distance between me and this kid. No matter, it doesn't matter. I, you know, that's not a rational response, that's a terrified response of a mom who has sons who doesn't want to think of them as being threatened. And so, then they started showing other pictures of him, you know, with the hoodie and pictures of him looking more threatening. Then they put out records that he, you know, that he had been suspended from school and that he had been found with marijuana in his backpack and, you know, things that were going to allow people to fasten onto something other than the fact that he was seventeen years old and he was walking home from watching the games that my seventeen year old was watching and this guy decided who he was and decided to stalk him. And then when he was, this same guy was getting his butt kicked, shot him. So nothing about that story is positive for the attacker. You know, nothing in American culture suggests that you can, that a bully, and that's what's happening, the ultimate form of bullying, is that a bully is going to become a hero. In that scenario, there's no question who's the victim and who's the aggressor and people in their hatred and in their pettiness and in their blindness were able to switch that around and to make this skinny kid the aggressor, you know, the terrifying aggressor of a guy who outweighed him by fifty pounds, or whatever, and who had a gun. There's nothing about that that makes sense and yet there are, I have, you know, countrymen and women who think that makes sense and the criminal justice system had a law in place that was so twisted that it allowed that man to walk free. That, that is epically tragic and epically wrong and as my sons, my three sons' mother and as Darrell's [Darrell Britt] sister and as the daughter of a hardworking black man [Thomas Elwood Britt] and as a human being and as a child of God, that's incontrovertible. Story_ID: 674061 Speaker 1: Now this is a issue that President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] weighed in on. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I think with a dramatic effect of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --those who say-- Speaker 2: I'm glad he did. Speaker 1: --he never discusses race, said that that could have been me. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he got attacked for that and reamed for that and I don't care. That's the fact. You know, he could have had a son that looked like him. You could have had a son like him. I have a son, you know, that's tall and skinny and, and beautiful. And, and I think about it because my own son [Skye Merida], who's that age, doesn't get high, has never been arrested, won't take a drink, he, he was voted his school's, he was given his school's quiet giver award. He's about as, you know, we could leave the house for three weeks with the liquor cabinet open and he would never go near it. He's sort of the perfect kid and I know that if something like that had happened to him, the haters would have found something about him to fasten on. I don't know what it would have been. They would have made something up because hatred takes what it needs to serve its own purposes and, and watching that happen and watching that trial and watching his mother [Sybrina Fulton] try so hard to be so strong and stoic and seeing even that turn against her, it was just, it's just epically wrong. And so there was a lot to write about that. I wrote several pieces about that for The Post [The Washington Post] even though I'm not an official columnist anymore. Story_ID: 674062 Speaker 1: And the verdict in this case, just rendered earlier this--I mean, in 2013-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --exonerated-- Speaker 2: Zimmerman. Speaker 1: George Zimmerman. Speaker 2: Yeah, it felt to me like that was the wrong charge. You know, with that, I think, I do think that the prosecution overshot itself. I just think that there was a way to do that without making it, I think--well, what, first degree murder, whatever it was, it just, and with the law that was in place, you know, after the trial was over, at least one of the jurors said she didn't want to, she didn't like the verdict but the way the law was set up she wasn't allowed to, in good conscious, in good conscious decide otherwise and I feel like something similar happened with the more recent case with the music being too loud, remember that kid [Jordan Davis], and, you know, it seems to me like legal defenses, or legal prosecutions in these cases, you have to understand that that law, those kinds of laws allow a lot and--but the, you know, I don't, in some ways it's hard to even discuss law when you know, some things are just wrong and that's just wrong and, you know, we've heard about Zimmerman beating up his wife [Shellie Zimmerman], about him, I mean, he's just not a good guy by, right now, you know, anything can happen. He can become, you know, I mean he's, he too was a child of God-- Speaker 1: I think he's arrested for DUI [driving under the influence]-- Speaker 2: DUI, he's not a, he's not a solid citizen, never was and a lot of the people that embraced him, they could care less about him now. He just turned, he was just trying to, to box a rapper. Did you hear about this? He was supposed to rap, to have a boxing match, was it DMX, it was somebody where, and people were so outraged by it, just to get money, people were so outraged by it that it got shouted down by Color of Change [Oakland, California] and some other organizations. That's how desperate he is for money. They don't care about him. He thought they cared about him. They didn't. He was a symbol of their hatred and once, once he was done, once he was exonerated, they don't care about George Zimmerman any more than they care about Trayvon Martin. What matters is people's worldview and what supports it and because mine is about love and about being bigger than that, you know, that's, that's going to be my focus. Speaker 1: Recently a black woman [Marissa Alexander] was convicted of, she's in jail now in Florida for-- Speaker 2: For having shot at the wall. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, yeah, well we'll see what happens with that. Speaker 1: I think the upshot of that is if--had she actually shot her husband, she would be exonerated from-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, isn't that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --for standing her ground. Speaker 2: --yeah, I mean, some, the law is insane. The law can be insane and, you know, my son wanted to go to school in Florida and he's, it doesn't look like that's going to happen, college, and I'm, I can't--as a black mom, I can't say that I'm unhappy about that. Story_ID: 674063 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. Well, well what are you going to do next? That's the logical question, I think. Now here we are at 2014, you're still a columnist with The Washington Post-- Speaker 2: No I'm not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You're not? Speaker 2: I'm not, I left the column. Speaker 1: Oh, you left, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, so, yeah, I'm, I left towards the end to write--to write the book ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt] 'cause that took all my energy and-- Speaker 1: So that's in 20--you left in 2011? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just before, before that, and, I mean, I still, I wrote probably three pieces about Trayvon [Trayvon Martin] for The Post. I write other things for them, I write other things for other organizations. I'm basically right now getting my youngest out to college and doing some writing, I'm a yoga teacher, I've been doing that for about eight years. I'm, when Skye [Skye Merida] is gone, I'm gonna figure out what's next. So what's next for me could be any number of things. I'm looking at things, I just don't have enough time to tunnel into any one thing so I'm still doing a lot of different stuff but I want to know what that next project is as much as you do, more than you do. (Laughter) I really want to know 'cause it could be a screenplay, it could be a play, it could be another book, it could be being a columnist again, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay, and for any young people watching this in the future, being able to write, is a, is quite a gift and opens up a lot of doors. Speaker 2: Oh my god, I'm so happy that God blessed me with that gift. I love words, I love their power, for good, you know, 'cause god, god knows they get used for bad all the time but to be able to use them to inspire and to touch people and to make people want to be better, to do better, I love that and, yeah, and that's never going to go away. You know, I don't, you can get as techie as you want, you can have all these different ways of communicating, words will always have power and I will always want to use them in the best possible way. Story_ID: 674064 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't know if today feels as different as it should because the, the poorest among us and the least well educated among us still have the problems that they've had forever. It doesn't feel that different to me and it feels like the divisions don't shrink, that they, they can, they get wider and I know I'm so concerned about what culture tells young black women about self--about respecting themselves and about loving themselves and black people in general. You would think with so many, there was a time when there were no, there were so few black people in public life and in the public mind and heart that people like O.J. [O.J. Simpson] meant so much. There's so many more now and yet I still think we suffer deeply from issues, self love issues, and--although, but every human being does, I don't care what color you are. I think self love is the number one tough nut for us all. So my concerns aren't that different than they were ten years ago or twenty years ago, even with a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], even with Oprah Winfrey existing, even when so much is so positive and so powerful, you know, I'm really hopeful for, so every little thing that looks, that takes us further in the direction of, I know--I don't know that there, we'll ever have a colorblind society but one that's, let's say color appreciative of all kinds of different people. You know, I do, I want, you know, of course I want better education. You know, I want more--I'm going blank, you get it. Speaker 1: I--I get the drift of what you're saying. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 674065 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career, is there, is there any major thing that you would do differently or go back and tweak? Speaker 2: I left my column right before Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected president because I knew that I couldn't do my family and my book ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt] and my column and it just seemed like it made sense to make a clean break, which meant I didn't get to write regularly about his presidency and about his family being in that position and I, that's, that's the big regret. I don't think anybody would have written about it quite the way that I would have with that personal, that intimacy and distance at the same time and it was such a deep, rich vein I would have loved to have written more about that. That's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 674066 Speaker 1: Do you think that, that women are to--I mean, in the, in the article from, I guess, from O Magazine, you discussed like putting yourself first and how women always seem to put themselves second or third in the equation as opposed to man. What, what are your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: I don't think it's always. I think, you know, always is always, is always a dangerous word because it just, it encompasses too much but I think, I'm--if any, so often when I have conversations of any depth and intimacy with women, I will so often get to the point where they say something that they've given up, that they've sacrificed, that they are, even at that point, sacrificing for the man slash men, and kids in their lives, that it's just astonishing. You know, I recently had lunch with a woman, I've known her ever since--she taught one of my kids, really strong, beautiful, powerful, owns her own business, we're having this conversation and then she tells me that one of, that her ex-husband was abusive, that he had actually--and I, it just didn't comport with anything that I knew about her and it was, and how hard it was for her to leave. You know, so many women have these kinds of stories where it doesn't matter what their public face is, and I discovered that while I was writing the book ['Brothers (and Me): A Memoir of Loving and Giving,' Donna Britt], when I would tell people that I was writing the book, and especially at the Ranch [Rancho La Puerta, Tecate, Mexico] where there would be, there weren't that many women of color but there were all these women who ran corporations, who had their own businesses, they were powerful lawyers to prominent people and when I would tell them what the book was, they would pull me aside and tell me their story, that was like huh? You know you've been abused? You gave up all that, you, you put all that aside for, for this guy to--and it wasn't just husbands or boyfriends, it was brothers and fathers and just story after story of sacrifice out of love and out of this nurturing sense that we have and I just think, I think we have to own that that's who we are. I think a lot of women feel like it connotes weakness or some anti-feminist thing. I think it's really feminist to own who you are as a woman and part of that is that nurturing and that giving and thank god for it and just make sure you use it in ways that support you. Story_ID: 674067 Speaker 1: Likewise, if you look back at everything you've done to this point, to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy as a writer, I guess? Speaker 2: Wow. (Pause) I remember being at this gathering of columnists for The Post Writers Group [The Washington Post Writers Group] and somebody jokingly said she's the love columnist and I like that because I don't write a love column or a lovelorn column or anything like that but it always comes down to that. It's, to me, it's always about, the reason Darrell [Britt's brother, Darrell Britt] mattered so much to me was because I loved him. You know, the reason Trayvon's [Trayvon Martin] death struck me so deeply was because I knew how much he was loved by his parents [Sybrina Fulton and Tracy Martin]. The reason that I'm here able to string together three sentences with any coherence is because my mother [Geraldine Mae King Britt] loved me and loved books and gave them to me and taught me that and my father [Thomas Elwood Britt] supported me and the reason I want so much for black men to be respected and loved is because how much I love my three sons [Justin Britt-Gibson, Darrell Britt-Gibson and Skye Merida]. And so--and my husband [HistoryMaker Kevin Merida]. So that infuses everything I write, everything I write. And so my legacy, I hope, is being a writer who happens to be black, who happens to write about issues of color, a lot, as well as issues of gender and, and everything else, but that, that informs my writing because that comes from God which is everything. So I hope that's my legacy, if that makes sense. Speaker 1: It does. Speaker 2: Great (laughter). Story_ID: 674068 Speaker 1: Now we always ask about family. Now, now your,your husband [HistoryMaker Kevin Merida] is an editor with The Washington Post? Speaker 2: He's the managing editor of The Washington Post, first African American, smart, great dashing guy. Speaker 1: Okay, you've got two sons. Speaker 2: Yes, do I need to say their names or no? Yeah, and I have, I have three sons. Speaker 1: Okay, three sons, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. One, the oldest is a screenwriter, Justin Hemani Britt-Gibson [Justin Britt-Gibson], is a screenwriter in Los Angeles [California]. Darrell Britt-Gibson is an actor in L.A. and Skye Merida is a high school student about to graduate. Speaker 1: And what's his interest? Speaker 2: Sports and sports and more sports. Speaker 1: He would be a great athlete or writer, a sports writer? Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a good athlete. He just, he wants to be in sports journalism one way or another, whether it's in front of or behind the scenes, he's, he has an encyclopedic knowledge, it's scary what he knows. And so it will be interesting to see and I'm so proud of all my sons. You know, the two oldest are making it in Hollywood, which isn't easy to do. There's a, you know, and I have a very blessed life. Story_ID: 674069 Speaker 1: Well, is there anything we need to go over before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Pause) As authentic, as inspiring, as a force for love. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, thank you. Speaker 1: Thank you very much...