 Story_ID: 611453 Speaker 1: My name is Tracey Lewis. And I'm here today with [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey who is the director of governmental affairs for Skidmore Owings and Merrill [Skidmore Owings and Merrill LLP, Chicago, Illinois]. And I'm just going to slate this interview. And can you tell me your name and spell it, please? Speaker 2: Sure. First name is Lee, L-E-E, last name is Bey, B-E-Y. Speaker 1: No middle name? Speaker 2: No middle name--couldn't afford one. We were too poor (laughter). Speaker 1: And can you tell me today's date? Speaker 2: I think--I'm sorry, today is January 24th, 19-, January 24th, 2006. Speaker 1: In a time warp (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's 1965 again (unclear). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And, and where are we holding this interview today? Speaker 2: We are holding this interview in Chicago [Illinois] in the offices of The HistoryMakers at 19th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Correct, thank you. And let's just kind of jump into the little ice breaker. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Oh, wait, you didn't tell me what--and I didn't ask you what your, your occupation is currently? Speaker 2: My current occupation is I am director of governmental affairs for Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, the architecture firm. Speaker 1: Here in Chicago? Speaker 2: Here in Chicago. Story_ID: 611454 Speaker 1: So, I'm going to do five People magazine-ish questions. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So, tell me what your favorite color is. Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: And your favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Hmm. I--see there you stumped me with the second question. (Laughter) Favorite place of vacation would be, would be, would be Michigan. St. Joe's [St. Joseph, Michigan] all the up to, to the east of, in there, so any place along the, along the lake [Lake Michigan] is good. Speaker 1: Okay, like Union-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --whatever it's called. I can't think of it. Speaker 2: Union, Union Pier [Michigan] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pier. Speaker 2: --Union Pier, and all, um-hm. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is summer--the hotter, the better. Speaker 1: And favorite color--favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food would be--my waistline would bear this out--pizza. Speaker 1: What type of pizza? Speaker 2: Deep-dish sausage. Speaker 1: Chicago-style? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, uh-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite saying? Speaker 2: Favorite saying? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Hmm. I don't think I have one. Speaker 1: Well, now, Neil Sternberg, or Steinberg said that you're--you coin a new phrase--read it like you hate me (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, like you hate me, yeah. Maybe I'll, I'll say that, so I invented it, right, yeah, my only (laughter). Speaker 1: 'Cause if, if you Google it, apparently no one has ever said it before so. Speaker 2: That's true, that's true, but, yeah, how about that? Speaker 1: Read it like you-- Speaker 2: Read it like you hate me (laughter). Story_ID: 611455 Speaker 1: So, let's just start from [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey being born where? Speaker 2: I was born--well, I was born in Mount Sinai Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] actually in 19-, on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] in 1965, October 20th of 1965. And I was a premature baby which is kind of hard to believe as I (unclear) now. Speaker 1: How much, how much did you weigh? Speaker 2: You know, I was trying to get this from my sisters, but I was, I, I remember my parents told me I was less than four pounds. And, in fact, I was so small, my father [Lee Bey, Sr.], who's about, who was about the size I am now, could say he could just about hold me in, in his, in his hand. I spent the first several weeks of life in, in an incubator--was touch and go. In fact, the, the doctors had told my mother [Lula Dixon Bey] that, you know, you can, you can have another. And so, I was that close to the end and-- Speaker 1: At the beginning. Speaker 2: --at the beginning, at the very beginning, and somehow, I came out of it. And, and they brought me home. And I've never looked back since--never been sick since either but, but yeah, and so, that's how it began. I was the youngest of three--two older sisters, and, and we're all four years apart. So, my, my sister, Dee [Deneterius Bey], is four years older than me. And my older sister, Claudette [Claudette Bey Caldwell], is eight years older than me. And that was our happy home. Speaker 1: And what neighborhood did you grow up here in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: I grew up in two neighborhoods. We--when I was born, we lived on the--despite being born way on the West Side, I, we actually lived on the eastern, the western edge of South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], 7327 South Kimbark [Avenue], right at 70-, you know, right near, middle of the block at 73rd [Street] and Kimbark. And we lived there from the time I was born--well, before then, but I lived there from the time I was born until 1975. We moved to Avalon Park [Chicago, Illinois], a little further south and east, and there we lived at 8357 South Constance [Avenue], this house that my, my father was given over to the spirit of fixing things, right. So we, so he found this house. I remember, I remember this thing on, on Constance. I remember I was rolling up, and he had found this house. And the curtain is waving in the wind, you know, like Batman's cape, and it was--the thing had been abandoned for, you know, I think, I think five years. And my father says, "Well, this is it." And I had to--I just remember the oxygen going out of the car, right. But my father got it, and bought it for back taxes. The house is large enough for us all 'cause my, my [maternal] grandmother [Early Dixon] had moved in with us-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at, by that time. And it took him about two years. And we lived in both houses, and then and he fixed it up. And that's where I spent the last half of my childhood, childhood. Speaker 1: So, now, where did you go to elementary school? Was in South Shore initially and then-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. First-- Speaker 1: --okay. And what school was that? Speaker 2: --first school was James Madison Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] at 74th [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue]. And I was there until fourth grade. And then, we moved the summer between fourth and fifth grade. And then I, when we moved to Avalon Park, I went to Charles P. Caldwell Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] at 86th [Street] and Cregier [Avenue]. (Pause) 85th [Street] and Cregier. Story_ID: 611456 Speaker 1: I kind of jumped ahead a little bit, but I wanted to--let's start off first with your, your family, and your parents. Can you tell me your mom's name? Speaker 2: Sure. My-- Speaker 1: And her maiden name? Speaker 2: --my, my mother's, my mother was Lula Bey, L-U-L-A, Bey, and her maiden name was Lula Dixon [Lula Dixon Bey], and she was born in Helena, Arkansas [Helena-West Helena, Arkansas]. And my father's name was Lee Bey [Lee Bey, Sr.]--I'm named after him, and he was born--actually he was born in Mississippi, but he moved to Chicago [Illinois] when he was real young. I remember he used to tell me a story about him being on a train, and he just remembers being, you know, you know, like next to his mother [Onnie Barry Bey] and his, and his, and his siblings as they, as they came up. He put the year at about, about 19-, he was born in 1929, so he puts the year at about 1930 or so--1932, I guess. I think he remembers coming up, and the fair, the World's Fair [Chicago World's Fair, A Century of Progress International Exposition, Chicago, Illinois], being-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --not long after that, so it would have been '33 [1933] so. Speaker 1: Right. And what year was your mother born? Speaker 2: She was born in 1929, too, October 18th. Speaker 1: And where in Mississippi was your father born? Speaker 2: He was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi. Story_ID: 611457 Speaker 1: Did you know your maternal grandparents and their names? Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my maternal grandmother and father [grandfather] were Sam Dixon and Early Dixon--Early, like early in the morning. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandfather, Sam Dixon, died in '68 [1968] or '69 [1969]. I, I wrote it down there. I can't remember which one, but I actually have, actually, despite being--I don't know, anywhere between three and four. I actually have vague memories of him--how his hands felt, you know, and it's, you know, I, I remember him very well. And my grandmother outlived him by a good long time. She lived with us [in Chicago, Illinois], and she died in 198-, 1989 and, and, you know, she was a colorful woman, to say the least. Speaker 1: Well, what, what made her colorful? Speaker 2: Well, she, she was a, she was, she was colorful in that, that--she was like, like an onion in the sense that you can never quite--I mean, you, you'd be living with her, and then you'd find out something that you, you wonder--well, how come we never knew that? Like she was, like she sang in the choir, and she taught Sunday school, and some of the things that she did as a, as a kid--I mean, like adventures that they went on and, you know, if it didn't come up in conversation, you know, you wouldn't, you know, she wouldn't-- Speaker 1: She didn't talk about it. Speaker 2: --she, she didn't talk about it. And, so, so it was always a sense of discovery and, you know, and I didn't know that, I didn't know that--that, that kind of thing about her, but, but an interesting woman. She was, and could have been, she was born in 1901. She was born in Yazoo City, Mississippi, and had an incredible artistic ability. I mean, she could draw straight lines without a ruler. So I, so I could remember we, when we went to visit her, for instance, when I was really small, somewhere three to four, somewhere in there, about four, four, seeing the drawings that she had done, just doodling, you know. And, and she would, she would draw, like houses and, and people's faces, and they would be absolutely beautiful. And to her, it was just--well, this is something I do, it's just something, just something I do. Speaker 1: Wow-- Speaker 2: She, she used to tell us a story about how she learned to, to, to read and write. She had older brothers. She had, she came from a large family. She was either the youngest or closer to, to, to being the youngest. And she learned to write because because her brothers were learning to write--older brothers. And they would write their papers and they, you know, for homework, whatever, and then throw them in the garbage, and turn in the real assignment. And she would go in the garbage and get the papers out, and figure out how to, you know, figure, figure things out, and that's how she taught herself how to, how to, how to read and write. Speaker 1: What an interesting--do you happen to have any of her, her drawings, or anything like that? Speaker 2: I, I don't, and which is a shame because I'm sure she left some behind. Maybe, even my sisters [Claudette Bey Caldwell and Deneterius Bey] have them in their collections. I was officially--I'll see if I could shake them down for some. Speaker 1: That sounds really, very interesting, too-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --like an, an architect or, or a master draftswoman-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --before her time. Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Story_ID: 611458 Speaker 1: Let's talk about, a little bit, a little bit about your, your dad [Lee Bey, Sr.] and his parents-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --their names and-- Speaker 2: Their, their names were--his mother's name was, was Onnie [Onnie Barry Bey] and it's--I think it's--I, I spelled it right in there. It's, it's, I remember he used to tell us it's Johnny without the J, but I can never remember whether it was two Ns or one-- Speaker 1: You have two-- Speaker 2: --but I spelled it right there because I-- Speaker 1: --okay, you have two. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, there you go. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was Onnie. She was--well, Onnie, what they called her is what they called her. She was Onnie Barry and married, married my grandfather. My grandfather's name was Claudis [Claudis Bey]--originally, his name was Claudius Johnson. The family's name was Johnson and it--he changed it in the '30s [1930s] when he joined the Moorish Science Temple [Moorish Science Temple of America]. I mean I could talk about it if you like. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I--please, that's real interesting. Speaker 2: Well, you know, they, they were in Mississippi. My mother [Lula Dixon Bey]--my, my father's parents, and they, they, you know, they come to Chicago [Illinois]. And they live in what we now call Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]. They had a house, or an apartment, on Vernon--I want to say 28th [Street] and Vernon [Avenue], which probably no longer exists. I guess it's Prairie Shores [Chicago, Illinois] and Lake Meadows [Lake Meadows Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] over there now. Speaker 1: Oh, right. Speaker 2: And he worked for, he worked a while for the WPA [Works Progress Administration], building streets and things for, you know, for the city--bridges and stuff like that. And while he was there, he meets a guy who was a member of the Moorish Science Temple. Now, the Moorish Science Temple is, in some respects, is like a precursor to the Nation of Islam in a way. I mean, it have--kept--have some of the same beliefs in terms of, that African Americans are not just Negroes, but really were--are, are people grander than, than, than we're being told, and that a prophet in this case was a guy named Noble Drew Ali was the guy that God appointed to kind of lead us out of the--to lead them, lead us out of the wilderness. So, it was a religious order, religious group, and had temples around town. They worshipped at one on Orleans Street on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], despite living on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. And it had some tenets of Islam there that believed in the Koran [Qur'an], and that kind of thing. But one of the things you had to do, when you joined, was you had to change your name and, and abandon the slave name, and take on the name of either Bey or El, E-L. And I'm glad he took on Bey 'cause Lee El would, it would-- Speaker 1: Too much trouble-- Speaker 2: --give people fits, right. But, but he changed the name, so, so we, so, so then the name, the name switched from, from Johnson to, to Bey (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bey. That is so--because I, I was going to ask you if, you know, you knew the origins of your name. And, well, that's real interesting about the Moorish Science. So, does it still exist in its original form, or did it kind of--has it morphed into something else? Speaker 2: You know, it--the, the--it still exists. It doesn't have the power, I guess, that it had in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s], but it still exists. You know, many--when, when the Nation of Islam was founded, many members left for that. And the Nation of Islam was more political than, than the Moorish Science Temple was. And then, it kind of, it lost its power in the, you know as the 20th century went on. But it was huge here in, in Chicago, New Jersey as well, and Newark [New Jersey], especially. And it's, it's also--a (unclear) now is also strong in, in prisons-- Speaker 1: Interesting-- Speaker 2: --guys who, who undergo the conversion and change their name to, into Bey. I'll get it--when I was in the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], I would get a call at least once a month from someone who had just got the name Bey. And they, you know, they saw my name some place and called, you know, would call up just to, just to talk and stuff, yeah. Speaker 1: That is really interesting. Speaker 2: They call collect, you know, so, what you're--what do you do (laughter)? Speaker 1: As prisoners are want to do. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Wow, that--wow. So, I mean, how do you feel about having the name Bey because I do have a lot of cousins. Speaker 2: Tons-- Speaker 1: --so they're Johnsons and-- Speaker 2: Well, you, you know, the, the cousins that are all, all Beys who were, who would have been Johnsons, if that makes any sense. My father had five sisters, but only a few was--got--only a few boys were born. So it's, it's me, and I think I've got--let's see, how many male cousins have I got with the name Bey--not many. That was--it's me and my cousin, Derrick [Derrick Bey], my cousin, Greg [Gregory Bey]--that's it. And then, there's, then, their sons, Greg's sons, but everyone else-- Speaker 1: (Unclear), too? Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all progeny of, of the sisters, girls, so they all, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hm, they all changed. Speaker 1: Well, that's really--now, that's interesting as well. I, I like the story about people calling you collect (laughter). Story_ID: 611459 Speaker 1: We're going to jump to your elementary school which you said James Madison [James Madison Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you said you were there until-- Speaker 2: The end of fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, you went to Charles Caldwell [Charles P. Caldwell Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And when did you graduate from there? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: And, and, oh, that's why I don't have your--where you went to high school? Speaker 2: I went to--actually, I went to two high schools, and not at the same time, of course. My first two years, I went to, to Lindblom Technical [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois], when it was then Lindblom Tech. And my grades were so atrocious, I ended up leaving Lindblom. Actually, that's--it ends up being an interesting time of my life actually. Speaker 1: Why was, why is that so? Speaker 2: I was, you know, my, my two oldest sisters are extremely smart, like in Who's Who of, you know, American High School Students [Who's Who Among American High School Students]. Speaker 1: Oh, high school. Speaker 2: And my sister, Dee [Deneterius Bey], is--if she's isn't a genius, she's as close to it--I mean, an extremely bright, bright woman. And, and I was just sort of interested in other things (laughter) so, but I, but I would do well on standardized tests. And so, that's how I ended up getting into, into, into Lindblom. And I was in the gifted program when I was in the seventh and eighth grade, but I, you know, I was just there because-- Speaker 1: You were there 'cause of-- Speaker 2: --because I was there, yeah, yeah, although I did learn some things there that actually end up playing a role in my life later on. And, and I, and I wasn't interested in academics at all at Lindblom which is a shame because Lindblom then was like, it's like Whitney Young [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], or is now-- Speaker 1: A real powerhouse. Speaker 2: --a real, real powerhouse. It was the first and, and then second, depending on which semester it was--top-rated school in the city. And my older sister, Dee, had graduated from there a year before I got there. So, I come, and this, oh, you're Dee's brother and, oh, my God, you know. And I was, you know (laughter), was not setting the world on fire at all. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You're definitely in her shadow there? Speaker 2: Oh, in her, in her shadow's shadow, you know. It was, it was pretty bad. Story_ID: 611460 Speaker 1: But then, something happened. In the end of my sophomore year [at Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois], which would have been '81 [1981], I think, or, you know, June of, June of '81 [1981], I had--I failed the, I'd failed an English class, if you can believe that, and a chemistry class. And I wanted my parents to send me to summer school, and they refused to do it which-- Speaker 2: Why? Speaker 1: --my father [Lee Bey, Sr.] said, well, if you didn't get it for free, I'm not paying for it. And I remember being, feeling that, that summer, like what's going to happen to me? Then something else happens that summer. Very suddenly in August of '81 [1981], my father dies. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry to hear that. Speaker 1: Yeah, in-, indeed, I was fifteen years old. And those two events happening so suddenly--I mean, I, even explaining it to my children now, as I, as I get older, I, I cannot tell you how much that shaped my life and, and convinced me that I had to be then about the business of taking care of myself. I, you know, I'd figured out then I could no longer just be this guy who's, you know, who would let the fates take care of him, that I had to be an active participant in whatever I was going to be. So, I end up leaving Lindblom, and went to CVS, the Chicago Vocational [Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --which was closer to my house. Wasn't, wasn't much money around after my father died-- Speaker 2: Right 'cause you were living on Constance [Avenue] instead? Speaker 1: On Constance-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: -um-hm, so I could walk to school supposedly and, you know, catching a bus. My parents had a store at the time actually--I forgot about this--a real small grocery store at 87th [Street] and South Chicago [Avenue]. An idea would be that I would just help out my mother [Lula Dixon Bey] after work, and just sort of try to fill the manly shoes as much as I, as much as I could. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm--I just want--it was like, what type of store? Speaker 1: A grocery store, really small, and then get candy and, you know, I don't think we sold meat, but candy, canned goods, vegetables, that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It had been my parents' dream. And I, and I guess they got it in--I want to say the fall of '79 [1979]. And then, by the summer, August of '81 [1981], when my father died, my mother still ran it, but her, her heart wasn't, her heart really wasn't, really wasn't in it. Speaker 2: What--it's a pretty devastating blow. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I mean, I mean, I could, I could, I just remember this house, just how sudden it was. I mean, my father was, my father was quite a character. I mean, he was--my, my mother was, was kind of introverted, and, and, but my father was extroverted. He was as funny as the day is long, and, and he was just the kind of guy who, if he came into a room, either, you know, it was, he was, you're going to laugh, you're going to do something, but, you know, it, he was, his presence was, what was, was felt. In his large family, our large family, extended family in the (unclear) means the number--it's dozens and dozens and dozens of cousins and nephews and in-laws, and that kind of stuff. And then, he was coming, like the center, the center of all that, in a, in a big way. And then, when he, when he, when he died, I mean it was, I mean it was like I'd stepped into somebody else's life. This wasn't the life that I had, had known. But I, but I learned, but I learned some valuable things from that. I mean, one was the, you know, to, to step up and take care of myself. Story_ID: 611461 Speaker 1: So, I went, so I ended up going to the CVS [Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], one, A because my grades were bad, but B, I thought, I thought I, I should learn a trade, right? Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And I thought, well, that will be a good place to go. So, CVS didn't--did not want to take me. I mean, my grades were, were that bad--no, no reason to, so I thought, oh, if I can't--what am I going to do? So, my brother-in-law, Charles [Charles Caldwell]--and God bless that brother to this day. And, and Charles is eight years older than I am, so he's, you know, a college student himself, you know, himself, all of maybe twenty-three years old at the time. He convinces the, the counselor there at CVS, a guy named Frank Beeter [ph.]--I'll never forget his name--to, to take me. He and my sister, Claudette [Claudette Bey Caldwell], kind of, you know, put themselves in the mercy of the court from the taking, and, and the guy did. And so, I, I get, I get admitted. So, I start, you know, my junior year at, at CVS. And, you know, the first year was kind of funny because I because I was from the neighborhood. I knew a lot of the students there so, I mean, I wasn't super-popular, but I was popular enough. And, but I was, but I just buckled down and got the, got the work done. Speaker 2: And what, what trade were you interested in pursuing while you're at CVS? Speaker 1: The only one they would let me in was, was print shop, graphic arts, and that ends up being kind of interesting because I thought, okay, well, I'll operate a printing press. Then, I remember, we went to a print trade show at McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois] that the shop teacher, Mr. Roberts [ph.], took us on. We're learning, we're learning the craft on, you know, these kind of old-fashioned presses. And we go to this trade show, and I see this exhibit for the future of presses. And, you know, this, this is '82 [1982], so that, you know, there's computers and stuff-- Speaker 2: That are, like this big? Speaker 1: --like this big, but they were really sleek and modern and, and then, you type this thing. And I remember thinking that, that, that computer is going to end up replacing, you know, much of the functions that we were learning in school. And it terrified me. I thought, well, what, what the heck am I going to do now? I mean, I'm learning something that I think is obsolete. Speaker 2: Already (laughter). Speaker 1: Already (laughter), exactly, already. Story_ID: 611462 Speaker 1: A funny thing happened. My senior year at CVS [Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]--had a teacher, Thomas Doyle [ph.], God bless him, too-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --because I really liked this teacher, his English class, so he let us write essays. So because he would let us write and, you know, and encourage us to think, I did some of my best work in his class. One day, it was March of 1983--I graduate in June of '83 [1983]--he's handing back papers. I need to write something about, you know, you know, you know, defense issues and the Cold War. And stuff was still hot then, and military buildup--I mean, this was just--this country have--all this stuff was still hot then. We had to write a paper that argued one side of the case or another, and had to balance it against some social issue, essentially asking the question, why spend all this money for [U.S.] military when there's your social need to, and all, all that kind of stuff? And Mr. Doyle is handing back papers, March of '83 [1983], and he hands the paper, and he says, you know, you're a good writer. You ever think about journalism? And he keeps on, and as he's passing out the papers. Speaker 2: What, just like this-- Speaker 1: Exactly. He's throw-, and I cannot tell you what that did. I mean, I thought, journalism, journalism--yeah, and all of a sudden, it made, it made sense. I mean, and it--had he not said that, I don't know what, I don't know if I would have ever come to that conclusion. Speaker 2: I would be speaking to [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey, the print shop owner? Speaker 1: Exactly, the print shop owner, that's right or the, or the out-of-work print shop owner maybe. And, and I thought, this is it--journalism. Aww, that, that's what I want to be. I could write, I always could, I could always write well, and I kind of liked newspapers, reading, and the stuff like that, so I thought this is it. About two weeks later, I'm in print shop, and there's a guy named Darryl Alexander [ph.] who's one of the students there. I haven't seen Darryl since we graduated. Speaker 2: That time-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --but you still remember his name? Speaker 1: --I still remember his name, and here's the reason why. He's, he's printing up something and doing something. And in the next room, he has this paper called the Englewood Express [ph.]. So, I said, "What's that?" He says, "Oh, this?" He says, "This is the Englewood Express--this is the paper that I write for." I said, "I didn't know you wrote." And he says, "Yeah." He's like, "I go there on weekends." So, I said, "Well, I want to write, too." I said, "How do I, how do I get into this?" So, he says, "Well, the next meeting," staff meeting was that weekend. He says, "Why, why don't you meet me there?" So, I rode my bike from 83rd [Street] and Constance [Avenue]-- Speaker 2: What kind of bike? Speaker 1: It was a Schwinn World, a ten-speed bike--my mother [Lula Dixon Bey] had bought me for being for, you know, for trying, for putting through the effort to, you know-- Speaker 2: To be, be a good boy? Speaker 1: --to be a good boy. And I, I love this bike. I still dream about this bike even, even to this, even now. And I rode that thing from 83rd and Constance all the way to the Kelly Branch Library at 61st [Place] and Normal [Boulevard]-- Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: --where, where upstairs this thing is. I get there and it dawns on me, I don't have a chain. So the librarians let me actually bring the bike in. I mean, today, that would never happen, but bring it, bring it. So, I go up there, and there's the staff of the Englewood Express. And it was headed by this guy, Larry Muhammad, young guy who was--I worked for the Defender [Chicago Defender]. And I think I worked for one of the dailies, and, and I worked for the AP [Associated Press]. And he was--remember, he was thirty-six years old, had an [U.S.] Army coat, and a silver Honda Civic with a, with a stick shift. And I thought he was the coolest guy in the world. And, and if he'd--that day, if he'd told me to march into the lake [Lake Michigan], I would have done. it. And, I-- Speaker 2: So, you're a little impressionable? Speaker 1: A little impressionable, that's right. And I, I thought he was just the coolest guy. So, you know, so we get, and we meet, and he says, welcome aboard. And, and I show my writing, and, and that, that start, that started it. So, as much as I regretted, you know, leaving, having to leave Lindblom [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois]--think of why not--(unclear) with a hot poker for the most part. I mean, had it not been for that, and going to CVS and meeting, you know, the people in those circumstances, I never would have found journalism. Speaker 2: That is a very interesting kind of convoluted (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: --but, ultimately, a very beautiful story. I like that. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 611463 Speaker 1: I'll ask you one last question. So, it's March of '83 [1983]. You're thinking about journalism. You go to Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. Where--college, where, where was this coming in, your, your senior year [at Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] so-- Speaker 2: Well, that becomes an interesting question because I, I had a chance to go on a scholarship. I actually did very on the AC-, on the ACT. In fact, I remember my counselor, who's not Frank Beeter [ph.], but another person--I can never remember someone's name. I remember her--going to see her to try to figure out career plans. And I remember her, she was like ninety (laughter), she was not interested. When I did well on the ACT, I got, I got a twenty-five on, on it and-- Speaker 1: That's good. Speaker 2: --and, that, that was good. And, and it was funny was I didn't--I mean, can I, can I--should brag about this. I actually didn't finish it. I actually 'cause I've always been awful in math, so the, the math part, I was going so slow, I didn't finish the math part, you know, but I mean not even close, but I still got twenty-five. So, she came, she came to our shop--says, I need to talk to you. So, we're, we're talking, and she had arranged for me to get a scholarship, not total, but significantly, at Western Illinois University [Macomb, Illinois], but I didn't go. And the reason why I didn't go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because-- Speaker 2: --and I never told anyone this until recently. In fact, I just--I even told my, my wife [Valencia Scott Bey] and kids this--is because I knew that my mother [Lula Dixon Bey] couldn't make up the, the shortfall. Speaker 1: Oh, that-- Speaker 2: So, I never brought it up, I, I never brought it up. So, so I, I held on that for twenty years. I never told any-, anybody, but I, I sure didn't. I was, I mean, they were looking for graphic arts majors and stuff and, and that's, and that's, they were, they were heavily recruiting. And that's where I was going to go. But because I knew, I knew my mother couldn't afford to, to, do the whole thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To make that up. Speaker 2: --I, I thought, nope, nope. And then, I didn't want to leave her alone either because my older sisters [Claudette Bey Caldwell and Deneterius Bey] had moved out-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and then, I just--and she was there with my [maternal] grandmother [Early Dixon], and I didn't want to leave her alone. So, I never told her, so I, I never told her. Speaker 1: You didn't want to burden her? Speaker 2: Didn't want to burden her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I ended up going--where I ended up going was, which was actually being, actually was another good move--ended up going for my first two years to Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois]. It was good, it was cheap, I could ride my bike there and catch the bus there. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And it had a student newspaper, Tempo, and, and it was great. And the faculty advisor--show you how small the world is--the faculty advisor was a young professor, and probably in her middle thirties then, and, and she used to bring her son to-- Speaker 1: Don't say it was Kanye West? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --that's exactly who it is. Yep, Donda, Donda West was the faculty advisor, a great woman, too, really was encouraging to me, you know, to pursuing this career. When, when I wanted to--Chicago State didn't have a journalism major, and I wanted to go to Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. She was really encouraging about me going to Columbia College and, and doing that. But, yeah, she used to bring her, her little jug-eared son there. And, and she, she had this great green Volvo and we used to--I was over at her house always-- Story_ID: 611464 Speaker 1: In your childhood in, in growing up in Avalon Park [Chicago, Illinois] in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], any particular sights, and sounds, and smells that y- kind of have a nice and tangible quality to you when you, you think about your childhood? Speaker 2: You know, I, I do. The, the first half of the childhood, of my childhood, I remember the block. And it's funny when I go there now, and try to show my kids. I, I can't show them what I saw because the block has changed so much. But I, I remember, as far as--I, I remember the, the houses were, were colorful then. I mean, you get to see--there's a brown house and a white house. I mean, and the block had a lot of color and texture. And, and I remember the gardens in front of, of the house--the people, the people kept them. And if the wind blew the right way, then the smell of flowers that would, that would come around. I could remember our, our backyard, and I think I have a picture of me in the old backyard. I could remember laying on my back. This is before kindergarten and was watching the, the clouds go by. I can remember a, a large, what I think is an oak tree, that was in the yard of a house at the corner, that it was visible from our house. I could just remember this thing swaying in the, in the breeze in the summertime, and just--I don't know, just, just being fascinated by that. I also remember 75th Street, which is like the main street there, which, you know, your parent--don't--stay off 75th Street. Of course, you know, that's where you want to go, right? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Naturally. Speaker 2: And, so, I remember going there and it, it seemed so bustling. It seemed like State Street to me with, you know, cars, and people and, and every-, everything. But, yeah, I mean, it was, it was, and, and it's funny. I mean, I mean, not being young again, I, I don't know, I don't know if kids who have this experience but, you know, to, to put into some context, I mean all of us--our parents were, you know, newly up from the South. And folks, we were first-generation northerners, all, all of us. And, you know, many of them had brought, you know, the sense of thrift and industry, and other things. So, you know, the store owners were black, you know. The--I could remember there's an Ace Hardware [Ace Hardware Corporation] store that my father [Lee Bey, Sr.] used to go to on 75th and Dorchester [Avenue]. We used to even, used to walk up there. And the guy who owned it was, was a Korean War buddy of his. And this hardware store is like an old-time hardware store with the wooden floors that squeaked and saw-, it smelled of sawdust. And I remember being--I mean, being fascinated by this place, you know, from as far back as I could remember to age eight or nine, and just touching the tools and, and just going there, and men being men and laughing at stuff, and that kind of thing. That, that left an impression on me. Story_ID: 611465 Speaker 1: We moved to the other, to the other place. Avalon Park [Chicago, Illinois] was more upscale than, than that part of South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] that we, that we lived in. And I can remember the, you know, you know, just the, just the houses. I mean, there were more big houses and just the--and all, all of this kind of architecture base. This is kind of funny, but I never thought about that. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, and-- Speaker 1: But just, I can remember like, in the, you know, the houses, the window detail, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Oh, what were the houses like in your, in your neighborhoods, like were they greystone, or wood, or what were they-- Speaker 1: Largely, largely wood frame houses at Kimbark [Avenue] and then, brick stucco. Our house was frame, though, when we moved to Constance [Avenue]. But, you know, since we had this far-flung network of family and friends on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], we were always driving to somebody's house. And I can remember just looking out the, the window of, of the, of my father's [Lee Bey, Sr.] car. He had this big black 1970 Buick Electra when, when I was little with a convertible top. And I could remember just, just drinking in everything that I saw. I mean, just, you know, the bungalows, the churches, the, the, you know, the corner buildings, and just drinking in all, all the detail. And it's funny because when I end up being architectural critic for the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], it's funny how much encoding that, that-- Speaker 2: Your childhood had-- Speaker 1: --yeah, and how to appreciate a building, and how it's sited, and how a city is, is formed. And it's amazing how much of that stuff I was able to draw on. Speaker 2: Now, was that something like, that your parents kind of talked about, like, oh, you know, I like, I like that house, or there's something really, I, you know, I loved the bungalow style, or was it just something that was inherent in, in you that, that architectural interest was already in you? Speaker 1: You know, a, a little of both. My, my father actually wanted to be architect-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: --when, he was young. And he would kind of hint at this a little bit when, when we were, when we were young. And, but he, he liked a good building. You could just sort of, yeah, I can remember him just sort of looking at buildings. If this building he liked, he would just sort of just go look at it, or it would catch his eyes as he, as he's going by. And I, I, thinking about it, I'm thinking, you know, you know, you pick up all kinds of clues, cues when you're a kid, but both verbal and non-verbal. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it must have been--I remember when I was fourteen. This was about a year, year and half before he died, so maybe thirteen, fourteen. I remember one Saturday, he--we drove down to what's now Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]. And I remember, it was, and it was not in the same, it's not in, in the state, the reclaimed seat that it is now. I mean, there's been buildings. There was all kind of stuff, but the fabric of old Bronzeville was still there--the corner buildings, the old churches, all of it. I remember us spending a Saturday, and I don't even know why, just driving around looking at it, and him telling me, this is what this building was, this was what this building was, and being fascinated. And that trip, I guess, I'll probably get to it later, I suppose. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, most definitely. Speaker 1: But that trip is directly related to a series that I ended up writing, writing on Bronzeville twenty years later. I mean-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --it was, it was like, he was over my shoulder again saying, "Remember this building, remember this building" because I end up writing about in, in many of the same-- Speaker 2: All those particular places? Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: That's really beautiful Speaker 1: Thank you. Yeah, it's-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --yeah, it's, yeah, he--the old man knew what he was doing. He was driving me around and he was showing me, showing me something that was, that was sinking in. Speaker 2: And, and impacted you-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --right until-- Speaker 1: Uh-hm. Speaker 2: --until this very moment. Story_ID: 611466 Speaker 1: I did want to go back for a moment when you're talking about losing your father [Lee Bey, Sr.], and that particular impact on, on you. And I just wanted--brought it a little bit--how did that impact your family? I know that you said that your mother [Lula Dixon Bey] really didn't have her heart in, in the store, now did the store remain open? Was that open like, until you went away to college [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] or-- Speaker 2: Let's see. I think the store stayed open--I can't remember now whether there was to--he died in August of '81 [1981]. And the store may have stayed open until March or May of '82 [1982] or '83 [1983]. I can't remember which one now, but maybe it was '82 [1982]. How it, how it impacted us was interesting. My, my mother ended up giving away all the food in the store--just, just giving it away. I mean, you know, she--if there was, if she heard a need of someone, she would should just--I mean, that's, that's how we ended up giving the, you know, we literally gave away the store. Speaker 1: Give the store-- Speaker 2: You know, we just sort--I remember going with her to, you know, to take food around to, to cousins, and whoever needed some. If you need something, come on by. And I think that was her way of releasing, and kind of moving on to the next phase of, of her life. Speaker 1: My sister--well, my older sister, Claudette [Claudette Bey Caldwell], was married by then. She got married, and her and Charles [Charles Caldwell] married in '80 [1980], '81 [1981], August of '81 [1981]. Dee, my middle sister, by the way, whose name is actually Deneterius [Deneterius Bey]-- Speaker 2: Ohh-- Speaker 1: --yeah, but, but we ended up calling her Dee because when my sister's kids were born, they couldn't pronounce that name. So, they called her Dee, so then we all started, started her calling Dee. Speaker 2: Dee, okay. Speaker 1: But the, the name is very masculine, so she'd always get, so, you know, she would, she would show up to job interviews and-- Speaker 2: Like-- Speaker 1: --"Deneterius, you're a girl?" And, "Yes, I'm a girl." But, but, you know, she was, so she was still, still in college. So, you know, so she had to, had to complete, and, you know, and it all affected us and 'cause we're all in different parts of, of our lives, all affect us in different ways. But, still, despite my father being the, the dominant character in our lives, we, we knew that my mother was, was really the, the root. I mean, if you could-- Speaker 2: The woman behind the curtain? Speaker 1: Exactly. I mean, if my father was the apple or the fruit, right, of the, you know, the, the thing that, you know, that draws the eye and, and the desire, my mother was really, the, the tree, you know, that's the trunk that made the fruit--and he knew that, and she knew that. And so, that was the, that was-- Speaker 2: Now, did you know that when you were a, a kid? Speaker 1: Yeah. We, we used to have these, and it seems kind of, you know, kids are always doing this. I'm sure my kids do the same thing but they, we used to wonder like, how would things be like if, you know, if Daddy died first, Mommy died first, what, you know, what would, would happen? And we came to the conclusion early on that, you know, we don't want to lose either one of them. But if Mommy died, there would be utter calamity, you know, in the house. And, you know, and she did, she did a job, incredible job of holding things together. And by this time, not only is, you know, I'm still home, and my sister is still in college. My [maternal] grandmother [Early Dixon] was still--lives with us at this time. And then, my aunt, her older sister, who's still alive actually, lives with us as well. So, she kind of had to hold all this stuff together while plotting--planning her next portion of her life, of her life. That's why I don't to be a burden financially to her. Speaker 2: Right, that's--I was, I wanted to kind of join those two together because, you know, you said that things were tough so-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 611467 Speaker 1: So before you start school [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], the store is closed. The, the source of income-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is gone. So now, what is, what is your mom [Lula Dixon Bey] doing? Speaker 2: She, she ends up, she was, she didn't complete high school in, in Helena [Helena-West Helena, Arkansas]. And she ends up going back and getting, getting a GED [General Educational Development]. And she's, at this time, time, she's fifty-two, fifty-three. And she ends up getting her GED, And then, she got a job as a--what do you call--you know, you, she would tend to, she would go the house of, house of elderly people, and kind of, kind of tend to them, you know. Speaker 1: Oh, like, what we call home healthcare. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it, yeah, that's exactly it. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: And you'd sign it up with a, with a company and that, that placed her in this. And she really liked it, and that's what she did. Story_ID: 611468 Speaker 1: And then, by, by this time in '82 [1982], I want to say--let me make sure I got, I got the years right--'82 [1982]. It might, in '82 [1982], I worked that summer which is--I was really proud because that way, I earned my keep. And I paid for my own night school to make up for the classes that I failed at Lindblom [Robert Lindblom Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --so I can graduate on time. And, and so, that's why when I mentioned that my parents [Lula Dixon Bey and Lee Bey, Sr.] deciding, like the previous summer, I guess it was, not to pay for-- Speaker 2: For summer school. Speaker 1: --for summer school--the best thing they ever did. Because then, when I, when I had to pay for it myself, I got good grades, obviously. But it awakened something in me that I could do something. That I could, so you get the journalism happening, but that's going to take a while. But even right now, I can do something to kind of steer, you know, my own, my own ship a bit, ship a bit. And, and that was--I mean, that was empowering to me as a, as a kid coming up. I felt like--I mean, frankly, I felt like a man, you know, I, I really did. Speaker 2: Right, right. Now, I guess with your, your sisters [Claudette Bey Caldwell and Deneterius Bey] away from home, so it is just you. Did you feel like that was a, a space that you were filling to be the man of the house now that your father's passed away or-- Speaker 1: I, yeah, you know, at some level, I did. Yeah, yeah, I, but I, I can, but more I remember, just not wanting to be a burden, figuring a man wouldn't be a burden. I, you know, I'm not going to be--I won't be a burden. Speaker 2: Your dad taught you that? Speaker 1: He taught me that. That's right, that's right (unclear). And, and, you know, that's the thing. I, I just remember being, being so proud that I could, you know, that I could sort of, that I'm, could, could kind of pull my own weight after being so irresponsible in my, in my-- Speaker 2: In your youth. Speaker 1: --in my youth. That's right. Speaker 2: What, now, what was your, your job that summer? Speaker 1: I was work--it, it was a city job. It was, it couldn't worked out any better. You know, it was a city summer job, and it was actually in the print shop that I was a student in during the school year [at Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. So, so I got to operate the printing presses and stuff. We printed out flyers and Pluggers, and other stuff with the city. But it was, it was, it was the same as my class except, you know, I was, I was getting paid for it, so it was great. I mean, it was, it was, it was great (background noise). Story_ID: 611469 Speaker 1: Wait, March of '83 [1983], when was--Harold, Harold Washington was elected April of '83 [1983] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of '83 [1983], uh-hm. Speaker 1: So, I was in high school at the time, and I remember I went to U-High [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], so being in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and I, I remember that, that very bright dividing line between black and white. How was it at, at CVS [Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and then, I guess, and then you are at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago Illinois] later, so how, what do you remember about those heady days? Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm glad you, you mentioned that because Harold got elected the month--well, he won the primary the month after Mr. Doyle [Thomas Doyle (ph.)] taught me about journalism, meaning that I'll be a journalist. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And seeing Harold elected--and this sounds crazy--made me convinced that I could, I could be a newspaper reporter. I mean, I was just convinced. I thought if that can happen, if he can get elected, anything is possible. And, and I was a huge fan of, of Harold. I remember I had a, and you can probably hear traces of it, I had a stutter when I, when I was a kid. Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: And I, I didn't, I didn't like speaking in public. I didn't like speaking in private is what--I can make a smart remark, but I mean, the idea of getting in front of the class terrified me. I remember watching Harold and his command of the language, and how we did. And I thought, I like that. I want some of that. I can't get it all, but I want some of that. Speaker 1: I like the cut of his jib. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, the cut of his jib. And, and, and the way he would use language as a weapon, or a flower, you know, he could reward, he can punish with, with using words--not yelling, but just, just this sort of cool detached-- Speaker 1: It's so beautiful-- Speaker 2: --yeah, exactly, exactly. And, you know, for a kid, he was, he was from the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] just like me. He was from my parents' [Lula Dixon Bey and Lee Bey, Sr.] generation. I could see elements of my father in a way in there. And it was an incredible time. And then, when, when he won, oh, my goodness. Story_ID: 611470 Speaker 1: And I remember we had a teacher, a substitute teacher at CVS [Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]--hmm, what's this guy's name, can't think of this guy's name. Speaker 2: That's really good--if you remember a substitute teacher (laughter). Speaker 1: He was, he was like a, he was like a, he was--I used to call these guys the CVS players. They would be this recurring theme, recurring teachers that would pop up in class. This is Mr. So-and-So, Ms. So-and-So. It seemed like it, it was the same six or eight that kept popping up. Either it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The CVS players (laughter). Speaker 1: English class or--so, but this guy, and, ohh man, I wish I could remember this guy's name. But he was probably looking back on it now, probably when, younger than I am now, for sure, he's probably thirty-three, thirty-four--very cool, very astute. And it seemed like, he had something going on, that substitute teaching was just a thing he did. But he had, he got a sense that he had a fully--I get it, since he had a fully formed life away from that. But I remember he brought, he came to class. This is during the, this is after the primary, before the general election. And by this time, you know, the, the Democratic machine and some, during its support to Bernie, Bernard Epton, who's Republican, and-- Speaker 2: Which was just unheard of-- Speaker 1: --unheard of, and, and as racially nasty as, as the first, as the primary was, this one was equally nasty because the, the, you know, Epton had this sort of tagline, you know, essentially, elect me before it's too late. Speaker 2: Before it's too late-- Speaker 1: Before, before, and-- Speaker 2: --that's right. Speaker 1: --and this teacher was downtown. And he is, tells--he hands us these--well, let me just back up a bit. He hands us--passes out these, these, these sheets of paper. And it has, like tons of ethnic jokes, you know, what will happen if Harold Washington is selected mayor [of Chicago, Illinois], whether the city's seal will turn to from what it is, to like two chicken bones' crossed and a drum. And, and they will be-, become Chicongo, Chicongo, you know, that kind of ignorant stuff. So, we, we like, "What is this? Where did you get this from?" So, he says, "I'll tell you where I got it from." He says, "I got this from a cop who's passing this down--your downtown at State [Street] and Madison [Street]." And we were like, no kidding. And so, he tells a story about how the cop was passing it out to whites. You don't want to pass it out to him. He basically, like-- Speaker 2: Like snatched it-- Speaker 1: --rolled up on him and said, you're, you're gonna give me this. And he got it for the specific purpose of showing. And he said, you know, why you guys are, and, and the teachers tells us very cool. He says, "No, you know, like, high school's fun, but, you know, this is the world that you, that you're going to go into. This is the world that you're going to live in." And I remember being just, you know 'cause living as, as we lived on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] then, you know, you never can make contact with anyone white unless they're on television, or a cop, or a teacher. But if you didn't get into trouble, I mean, I mean, the idea of whites and race--it, it almost didn't exist. I mean, when I was a kid, the store owners, the store owners were black and, as I mentioned before. So, you, it, it was almost like a, like a, it was like, like a large island. I mean, you could drive from one end of the South Side to another-- Speaker 2: And still not encounter any whites. Speaker 1: --and, and still not run into, into a white person. And the idea, you know, you knew from history books that there was this history, you know. You knew from, you read something here and there. And, of course, you know, the rea-, but you don't understand the reason why your neighborhood is all black. It's because it was very, you know, either-- Speaker 2: 'Cause it was segregated. Speaker 1: --it was, exactly, those very forces that are the outline of that paper in a sense. But that was a, again, was, was another wakeup call for me that, okay, this is what the world is like. This is, this is the world I'm gonna, I'm gonna, gonna go into. And I, and I can't explain it better than that, but, but those, those things, Harold's election--what that guy gave was-- Speaker 2: The handout. Speaker 1: --the handout and, of course, you know, first, it, it shaped me in ways, even now, I, I can't fully, fully-- Speaker 2: Well you're still young. Speaker 1: No, so, yeah, at that time, they figure it out hopefully. But, but it was a, but to answer your question, it was, it was a fantastic time. Story_ID: 611471 Speaker 1: And then, actually, so I graduate [from Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] in '83 [1983] and, and at the UIC Pavilion [Chicago, Illinois]. And there's a surprise guest speaker--lo and behold, it's Harold Washington. Oh man-- Speaker 2: No way. Speaker 1: --we were yelling top of our, our lungs that Harold can--and no, no one knew that the, you know, the, you know, he comes up on stage and he's hand goes out--we're all hollering. And, and it was, and at that time, I was, I was done. I mean, I was just, I was done. Speaker 2: It looks like seeing The Beatles. Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Yeah, I, I can't, yeah, I, I can't think of even when I've been that excited to see even now, you know, you know, of a figure that, that, excited to see. But it just galvanized at that point. I don't know, just seeing him, I just knew. Now, I'm definitely going to become a journalist now. I, I--why I saw it that way, I don't know, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was just going to say because it's such an interesting connection like that. I could see where someone might say, oh, I know I want to be a politician, or I wanted to be a lawyer, but now I'm going to be a journalist. So, you haven't necessarily put those two together. But I guess maybe, it's just like you said, he embodied some elements of, of your father's [Lee Bey, Sr.] personality as a strong figure and, and so eloquent, and so well-spoken (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --the classic and he's so articulate. Speaker 1: So articulate, that's right. And he had done what, you know, what, what was the impossible. And, you know, did it on his own terms. And all, all that stuff kind of pours into you as, as a highly impressionable individual. Story_ID: 611472 Speaker 1: So, you're at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. You're looking at little baby Kanye West- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes (laughter). Speaker 1: --in class. Now, what, what, I know she was an English professor- Speaker 2: English professor, but she was faculty advisor for the student newspaper [Tempo] which I was a part of. And, so yes, she'd bring the little boy to class. And, in fact, it was interesting because her mother, Shirlie, Don-, Donda's [Donda West] mother, Shirlie [sic. Lucille E. Williams], I think, was a student there as well. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And she was great. I, I don't know, I don't know whether she's still alive or not. But she knew the Gap Band, which was my favorite. And she's the one who told me that the Gap Band, the G-A-P was from Greenwood [Avenue], Archer [Street], and Pine [Street], the streets that they, that they, that they grew up on [in Tulsa, Oklahoma]. That's, that's what it meant. Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Oh, man, she was great. She smoked cigarettes, didn't look that much older than, than Donda, actually, and was just a--I mean, the kind of--and she was, she was a fixture around the newspaper, and was just the kind of, you know, smart, motherly figure. I mean, I mean it was just, it was, it was a great time. I mean, it really was a great time. Story_ID: 611473 Speaker 1: So you're at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago Illinois] for your first two years. And Donda West encouraged you to go jump over to Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] because they had a, a journalism program. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Columbia had a journalism program. I, you know, I was curious about Columbia because I had a friend, who--we're still friends now--Sebastian Williams [ph.], who was a psychology major, but he was on the student newspaper [Tempo]. And he and I kind of somehow, from talking to him, the idea for Columbia came out of that. And I can't remember whether he suggested it, or whether I--I don't know how, but somehow, it came out of there. And he had a friend who ended up being a policeman, who was a journalism student at Columbia at the time, who was preparing to graduate. And he was having a party over at his house, lived on the southeast side. And Sebastian said just to come to this party, and see the kind of people you'd be going to school with. And, and, and Sebastian was older than me, so he drove, and I remember going over there, and it was, it was spring. I wish I could remember the year--it must be spring of '84 [1984], I'm guessing now. And just seeing, you know, all the, you know, the Columbia folks there--of course, there's lots of pretty girls which was, you know, just what I wanted to see, right? Speaker 1: Naturally. Speaker 2: And they were journalism majors, and it seems like everyone was funny and, and all this kind of thing. And I thought, oh, I could go here. But the other thing was--Columbia had, and God bless it for this, it had an open enrollment policy. So, if I could manage to pay, I could get in. But my grades at, at Chicago State were, were decent, but, you know, I, you know, I, they didn't matter. Grades didn't matter so-- Speaker 1: Well, you hadn't Lindblomed yourself. Speaker 2: That's right, I had, I had, that's right, I hadn't Lindblomed myself. And so, and, you know, I was really serious about being a journalist. And Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications]-- Speaker 1: At Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: --School at Northwestern, way too--I mean, I mean I know it seems funny now, but I think it was nine thousand dollars which, to me, was all the money in the world times ten. I mean, Columbia was three thousand at the time, so that, that was more manageable. But also, another funny thing happened at Chicago State. I met, on the student newspaper, there was this woman named--Betty Davis [ph.] was her name--who was an older student, who was a writer for the paper, wrote, you know, arts and stuff. And I remember talking about, we were talking what, what, you know, what our next steps are. And I said, I wanted to go to, I, I wanted to join the City News Bureau of Chicago [City Press]. I'd read about it. I wanted to join there when I graduate. So, she came to me once, and she had a copy of Chicago magazine. It had a story written on--I'll never forget this--by a reporter named Jack Starr--with two Rs--and it was a story of a girl's first year at City News. So, Betty was a beautiful woman, had a short Afro--boy, where is she now? She must have been in her late twenties at the time. Speaker 1: An older student? Speaker 2: Older student, that's right, that's right, and the oldest, and a beautiful short Afro. And she had, like a cane, but was very, but it was a stylish cane. It's just, just like a--so I'm sitting at my desk. So, she throws this magazine across and, of course, it lands perfectly because she was just that kind of cool woman, right? So, she says, you want to be a journalist? You need to read this to see if you're ready for this. So, I took this thing home, and I'm reading it and, and, you know, this young girl talked about how she was terror-, you know, she was terrorized by cops. And, you know, the, the editors at City News was beating her up--get this detail, get that detail. And I was like, in a cold sweat, thinking, okay, this is what I'm--but yet, I was excited by it at the same time. I was terrified and excited at the same time. Speaker 1: Right, the, the adrenaline, your fear or flight, like okay. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Yeah, I want to run from it and hug it at, at the same time. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Which is a strange emotion. Speaker 2: It is, it really is. And I, and I remember, I must have read this thing--I think she had to--give me my magazine back. And I must read this thing over and over and over and over again. And, and this was, yeah, this was, this was '80- this was late '84 [1984]. I want to say November of '84 [1984]. And then, I thought, okay, well to get this, and I got to go to Columbia now because I don't think Chicago State was going to get me there. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So, then, that's when I made the decision to go to--next year, to go to, to go to Columbia. And, and, you know, and, luckily, I was poor enough to get enough, you know, financial aid to help, you know, get me on. But then, I joined the student newspaper [The Columbia Chronicle] there which paid some of the tuition-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's nice. Speaker 2: --and that was good. Story_ID: 611474 Speaker 1: So, any mentors while you were at, at Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes, well, you know, one mentor at Chicago State, [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, the-- Speaker 1: Ohh, right. Speaker 2: --who was, who--he, he'd taken over from Donda [Donda West], late, as faculty advisor, like late, in my last semester. And I had a class of his in which he introduced us to--well, me--to James Baldwin, all the black writers, all the black writers with a conscience, with a conscience. And, and, so he was, he was great. He--like, we, we still keep in touch. But at Columbia, I met, and he just passed away recently. His memorial service was a couple, was just this weekend that I spoke at. But, but at Columbia, my mentor was Les Brownlee [Lester H. Brownlee]. Speaker 1: Ohh, right-- Speaker 2: Les Brownlee was-- Speaker 1: --we have a thing in our lunchroom, a nice-- Speaker 2: Oh, do you really? Speaker 1: --of the, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, he's, I mean, he was, he was great. I mean, he was--I mean, as important as other people were who got me along the way to, to this point. I mean, Les, single-handedly, made me a journalist. He was faculty advisor for the student newspaper [The Columbia Chronicle] at Columbia. And I had, you know, I had, you know, he taught a range of classes. So, I was in--I want to say two of his classes during my two and a half years at, at Columbia. But we were, we were as thick as thieves. And, and he pushed me to, to write better, to do better, to think more, to, to do all those things, and he threatened me-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's always worked. Speaker 2: --which, which was always good. My--I was--Columbia was coming to an end and I, I can't explain to you how much I loved Columbia College. In fact, I don't like to go back. I mean, I, I like to go forward. I don't like, like, you know, dwelling too much on the, on the past, despite what I'm doing right here, right, but-- Speaker 1: That's okay. This is sanctioned. Speaker 2: That's right--it's sanctioned. But if I could go back--not to live, but just to see again, and as, as a go-see again, any, any part of my life, it'll be that. I loved Columbia College. If I'm, if I'm ever rich, they're going to get a million dollars out of me, you know, a grant out of me because it was so electric, so many creative people, so many people who are like me, who are, who are--kind of on the margins of things, things academically in high school, who kind of found themselves through film, and through dance, and through other things. It was great. And, and, Les was a master at seeing things in an unconventional way. I mean, he, he saw a journalist in me. I mean, I didn't come from, you know, you know, from a middle class family, a middle class family, or from a family, a family of journalists, or you know, those things, but he, he saw that I had some, some raw talent. And he molded and shaped, and he did this with countless numbers of students. But, so my years, years at Columbia are coming to an end in '88 [1988], early, late '87 [1987], or early '88 [1988]. And it's now, it's time to really grown up now, right? Speaker 1: The official-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 611475 Speaker 1: You were talking about, about Les Brownlee [Lester H. Brownlee], and how influential he was. So, it's spring '88 [1988], you graduated [from Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Do you remember who your graduation speakers--since you have this great memory? Speaker 2: I didn't even go, I didn't even go. I, I-- Speaker 1: You denied your mother [Lula Dixon Bey]-- Speaker 2: I, I denied, I--well, and, and there's a reason--let's see. Well, yeah, we, we--there's, there's a reason why. I, I was just tired. I, I'm done. I'm happy. Well, here's a deal, here--well, here's a reason why, kind of, which kind of goes back. So, Les had arranged for me to get an interview at the City News Bureau [City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press]. This is in '88 [1988]. This is four years thereabout after Betty Davis [ph.] gave me the-- Speaker 1: The Chicago magazine (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the Chicago magazine story [by Jack Starr]. So, now I'm, I'm excited, but I'm terrified. So, I thought, all right, I'm going to go and to, on, on this interview. And I didn't go. A week passes. So, Les says, "Did you go on the interview?" "Yeah, we, we set it up already." We hadn't. I was, I was paralyzed, I was frozen. I mean, I--all this, you know, five years of wanting to become a journalist. Now, it's here, and I'm, I don't know, I don't do it, I'm, I'm, I don't know what to do. So, another week goes by, and I'm in the newsroom. And Les, and, and Les is quite a character. Now Les--Les died about two months ago at ninety. So, at this time, he's in his seventies but, you know, he looks like, he's in his forties, and he's, he was a strapping guy. He was an athlete. He was an [U.S.] Army officer. And we're, we're exactly the same height--I'm 6'1". Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he comes to me and he says, "Did you go on the interview?" And I said, "Unh-uh, unh-uh." He says, "Listen, if you don't go on the interview, baby, I'm going to kick your ass." So, I come from the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], right? So, I know when a guy has the ability to do it, right? So, I thought, I think he is--I'm thinking--the only thing is, he gonna to do it in front of everybody, or is he just gonna (laughter) take me around back? So, I said, okay, I'll go. And so, I, I went on the interview, and I end up getting the job. In fact, I went on the interview in late April. And graduation, I think, which I thought, I thought, I'm not going. And that was--it was kind of a trend then. I don't--people still doing that. I'm not gonna go, so I didn't go. So, and June was the--well, let me, let me make sure I got this right. I think graduation was in June. Long story short, I got called to join City News before-- Speaker 1: Graduation? Speaker 2: --be- before graduation. So, I was working that day. So, that was like, oh, yeah, yeah, there--I would have gone, but I was working that day, unlike y'all, right? So, but yes, so I end up. And, and I was in the shower, ready to--and, and I thought, and '88 [1988] was, you know, college is over. I have a little money in my pocket. I thought, here's--this is going to be the summer of summers, right? I was going to travel. I was going to do something. Seven days after I graduate, nine days, after, after what would have been--this is before the graduation ceremony. But after my last class, nine days later, I'm taking a shower. The phone rings. I thought, who is this? And then I come out the shower, pick up the phone, and it's Paul Zimbrakos, the managing editor of City News Bureau, saying, "We got an opening. Can you start?" I said, "Well, yes." So, I start the next, the next week. No, no, no, actually, it's even worse than that. I start nine days after. The call came like--I mean-- Speaker 1: Before-- Speaker 2: Come--yeah, yeah, I mean (unclear), so that, that's the--I mean-- Speaker 1: Right, it's all very close. Speaker 2: It's, yeah, very close. And it's funny because later on that summer, I found out that a reporter had quit. And he was basically going down the list. And had, had I not answered that phone, I probably would have had the long summer off. And I answered the phone, so, I end up, I'm--I guess, maybe he was going in alphabetical order, right? I, but-- Speaker 1: This is a good thing that your dad [Lee Bey, Sr.] changed your name to Bey (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I was Johnson-- Speaker 1: Johnson (laughter). Speaker 2: --yeah. Baker would have gotten it or, or Blakeley, or something or--but so, so that's, that's how I start (unclear). But Les, Les got me there, yeah, by threat. Speaker 1: Bodily threat, too. Speaker 2: Bodily threat. Speaker 1: That's--no, that's, you know, I've heard a lot of stories about how people get into particular professions, but physical threats-- Speaker 2: Physical threats, that's a first-- Speaker 1: --is, is (laughter). Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter). Speaker 1: You know, now, I wanted to--no, no, actually, we're fine. Oh, what I wanted to ask you is--you, for non-journalists, they don't know what the, the mantra of City News service was, which is-- Speaker 2: If your mother says she loves you, check it out (laughter). The, the idea being is that, you know, don't take anything for, for granted. Don't make any assumptions, you know. Yep, so if your mother says she loves you, check it out (Simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Check it out. Story_ID: 611476 Speaker 1: I'll jump to 2006 and, you know, it [City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press] just closed down. How, how does that make you feel because I--it was obviously a very integral part of your early career. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I mean, it, it was, it was--although, you know, us, us, oh, not us--die-, we diehards, we kind of say that it's, it, it wasn't really the official closing. They really officially closed, when it closed in--I guess, '98 [1998]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, when--the one, the one that we worked for really closed '98 [1998]. And the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] kind of revived it, using Paul, but a smaller--Paul Zimbrakos, as the managing editor--but, but a far smaller staff than what was, what was there when we were there. So, it really kind of-- Speaker 1: It wasn't the same impact. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And can you just tell us a little bit how important the City News service was to the news gathering in Chicago [Illinois] and the United States and, and its history a little bit, 'cause I don't think a lot of people may know about it? Speaker 2: Well, City News Bureau was a wire service much like the AP [Associated Press] or, you know, UPI [United Press International], or something like that, except it was local, and it was owned. It was started in 1890, I want to say. And it's really a news cooperative. All the newspapers in town at the time, there were--I don't know, ten or twelve, when it opened--owned a piece of it. And the idea would be, you know, you know, cheap labor, right, is that, you know, you had these pool of reporters who would be everywhere. And you pay them very little, and they would able to make up the shortfall in your, your coverage. And, early on, the City News stories were used in, in newspapers--I think, as, you know, it's this 19th century turn to the 20th century. It was really like, like a tip service. You still had to write a story, a full story, but in that, but, you know, to pick, you know. But you, but then, the editors would get it, and whoever at the TV stations, radio stations, and they would decide their coverage based on that. But what it was good for was--it was really a boot camp for journalists. I mean, always for green is the grass, come out of college, right? And, you know, they get you right where you're cheap. But it was great because it was, it was immersion. I mean, it wasn't like, you got dumped into the shallow end of the pool. You got dumped in the middle of the ocean, and you, and you were still expected to come up with scoops. You were still expected to do--and you're working in Chicago in one of the most competitive news environments probably in, in America, where you got TV news reporters who actually do work--not--they're not just pretty faces saying what a producer tells me. They're actually digging their own sources. And, but it was great, because for me, 'cause I, I didn't go to Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], wasn't gonna go to graduate school. This was a great shortcut, you know, for, for me to get daily news experience. And, you know, and, and some of the great writers of America came from City News. Mike Royko did. Kurt Vonnegut, Kurt Vonnegut did, and many others. Story_ID: 611477 Speaker 1: And what it did was it, it was great at teaching you to make sense out of chaos. I mean, you would get, you know, you'd, you'd get the barest of details. Lee [HistoryMaker Lee Bey], there's a fire or something at the corner of this and that. And you'd race in the car to get there. And then, you'd go to the scene of a fire or something, right? And all you see is guys running around--hoses, water squirting. You have to jump in there, and be able to, to lay a narrative out, out of that and, in, in, you know, in the middle of chaos, in the middle of all kinds of things. And, and it was just great in terms of teaching you discipline and it's a skill that I've learned to this very day, even to this ve- that I use to this very day, even at, particularly at City Hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois], but even at, at SOM [Skidmore, Owings and Merrill LLP, Chicago, Illinois]. At Skidmore, an issue will come up, and you, you need answers. And your brain kicks into the City News Bureau [City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press] mode--who knows, who would know, who can find out, who's around, who can I get my hands on? Okay, this happened last time. Is this the same guy that, you know, do I get to this time? And it just breaks the world down into the basic colors, you know, and then, then from that point, you can, you can do-- Speaker 2: The five Ws? Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: So, for all non-journalists? Speaker 1: The, the who, the what, the where, the when, the how, which is the H-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and the, and the why. And, you know, those, you get the--those things answered, you could find out everything, you know. Story_ID: 611478 Speaker 1: Now, you spent two, two years [at City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press]. Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then, obviously, like you said, it's a, it's a boot camp, so people don't necessarily stay-- Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: --for their entire career? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And you step into the Daily Southtown [Southtown Economist; Daily Southtown]. How did that opportunity come to you? Speaker 2: It came to me through a setback, one that I hated at the time, despised at the time but, once again, turned to be the best move--City News Bureau, I was, you know, you work your way up. You, you go from switchboard person--everybody does. Speaker 1: So, you sit on the phone-- Speaker 2: You sit on the phone-- Speaker 1: --and get the, the tips? Speaker 2: Exactly. And, and, or people's mother calling, looking for them--any-, anything, right? Then, you, you get a beep and, and then, you go out to one of the police stations around town. And then, you phone in your stories. And then, everybody--person turns into a story that goes out, goes out with the wire. Then, you become a rewrite person. Then, you become a beat person, which means you get to report and write your own stories. At that point, it's time for you to go. So, I made it through all of them, and they're pretty short, pretty short fashion. And I got through, I got to the criminal courts. And I hadn't even been in a courtroom before, never even, never even been in a courthouse before. I didn't know the difference between the prosecutor and a defense attorney. Speaker 1: Nothing. Speaker 2: I didn't know anything more-- Speaker 1: You didn't watch 'L.A. Law'? Speaker 2: You know, I, I should have, I should have, right? And 'Law and Order' wasn't on yet. Otherwise, I could have-- Speaker 1: Would have been awesome Speaker 2: And, and I went, and I went there. I was fascinated by it. It was the best drama in town. And I got a chance to learn, to, to know judges, and prosecutors, and attorneys--many people I know to this very day out of it. And I, I just, and I just loved it--I mean, seeing justice, and even lack of justice happen. Story_ID: 611479 Speaker 1: Got an opportunity from a guy, Tom Sheridan, who no longer works for the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. He was executive, he was executive to the editor at the time. And the Sun-Times was looking for interns for the summer, summer of 1990. And it was ninety days, no guarantee of employment, but the thing that got me was--I should say that City News' [City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press] pay is notoriously bad. And this is--we, we talking 1988 dollars, 1990 dollars. I think I made sixteen thousand dollars a year. I was still living at home, right? Speaker 2: Thank God. Speaker 1: Yeah, thank, God. Otherwise, I'd, you know, I'd be living in the street. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Skid Row. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, just right, Skid Row and drinking. So, but, but the Sun-Times internship paid $435 dollars a week which was--I think, like $200, almost $200 more than I made in the City News. And, and I thought, even for ninety days, I, I need that money (laughter). So, so, and, and no health insurance, but I was 22--21, 22. Speaker 2: You're healthy. Speaker 1: I was gonna--so, I thought this--and it was a time to get--I thought if I can get ninety days of good clips in a newspaper, that will put me in, in good stead or something. Speaker 2: Now, wait, who owns the Sun-Times in '88 [1988]? Did, did Rupert Murdoch own it at that time? Speaker 1: Rupert had, had sold it in '89 [sic. 1986] to a, and something like, a group of investors. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I cannot think of the guy's-- Speaker 2: All right, so I know there was someone before Conrad Black. I just couldn't remember. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, and these, these guys had only been--and the idea was they were going to try to, you know, take the, the stink of Murdoch off the paper, and make it a legitimate, make it a legitimate paper again. So, I ended up, you know, interviewing at the Sun-Times. I didn't even own a suit jacket yet, right? I mean, I was still--so, they, they end up hiring me for the ninety day internship. So, it was a great time--end up, you know, writing all kinds of stories. They sent me everywhere. And while I was there, there was a older, older woman. She was over forty, same age I am now, right? Speaker 2: Very old. Speaker 1: Very old, old man--who had been a legal secretary in the IBM building [One IBM Plaza, Chicago, Illinois]. And she went to Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], she'd gone to Columbia College, and we were interns together. That woman is [HistoryMaker] Mary Mitchell today. She was Mary Johnson then. We were interns the, the same summer. And, and I remember having to, you know, help her write a lead. I mean, she had it down, but she'd always get her leads handed it back to her. But, but the City News, I had, you know, you can, you can pound out a lead, the lead being the introductory, you know, sentence to get you into the story. So, so we ended up being, being pretty close friends that summer. Story_ID: 611480 Speaker 1: End of the summer comes. And, you know, you get--have to have your interview with the, with the editor on your way out. And the rumor was that, that we were both gonna get hired. I knew Mary [Mary Johnson; HistoryMaker Mary Mitchell], Mary had done a fantastic job, deserved to get hired. I thought I'd done, done a great job--thought I was gonna get hired, too, right? Speaker 2: You should get hired? Speaker 1: So, I remember this. So, I go to the editor's office--Dennis Britton was his name at the time. And we're talking and he says, "Lee [HistoryMaker Lee Bey], now you're doing, you know, you did a great job," all kinds of things. I'm thinking, oh, my God, he's going to hire me. But I'm trying, I'm trying to keep, trying to keep cool. And, and I was thinking, you know, it, at the time, I think, the pay was maybe like--I want to say, seven hundred bucks [dollars] a week, or something like that. And I thought that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's nice. Speaker 1: --all right, that's, that's not--and I was still living at home. I'd move out at that point, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But, but this is great, this is great. Speaker 2: It's a union job, too. Speaker 1: It's a union job, that's right. And, and I thought, oh, this is good. I had just met--well, a few months earlier, I'd met the woman I'd later marry, Valencia [Valencia Scott Bey], I can just talk about that at some point, right? Speaker 2: Okay, but, no, this, this is nice, so you met then? Speaker 1: So, so, we, so you want me to go to-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, but I'm saying, just so, so you met her, then so things are really-- Speaker 1: Things, things are going, right, right. I'm thinking, so this is good. So, Dennis is giving this speech, you know, Dennis Britton, the editor is giving this speech about, you know, this, the--then he says, at the end of it, he says, "Well, I hope you had a great summer" (laughter). "I hope you had a great summer and, you know, best of luck to you. Here's a cup, a Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] cup, and a T-shirt." Oh, man, I was crushed! Speaker 2: A cup and-- Speaker 1: A cup and a T-shirt--I thought, I, and I, and I, so, you know, I was trying to keep the face on. I said, "Well, thank you, Dennis, it's been, it's been an opportunity." I thought, oh, man. So, then, I had to walk across the newsroom which, to me, at that point, seemed like it was nine blocks long, and try to keep my face from falling on, on the floor. Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: So, I'm walking out, and that's it, you know, you know, so I'm walking out. And I run into Mary Dedinsky, who I've not talked to since, only because that's the way it turned out, but I should call that woman now that I've mentioned her name again. Speaker 2: Mary Dedinsky. Speaker 1: Dedinsky, who's now--I think she's an editor at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] now, but she was managing editor at the Sun-Times then--I think the first female managing editor. Must have seen something, so she says, "Lee, come here." So, I come over, so then, she's--we're talking, and she already knows that, that things didn't go well. So, she said, "What do you think about the Daily Southtown? Well, then, it was the Southtown Economist. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I thought, it's okay. But what I really thought was southwest side newspaper, racist, wouldn't cover black communities-- Speaker 2: Right, that was the-- Speaker 1: --don't want to go there. My career was done, you know, that, that's what I was really thinking, but I wasn't trying to say that right then. So, she says, "I know a guy there, a friend, he used to be an editor"--I think, either there, or at the Daily News [Chicago Daily News], which was owned by the same company that owned the Sun-Times years ago. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So the two staffs were--the old staff at the Daily News and the Sun-Times always, the staffs are always friends, and always kept in touch after the Daily News closed. She said, "Why don't you give him a call? His name is Earl Moses." So, I said, "All right." So, she gives me the number, so I call Earl Moses up. He says, come. So, I end up going to the Southtown's offices--not downtown with the skyscrapers and the beautiful riverside view. Even City News [City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press] offices were at 35 East Wacker [Drive]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so you see--felt like--you, I felt like going down there. I, I'd made it, right, for like, Mary Tyler Moore. You take off my hat and throw it up in the air, right? So, you know, so the Southtown is, is not that. The, the offices-- Speaker 2: Where is his office? Speaker 1: Then, or at 59th [Street] and Harlem [Avenue], 5959, right on the corner of 60th [Street] and Harlem actually. And on the southwest side of Chicago [Illinois], you know, you've gotta dodge trucks, you know, cross a pair of railroad tracks, you know, there's an Arby's along the way, you know, you know, all--it wasn't, it wasn't downtown. Speaker 2: Quite far-- Speaker 1: And quite far from downtown. And the offices were like a converted warehouse, something like that. So, I go there and pull up, pull up in my car and, and I go-- Speaker 2: And what kind of car were you driving? Speaker 1: I was driving--let's see--I was driving then, a Datsun 280Z. Speaker 2: Oh, you were good (unclear). Speaker 1: Actually, I sure was, yeah, yeah. I had--my other cars before then was--I had like, an old Thunderbird, a little Ford Thunderbird from the '70s [1970s], and that kind of thing. But I, I was Mr. Cool, 'cause the Sun-Times had paid, you know, the money--I can afford a, a nice car. Speaker 2: A nice car. Speaker 1: So, I drive it there. And so, I go, I go interviewing, you know, I go to interview with Earl. Earl was black which I didn't, I didn't expect. He was a black, although he was the only, he was the only black in any capacity at all there. Speaker 2: In, in the editorial-- Speaker 1: Exactly. And, and there was maybe, maybe one or two black reporters, and the rest of the staff was, was all white. Naturally, I wasn't used--I hadn't been used to it because, you know, the other newsrooms I worked in were mostly white, too. So I go. In the interview, I put my best face. And, and so, he calls me a couple, a couple of days later, and offered me a job. So, the job was $404 dollars a week. Now, and which was thirty-one dollars less than I was making, make it at the Sun-Times, but at least I had health insurance. Speaker 2: Right, and but more than at city, a City News. Speaker 1: But more than the City News. So, then, I took a step back, but not all, not all the way back. And I was not thrilled at first about the Southtown. Meanwhile, Mary, my good friend, Mary Mitchell, actually got hired by the Sun-Times. I think, aww, man, now. So I, so now, I remember when, when Valencia, my wife, and I--we were dating. And they would say, where's your hub-, where is your boyfriend working? And she'd say, the Southtown Economist. No one, nobody knew where that was. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: What is that? Wasn't he working for the Sun-Times? Why won't the Sun-Times didn't hire him? So, I was like, oh, gee whiz. Story_ID: 611481 Speaker 1: Is she [Bey's wife, Valencia Scott Bey] a, a journalist as well? Speaker 2: Well, she, she was, she was. She--when I was this, when I was at City News Bureau [City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press], I was, I had to cover a congressional race on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. It was Mel Reynolds-- Speaker 1: Our good friend. Speaker 2: Our good friend who factors into these, into some more stories. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: This was 1990, the primary, the primary of 1990. And he was running against [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage. Speaker 1: Oh, right. Speaker 2: I think he--I think Gus beat him that last time that, that year. And, but I got assigned at City News. I, I get, I got assigned--originally, I was going to get assigned to a North Side [Chicago, Illinois] race and, but I ended up assigned to, to Gus' race 'cause I lived close by. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I ended up going there. And so, you'd go to his campaign, which is a place at 87th [Street] and Ashland [Avenue], which used to be the Sheba Disco [Chicago, Illinois], back when I was a kid. But then, it was called My, My House Supper Lounge [sic. Mr. G's Supper Club and Entertainment Center, Chicago, Illinois]. And so, I get assigned there. So, there's nothing to do, but sort of sit around, you know, until the returns come in. The candidates like, don't come in for a while. My shift started at six o'clock. So, about 6:30, seven o'clock, a friend of mine comes in, who's a radio reporter then at WBBM Radio [Chicago, Illinois]--James Rowe, a black reporter, a great guy, too. So, he comes in, and he's got this intern with him who's absolute beautiful, just, just beautiful. So, the, who is that? So, he comes over: "Hey, James, hey, Lisa, come over." So, I said, "Man, man, your intern is cute--why don't you introduce us?" Now, this is not me--I'm extremely shy. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. You said, you know, you didn't like to speak and-- Speaker 2: And I, I was just saying something. I mean, yeah, I wanted it to happen, but I really wasn't--so, he says, okay, yeah, c'mon. So, he kind of puts his arm around me. So, I'm thinking, oh, man, so he goes over, and he says-- Speaker 1: That was just guy talk. Speaker 2: And so, say, yeah, yeah, you, you weren't supposed to say nothing. So he says, you know, you know, "[HistoryMaker] Lee Bey, this is Valencia, this is my friend, Lee Bey. He's a reporter for the City News Bureau. Lee Bey, this is Valencia Scott." And then, and how you doing? I'm thinking, oh, man, she is fine. So, there's nothing to do. So, we, we sit down, and we, so talking for a couple of hours and stuff. And, you know, you know, I'd, I'd had girls--obviously, had girlfriends before, beautiful women, but Valencia was, was more beautiful than--I mean, she was kind of, of far out of my-- Speaker 1: Out of your league. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Out of my, my league, which may seem, from some of the pictures that I, I brought with me. So, but we're talking, you know, we're, we're getting together, and talking stuff. And, and then, I kind of, you know, get this sense that she's at least intrigued, right? So, now, that's, that's interesting. So, the night goes on. Gus Savage comes and, you know, when, you know, and the whole thing, you know, he gives his speech. He won, so it's, it's time to go. So, before we left, she was telling me she was interested in working for the City News Bureau. So, I wrote down in a book she had, the number to the, to the editor, to-- Speaker 1: To Paul Zimbrakos. Speaker 2: --to Paul Zimbrakos, and Joe Riley who's the top editor there. Story_ID: 611482 Speaker 1: So, I go home. And the next morning, I'm back at criminal courts, and I'm, and I'm talking to Henry Murphy [ph.], my long-time buddy. We were friends since we were eleven years old, still tight as, as a drum, as friendship. And so, he says, "How did the night go?" And it's, "Oh, man, it was good." We were talking about--I said, "Man, I met this girl, man, she is so fine." He said, "Really?" We were talking. I said, "Man, she looked like--," well, it sounds funny now. I said, "She looks like one of the girls in En Vogue." You know, the group, En Vogue? Speaker 2: Oh, right, right. Speaker 1: So, and I said, "But I did a stupid thing." And he said, "What is it?" I said, "I can't remember her last name and, and I didn't get her number." He said, "Ahh, man, you crazy?" I said, "I think I could find it, so I either get it from James [James Rowe]." And, and, that was her last, that night was her last night of her internship. Speaker 2: Okay, working with WBBM [WBBM Radio, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: So, working with WBBM. So, I thought, well, all right, I know her first name. I remember she said she lived near Austin Boulevard and Superior [Street], but I--and her name, Valencia [Valencia Scott Bey] being unique, I could find her if I had to. There's a-- Speaker 2: You're a journalist. Speaker 1: I'm a journalist, that's right. So, I hang up the phone with him. A little while, the other phone rings, and it's her--it's, it's Valencia calling me. Speaker 2: She knows you. Speaker 1: And I thought, oh, man. So, she was saying that, you know, thank you for giving me the number, and that kind of thing. So, I got on the phone--I'm thinking, [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey, ask her out. So, I'm thinking, I'm, I'm terrified. So, then, I said, I can't, I can't remember exactly how I put it, but I said, are you doing anything this weekend, or, or something like that? And she says, well, well, no. And I said, well--then, I hear it, like a child, a child in the background, saying like, mommy or something. So, I'm thinking, you dope, she's married. I thought, that's why she was so friendly. It's nothing, you know, there's nothing to (unclear), so I thought, it never dawned on me, she'd actually be married. I kept thinking, you know, if you ever watch 'The Usual Suspects,' the movie at the end-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --when, when Chazz Palminteri is trying to figure out things, and they kind of rewind over the entire movie. That's kind of what my brain is doing-- Speaker 2: Go back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) trying to remember, was there a ring, was there a ring? Did she mention a husband? Was there a ring? So, I said, "Is, is that a child I hear in the background?" So, then, she says, "Yeah," like that. So, I said, "I'm, I'm--I mean, does a, does a husband come with that?" So, she says, "No, I'm not married," but she thinks that I'm making some editorial statement on her having a, having a child (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A child, right. Speaker 1: So, I said, "Oh, good. What time could I pick you up?" So (laughter), so we making, so we making (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: A (Simultaneous) good save-- Speaker 1: Yeah, a good save. So she, she gets social. I pick her up and, and I meet her, her boy, who's obviously now my boy--Ernest [Ernest Scott], beautiful little year and a half, year old boy at the time. Speaker 2: Could you hold him in your hand? Speaker 1: Yeah, couldn't--him--hold him like this because (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: And, and we just sort of fell in that summer. Ernest and I kind of fell in love, and she and I fell in love, and two years later, we got married. So, so, that's, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --so that's the story there. Speaker 2: I like that one, too. So, so we can thank Mel, or [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage and Mel Reynolds? Speaker 1: You can thank Gus and Mel for that--that's right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 611483 Speaker 1: You go up through the ranks at the Southtown [Southtown Economist; Daily Southtown]. You write an award-winning series on, on race in suburban high schools. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I wrote the, the introductory piece to it and, and helped shape with the other two writers, yeah, the, the-- Speaker 1: The fourth R. Speaker 2: The fourth R, yeah. Speaker 1: So, I didn't know where. Speaker 2: You did do the research, yeah. Speaker 1: And so, I'm sure that helped bring attention to you again, like, hey, this guy--now, you know, the one I hadn't touched on is the kind of issue of race in journalism. You are a true blue Chicagoan during Harold Washington's first term and his half-term, the turmoil, the city council wars, Harold's death--how are these external forces kind of affecting you as a black man, and as a black journalist, and as a journalist? Speaker 2: Good, good question because I, I come in journalism in June of '88 [1988]. And, at this time, you know, Harold died the year before, and it was all that turmoil. So, at the time of '88 [1988], Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], who was, you know, acting mayor after Harold's death is, is holding the, the mayoral seat in, in advance of the special election, or the--I guess the next election in, in '91 [sic. 1989], in which he'll lose to, to Richard Da- Richard M. Daley. And it's interesting because, you know, you, you know, it kind of goes in my, in my mind for being this, this, you know, this sort of shining bit of hope for African Americans in Chicago [Illinois], and the political process and others, to being, you know, it seems like it's back to the same old, old thing again. And, and, you know, and Gene Sawyer, who I got a chance to, to know then, and then, even more later, is a true gentleman, and a, and a great guy. And I think, when it comes down to it, he may not see it fully in his, in his lifetime that, you know, that he did some, you know, taking that seat and taking the heat for that seat, as unpopular as it was, for almost half of like, Chicago--I think is, was, was in many ways, an act of courage. And I think, instead of it being told that Gene Sawyer lost the seat for, for black America or black Chicago, I think that the divisions within black Chicago calls you to sort of, to, to-- Speaker 1: To lose his-- Speaker 2: --to lose that seat. And then, it also may cause African Americans to, to lose the seat. But I remember meeting Daley who, in '91 [1991], on assignment, and thinking, this guy will never be mayor. Story_ID: 611484 Speaker 1: So, we just left off at you going back to the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] as a, as a general assignment reporter. Speaker 2: Right. After leaving, after leaving the Southtown [Southtown Economist; Daily Southtown]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --which I didn't, you know, which I didn't want to do. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: I ended up loving the Southtown. I mean the-- Speaker 1: After dogging it out? Speaker 2: After dogging it out, right, I ended up loving it. They, they moved me from the main office to an office they had in Lansing, Illinois. Now, I lived in Oak Park [Illinois]--I moved to Oak Park at the time. And they said to drive way, way over there to Lansing, Illinois. But it was great because the idea--the Lansing bureau was a remnant of the old Daily Calumet which the Southtown company bought a few years earlier. And they, the paper understood that, you know, Southeast Chicago [Illinois], and up through Indiana was, was growing. And the Hammond--well, it was still The Hammond Times [The Times]--was coming over the border into Illinois. So, the idea was to, in it, to wake that bureau up. So, he sent me and an editor named Keith Harrison [Keith E. Harrison, Jr.] over there. We were both young guys. I was twenty-five--no, oh, twenty-six, maybe, so to, to kind of wake it up. And they let me write anything I wanted to write, anything that I wanted to write, and it was great. So, it--I, I was like a kid in a candy store. I wrote everything. On cops, you know, everything. And then, the Sun-Times called. And I, I was making thirty-one thousand dollars a year, which was, you know, which was--I was married by then, and then-- Speaker 1: All right. And you have, you have one baby [Ernest Scott]. Speaker 2: Have one baby. And, and, but I was having such a great time. In fact, we were looking at houses, Valencia [Valencia Scott Bey] and I, in South Holland [Illinois] because it was, it was, you know-- Speaker 1: Right next-- Speaker 2: --close to work, and we can, we can afford it. And the Sun-Times called, you know, offer me a full-time gig. And I considered not taking it. I went to the interview but-- Speaker 1: This time (laughter). Speaker 2: This time, yeah, I, I guess, showed up there. And I considered not taking it because I was having such a good time with the Southtown, but I thought, well, I--well, you know, you can't, no, to, to a major paper. So, ended, ended up going to the, to the Sun-Times in September of '92 [1992], two years almost to the day that I started at the Southtown. Speaker 1: Okay, right on, right on the money. Speaker 2: Right on the money, yeah. Story_ID: 611485 Speaker 1: So, you're at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], which you don't leave really, until you move to the Daley [Richard M. Daley] administration. But you, you're going totally through the ranks there. Now, what is it because some people--they get a beat, and that's all they ever do for their entire existence? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Other people may move from--you're kind of doing general work to maybe becoming a columnist, but you seem to have run the gamut after the Sun-Times-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: --which is really cool 'cause I mean, so what is about you that, that made that happen? Speaker 2: You know, there is, and I've only have come to grips with this in my old age--that, that there has always been something restless about, about me that I, I can even remember as a kid. You know, you play with one toy, and then throw it away and put, get another one, and just wanting to do, and touch everything. I have--my four kids are all almost exactly like that. They kind of want to get it all, and to touch it all. And, and the Sun-Times was the perfect opportunity because against the second paper, you know, the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] is, is the dominant paper. So because of that, they're, you know, they're open for lots of experimentation. And with that, I mean, I mean, they literally--I mean, let me do anything I wanted to do. So, yeah, I went through the ranks, you know, general assignment reporter, then I was briefly--well, maybe for a year or two, educational reporter. Then I got moved to a special projects team around mid-, I guess, '94 [1994], '95-ish [1995]-- Speaker 1: That's all, um-hm. Speaker 2: --where I ended up meeting back up with Mel Reynolds again--just not on a positive note. Speaker 1: Right, right. I was going to say, now, that was a pivotal point in your journalistic career to break the story of-- Speaker 2: Of, of Mel Reynolds, the congressman's problems and investigation that the, that was against him. Well, to, to tell the story-- Speaker 1: Yes, please do. Speaker 2: --the full, the full story. There was a blind item in Michael Sneed's column in June, July of '90--I'm sorry, '93 [1993], '94 [1994]. I can't remember which one now--'94 [1994], I guess that would be. And it said something along the lines of, you know, are, are police looking at a political figure? Does it have to do with an underage worker? If it's true, it's shocking. If it's not, it's something else. So, yeah, we just didn't--who the heck might this be? Now, I covered Mel Reynolds, you know, since '90 [1990]. Speaker 1: 'Cause [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage lost, or wait, was he--I can't remember, was he forced out? Speaker 2: See--now I can't remember. Speaker 1: 'Cause I remember that controversy about his, his like, anti-Semitic statements, and all of this, and then-- Speaker 2: He lost--that's right. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: He actually did lose to, to Mel. Speaker 1: --to, right, the Rhodes scholar. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: He was-- Speaker 2: He was, he was--I said, he was like, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], version one. I mean, this sort of-- Speaker 1: Proto-Obama. Speaker 2: Yeah, the proto-Obama, right, this sort of, you know, bright light, you know, you know, got-- Speaker 1: Right 'cause he came in when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was elected. Was it '92 [1992]? Speaker 2: He came in '92 [1992], sure did. Speaker 1: To, right, okay. Speaker 2: And he had, he'd run for the office before and, and lost. And, and Mel was the sort of bright light, you know, you know, he a Rhodes scholar, bright, smart, the best, and the brightest. And, he kept losing. He, he lost to, to Savage in one or two races. Ninety-two [1992] was pivotal because they redrew the boundary of the congressional district to include mostly Republican in Bloom Township [Illinois], which is where Chicago Heights [Illinois], and some of the non-African American far southern and southeastern suburbs are. Mel was able, Mel Reynolds was able to appeal to those constituents there, and who are, you know, who were, you know, who had-- Speaker 1: Grow tired of Gus. Speaker 2: They were tired of Gus, had their, had their issues with Gus. And he was able to win the office in '92 [1992]. Now, by '93 [1993] or '4 [1994]--I wish I could remember exactly. I think it's like '94 [1994], you know, this, this allegation came up. So, I'm, I'm in--so, you know, I read this item in Sneed's column. And I didn't know who, who it was. The managing editor at the Sun-Times now, Julia Wallace, who's now at the--I guess at the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, calls me into her office. So, it's me, Sneed, and Maureen O'Don-, Maureen O'Donnell, great reporter, who's a close friend of mine now. And, so, so, "Did you guys read the blind item Sneed had?" And said, "Yeah, now, now, who is it?" So, Sneed says, "It's Mel Reynolds." And I said, "No kidding?" She says, "Yeah." So, they want to take me--Maureen and I--off all of our duties for the entire summer, which I wasn't that against. Story_ID: 611486 Speaker 1: And this is before architecture, right-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --and, and assign us, you know, investigative style to the Mel Reynolds case. And so, I got picked because I'd covered him in the past. And although I've never tried to--I've, I've always rebelled against--we talked about race. I've always rebelled against situations in journalism in which my race would be used as an advantage to the editors. I never wanted that way. I mean, I could, I could use it for my own advantage-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --if I was on a story. Speaker 2: --that's different. Speaker 1: That's different. But I never wanted to be, I never wanted to be put in a position where, let's send the black guy. He, he'll know, he'll, he'll go places. So, I made it clear from the beginning that I was doing this, but it was because I know the terrain, I know the candidate, and I know his world. But I'm, I'm not the black face 'cause the 'cause that's going to blunt any criticism of this. Speaker 2: And they put like, race, racist coverage-- Speaker 1: Right, right-- Speaker 2: --of, of the foible of a politician. Speaker 1: --exactly. So, you know, obviously, they, they say yes. But, but that was actually was good for them to hear that, and good for me to say that. It was also good for me to hear myself saying that because I wanted my own investigative powers and abilities to be the thing that drove my end of the story and not anything--not anything else (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not race. Speaker 1: Exactly. And, and I wanted to go into it like that. It, it was good for me to know that. So, we spent a year-- Story_ID: 611487 Speaker 1: We are back and we were just talking about Mel Reynolds. Speaker 2: Mel Reynolds. Speaker 1: So, you investigate him for--and, and your partner--a two-person team? Speaker 2: Yes, two-person team, and two and a half because Sneed [Michael Sneed] is, is also in-- Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: --you know, she, she was able to get to the places that we couldn't, that we couldn't get to, but-- Speaker 1: And Michael Sneed is a gossip columnist, well-- Speaker 2: Is a--exactly, gossip columnist at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], and really, really is a first-rate reporter. I mean, she did, you know, she did a lot of stuff at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] before the Sun-Times hired her away back in the, back in the '80s [1980s], but was really able to get into those corners, you know, where you need this one little bit of evidence. And, you know, Sneed would say, "Uh, I'll call you back." And the next thing you know, you know, call this number (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There-- Speaker 2: --and then, there's some cop or someone there who's there, who is, you know 'cause Mike Sneed says, talk to you. I'm, I'm talking to you. Speaker 1: So, what ends up happening with Mel Reynolds is that he's had an affair, affair, as an, an adult can have with a teenager, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'll let you tell the story (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, the, the allegation was, was that as we left the, the managing editor's office, was that he--when he ran for office, you know, a year or two earlier, had an affair with a then-underage campaign worker, that she was, she was sixteen at the time, and that, but now, she's older now. I think she's--I forgot how old she, she was--I forgot how old she was at the time of this. But she was now making an, an outcry to police. And the statute of limitations on it hadn't, somehow hadn't run out yet. That, and that, so, so that's how she was able to, to cry out. Supposedly, though, when he got word of her outcry, he then begins to cover up, obstruct justice allegedly--well, I guess he got charged. He got-- Speaker 1: Right. He's, he's served time for it. Speaker 2: --served time for it. So, then he begin to, to cover up the obstruction by offering like the, you know, the, the, you know, some sort of gig for the mother and, you know, in offering some, you know, offering promises and favors for her. And, you know, when the police are coming to interview her about it, then somehow the all-ticket trip down south that he supposedly is centered on, he's providing her legal counsel--all that kind of thing with the intent of gumming up the, the investigation which, of course, only--it's like quick sand--the more you flail around, the deeper, deep, you get in on it. So, what we had to do was, Maureen O'Donnell and I had to do, was so, you know, divide up our duties. And we spent the summer tracking down, you know, you know, campaign workers, anyone who was in a position to hear something. And, meanwhile, you know, Mel and I are, are still talking. And it was the weirdest time of my life, which probably was the reason why I was so exhausted when that, when that year actually--I think it stretched on to be two years finally, almost two years when it finally ended because he's an extremely bright guy, and he would hear, through his various sources, where we'd been, or where I'd been talking. And then, he would try to spin what he thinks I'd heard. And oftentimes, he was flat wrong. And when he was, he was talking, he was giving me clues of who to talk to next time. So, I learned from a guy, Chuck Neubauer, who's now at the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times], who's a great investigative reporter. He and I ended up--he, he doesn't come into the piece later on, into the picture later on. As we begin to do the financial, we, we then, the sex abuse ends up--the sex scandal ends up-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --we're into a financial scandal, and how were campaign funds spent-- Speaker 1: To-- Speaker 2: --to cover up and to do other things as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I learned a trick from Chuck. Chuck will be on the phone, and he'll talk to you, and then he puts long gaps in his conversations. And he figured out early on in his career that people don't like silence, that they want to talk to fill in the gap. And a subject will do this and fill in the gap with details that you need, whether you ask them or not. So, I went in from him, so I would get on the phone with, with Mel. And Mel would talk and I wouldn't say anything. And there'll be a pause, and he'd talk some more, and he was just talking. He would just of sort talk his way into-- Speaker 1: A hole. Speaker 2: --a hole, and I'm thinking, here's, here's we're going to get, who--here's who we're going to talk to. Story_ID: 611488 Speaker 1: That experience, end up learning two stories that were sort of break-through stories for me. Mel Reynolds was the second. The first one was a couple of years earlier when James Jordan [James Jordan, Sr.], Michael Jordan's father was killed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right. Speaker 1: I got sent down with another reporter to Carolina to figure it all out. I'd never been on the airplane before. I was twenty-six years old-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --probably almost twenty-seven. I, I had a fear of planes. I like planes, I liked to look at them, but I had a fear of getting on one. And the, and Joyce--I'm sorry--Julia Wallace, the managing editor, came back to the newsroom [at the Chicago Sun-Times] and says, "James Jordan, Michael's father was missing. Can you go down to Carolina?" And I said, "Joyce [sic.], no, I want to go, but I'm afraid of planes." She said, "Oh, big bad [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey is afraid of airplanes?" "Shh-shh." And so, she has strolled back to her desk. Now, she's going to tell--so, by the time that she gets back to her desk, I'm calling her, "Okay, all right, I'll go, I'll go." So, that's how I get on the plane. But, there, I mean, I never, I never reported from another city before. I'd never-- Speaker 2: 'Cause you are a Chicago [Illinois] man. Speaker 1: I am a, yeah, I'm the--never been on an airplane--all those things. Speaker 2: Had you ever left the city really? I mean, like going to visit-- Speaker 1: Not really. Speaker 2: --but relatives down south? Speaker 1: Well, you know, relatives down south, I took the train. My, my mother [Lula Dixon Bey] and I, when my grandmother [Early Dixon] was living down there, I, I took a trip to Springfield [Illinois] once by train, but I had trouble--I went to Minnesota to visit an uncle back in '72 [1972], but beyond that, and other than driving to Gary [Indiana], you know, a couple of times, or driving to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], but to take somebody back home after a party, I'd never left, physically left. So, I was twenty-seven years old, and that's-- Speaker 2: On a plane. Speaker 1: --on a plane, and ends up, you know, ends up opening the door to all kind of stuff. You know, for a couple of years, I couldn't get off a plane--it seems like. But, that, I mean coming back from that, and being able to report back, and we got exclusives on the murder when we were down there. It just moved my career to another level. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then, and then, from that level, the Mel Reynolds story moved me one more. Story_ID: 611489 Speaker 1: I was going to ask you because being an investigative reporter is very different than any other type of reportage-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, like during this time, are you like calling, calling, like Lee-- Speaker 2: Les-- Speaker 1: --Les, Les Brownlee [Lester H. Brownlee], and you're Lee [HistoryMaker Lee Bey] (laughter). Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You're calling like, okay, like how do I do this, or is there something that you, you've learned from being at City News [City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press], and you know how to be an investigative reporter--what, how did it work for you? Speaker 2: Well, you know, City News was invaluable because it, at the end, it still breaks down to the same questions, you know. If you need something you have to prove, and who would know it, why would they know it, how would they know it, how do I get to them? If I can't get to them, who could help me get to them? And you basically kind of work those angles until, until you get somewhere. The, the thing that helped, in this case, was that Mel [Mel Reynolds] had become very unpopular with many people who had worked for him. So, some, many of them were happy to, to either, you know--I don't know that answer, but here's the guy who does, you know-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --that, that kind of thing. So, that, that goes on, so that we cover that. And, you know, we, we break the story. And then, we break subsequent, you know, we had a couple of good scoops throughout the way in preparation for the trial. Maureen [Maureen O'Donnell] and I were the first to talk to the victim actually, or the--it's hard to call her a victim, but, but she, but I guess, but she was. Speaker 1: Because she was underage. Speaker 2: Because she was under-, underage. And, you know, she was a beautiful, poised young lady. I think, at this time, she might be eighteen or close to nineteen. She was nineteen at the time at the time of the trial, so she, maybe she's eighteen now, but just a beautiful, poised young lady--not what I expected. Speaker 1: Right, right 'cause I, I recall thinking that she was a kind of, like a trailer-park denizen-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --but that's not the, the case at all. Speaker 2: Not the case at all. I mean, the, the mother was a, you know, she came from a solid middle-class family. I mean much or, I mean, you know, you know, her mother lived in Beverly [Chicago, Illinois], you know, Beverly neighborhood of Chicago [Illinois]. And, and you know, and was really a kind of, in a way a sympathetic figure in a, in a way, but then, of course, there's the element of circus of this thing as well because as, as the trial goes on, you know, there's, there's other charges. A police spokesman, who's a friend of Mel's, ends up losing his job because the cops think that he's giving information to Mel, and he really isn't, but, you know, he's kind of tied in. So, he, he loses his, his job. It, it--I mean, it's just crazy. It was almost as bad as the O.J. [O.J. Simpson] trial was, which was happening, like at this, at the same time. Speaker 1: Almost, yeah 'cause that's '90 [1990], that was June '94 [1994]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: --and that just goes on and (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, it's very--in fact, the, the low-speed chase as I, I remember listening to, I'm listening to it on the radio as I'm like looking for, when I'm, I'm going out to Chicago Heights [Illinois] to meet some source in the story. I didn't me- so all these things are kind of, and so, and so the trial is kind of overlapped, too, or the pretrial is kind of overlapped, too. And it's, and it, it really is a circus. And then, the, the trial actually comes and, and the, the witness--Beverly Heard is her name. The woman, the victim, doesn't want to testify, so they lock her up until she testifies. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it's just, it's just crazy. And then, there's transcripts where the cops had invented, you know, they got Beverly Heard in, they invent a story, basically tell her, "You get him on the phone, tell him that you got a fifteen-year-old Catholic school girl who's gonna, you know, join you." And so, they get him on the phone saying, you know, "A Catholic school girl. Did I win the lotto?" And that ends up being like the giant, and it's just, and as it goes on-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) I totally forgot that. Speaker 2: You know, this, this scoop, the story, and, you know, we're on television talking about this thing. Story_ID: 611490 Speaker 1: Man, as it goes on, as the trial goes on--a part of me, though, is wearing out from this. And, and a part of me doesn't like it. Our, you know, we've got two kids. By then, we got one more on the way, Cassandra [Cassandra Bey], who's born in '95 [1995]. And as this trial goes on, I'm, I'm losing my taste for this. And it's, it's not journalism, it's not uplifting, it's nothing to me, and-- Speaker 2: Right. And, and also, your, your mom [Lula Dixon Bey] passed away in, in '93 [1993], correct? Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], um-hm. Speaker 2: So, what impact is that having on your kind of reassessing where this is all taking you? Speaker 1: All--a very good question. All of that is happening. My mom dies in '93 [1993]. Candace [Candace Bey], our first child, my wife [Valencia Scott Bey] an- our first child from my wife and I, is born in October of '93 [1993]. And then, of course, Mel [Mel Reynolds] comes up in '94 [1994]. And all this stuff, and everything is going so fast. And all that has, has caused me to kind of rethink a lot of stuff. Then, when, when Cassandra, my next daughter, is born, two years later, she was actually born--my, my wife calls me while I'm in the courtroom for Mel to get sentenced. And the phone rings. The big old giant, you know, pager-- Speaker 2: Right, right, the brick phone-- Speaker 1: --goes off. And, and I go, and my wife says, come home. And that act ends up being interesting. I mean, in ways again that I can't fully explain, you know, the career is going on along fine. I'm doing this stuff. I'm losing my taste for this kind of thing, but, but that phone call was like confirmation that it's, it's time for a change. And so, I end up taking some time off. Well, I think I could afford to take like, two weeks off after, after, it's, you know, to be with, with the new baby and, and Valencia. And when I come back in November, you know, I don't want, I don't want to chase gangbangers. I don't want to chase Mel Reynolds' types anymore. I don't want to do any of this stuff, but I don't want to leave journalism. So, we got a new editor at the time, Nigel Wade, from London [England], that, that the new owners of the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] had brought in-- Speaker 2: Which is Conrad Black. Speaker 1: --which is Conrad Black and, and David Radler, who turn, turn to be crooks of their own, in a few, in a few years. But I wanted to do something else. And I wanted to write something that played against type. I mean, I wrote about--I mean, I did a series once. I wrote the first part of a series that looked at the way the system treats child abuse. And I had to, and I had to--it was called 'Who Will Save the Children?' [ph.]. I think it was. And I had to write the lead-off piece. This is in the summer of '93 [1993]. And it was just when my mother was, was her sickest. And she, and she dies. And I wrote this story--the, the thing that sort of kicks it off. And I had to--the series, and I was then--I had to spend a week, or two weeks, a month, actually, before then, with the child investigative services team at Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago Illinois]--sees all kind of horrible things. And I was so dark in mood over my, my mom's death, and what I saw there, and my own kids being born--then I was happy about that but just-- Speaker 2: Right, but just, it's, it's change and, and a lot of emotion. Speaker 1: --and all those things, and I, and me thinking about my father [Lee Bey, Sr.] and stuff again 'cause, you know, my father dies in '81 [1981]. And it's off to the races, finishing school, getting on. And then, you know, with my mother dying, all this stuff happening, I, I wrote this, the series. And it was, the first thing--it was so dark and so graphic that they had to put a disclaimer on the front page. And-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --I, I just, I wrote it from this raw space (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Place-- Speaker 1: I got calls for weeks--people who called crying over it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Over that. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Can you even look at it--like if, if I, if I had a copy of it, could you even, like look at that again anymore? Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I can now, I can now. And, and oddly enough, it's, it's probably one of the best single thing I ever, ever wrote because, you know, all the emotion was out. And, you know, my, you know, my, my--I was trying, I was trying to write this thing. The news was gonna be good. I was trying to write it before my mother died. I was trying to get it that, so I remember giving a lot of time to it, you know, so I can let her see this one big, huge piece be-, before she died. And I missed it by two weeks. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: And end up, end up writing it, finishing it--in fact, they were going to hold the series. And I said, no, keep it, keep it going. I, I need to, and, you know, I probably should have been grieving. I, I went to work, and I went to work on Saturdays, and stuff like that. I want to go with people in the newsroom because every-, the Sun-Times is so supportive and so comforting when my mother died that I knew if I went there during the--then, and I'd start crying. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So, I would say, I'll be there in the night. So, I would, I would work nights and I, and I wrote this thing. But, but, you know, but after that, '93 [1993] leading, leading to that, I was, I was spent. So, I wanted to write a story that played against types. So, I wrote one story about this guy--well, the Museum, the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] let me go into their back room, the storeroom, where they keep stuff that's not on exhibit. And things will never be on exhibit because they're too fragile, whatever, and let me hang out for an afternoon there. And I wrote this great feature story about what I saw back there, like I saw a, a water pump from London that was made out of a log, an actual, you know, hollowed-out log that was used from a water pipe. And I forget what you call those things. I think it's called a cab, where you see those old movies with a princess inside this thing, and the slaves pick it up. Speaker 2: Oh, right, right. Speaker 1: It was one of those things from Turkey. It was encrusted with jewels and stuff-- Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Speaker 1: --you know, from 1912 or 1812 that was there. It was a great story, fun to write, and kind of renewing to write as such. Speaker 2: Right, and, and just taking you away from all of those kind of earthly-- Speaker 1: Exactly, Speaker 2: --worries. Speaker 1: Exactly. Story_ID: 611491 Speaker 1: Then I wrote one about a, a guy who designed Happy Meal toys. That was kind of fun--who lived in Chicago [Illinois]. Then another one--but the third one was about houses in Brookfield, Illinois-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --called the Lustron. The, the--Brookfield, Illinois was celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of this house called the Lustron, a house made out of--post-war house--made out of porcelain, enameled steel--the whole thing, the walls, the inside, everything. You have to use a magnet to make the--hang a picture on the wall. Speaker 2: That is crazy. Speaker 1: And it's crazy, but it was so quirky. I found a Lustron owner who was an original owner, had his-- Speaker 2: Porcelain-- Speaker 1: Enamel, yeah, and it's steel on the inside, but porcelain enameled steel-- Speaker 2: That's all right. Speaker 1: --on the outside. The roof, the outside exterior walls--everything. Speaker 2: What an idea. Speaker 1: What an idea. Idea would be this was, would be a mass-produced house. If you had a lot, you'd call the Lustron [Lustron Corporation] man, and supposedly, he, he'd erect it, you know, in, you know, whatever days. But the guy--it was invented here, but the guy could never make the economics work. He wanted the plant, that Ford City Shopping Center [Ford City Mall, Chicago, Illinois] is now in, to build them. He couldn't get it. Tucker-- Speaker 2: Oh, the Tucker cars [Tucker Corporation]? Speaker 1: Preston [Preston Tucker], the automobile guy--he got the plant first, and, of course, all the good it did him, right? And thinking of moving the thing to Ohio, it never really worked out, and the federal government spent a lot of money. So anyway, I wrote a story about it, and it was interesting. It, it was almost the prototype for the work I, I would later do-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at the--a few months later at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] where it was, you know, architecture, you kind of had the historical piece. You kind of have humor and other things. And from that point, the editor got, and his idea that he wanted someone to cover architecture. I had this story in my pocket, and the fatigue of other things, so I, I lobbied for, for the job. I mean, I, I just, first time ever, I'd, I'd ever done that and-- Speaker 2: Now, had there been an architectural critic at the Sun-Times prior to you? Speaker 1: There, there really hadn't. There was a guy who covered architecture under the critic's title in the '70s [1970s], but he wrote more real estate than architecture. Then there was the great Bill Newman, M.W. Newman, who wrote urban affairs stuff in the '50s [1950s] for Daily News [Chicago Daily News] and '60s [1960s], moved to the Sun-Times, in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], but not really an architectural writer critic. So, I would, so I would have been--I was, I was the first. Speaker 2: The, the first true-- Speaker 1: The first true one. Speaker 2: So, so now, it's you, and is Blair Kamin at the Trib [Chicago Tribune] at this time? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --he's, he's been there--I think, maybe three years as critic at the time. Speaker 2: Okay. So, this is, number one is creating a whole new genre of dueling architectural critics--the only city in the entire United States that has two critics. Speaker 1: At the time, it sure was, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time, right, right. Story_ID: 611492 Speaker 1: Now, at the same time that you are--you lobby to do this-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you're also an editorial page columnist [for the Chicago Sun-Times]? Speaker 2: Yes because--I forgot about that. They let me kind of substitute--well, it, it began, they let me kind of substitute writing editorials. Then, Nigel [Nigel Wade] wanted more ethnic balance in editorial pages, so he created what I used to call the Mod Squad. It was, you know, it was me, the, the brother, it was Jorge Oclander, Hispanic, and it was Olivia Wu, who was-- Speaker 1: The Asian woman. Speaker 2: --the Asian woman. And we'd each write, you know, it was like rotating like, you know, you know, like, like the old NBC mystery movie. Tonight, it's 'Columbo.' It's 'McMillan and Wife' next week. And, you know, 'Tenafly' the week, the week after that. And it was the, the kind of same thing and-- Speaker 1: The Mod Squad. Speaker 2: --the Mod- and, and it was good. I mean, I got a chance to write, you know, my own opinions, but the part of that I didn't like--this is, this is the crazy part of it. I'm proud of the, obviously, part of my blackness come from a long line of people who were proud to be African Americans. There's a, there's a, as you can see, from the more science story that I told, there's a thick strain of nationalism and Garveyism that runs through, through my line. But I did not like being the black columnist--having, having to be the person who told the black point of view. And there's something I, I have trouble explaining because when I get to be architectural critic, I wrote things that perhaps only a black person would write, but I want--how do, I can't quite even say it now, but I wanted to be my own initiative. I, I, you know-- Speaker 1: You wanted to come-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It, it was internal, not an external-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 611493 Speaker 1: One of your pivotal columns at that time was the coverage of a really horrific crime at Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois]--the, the rape and poisoning of a nine-year-old girl. Now, you know, when you started on this columnist pack, you're trying to get away from that, that dark kind of period of your life, but now here's this story. How did that, how did it come to be that, that fell in your lap, and not another member of the Mod Squad? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, well, it, it's funny. I was, you know, I, I heard about--not--I heard about the, obviously, I heard about what happened to the, to the girl at the time. This is a girl who was, you know, as, as you said, who was, who was abused and, and poisoned in, in Cabrini by, by an offender. And the guy disappeared, you know, and no one--everyone, everyone was looking for him. Speaker 1: So, well, she was called Girl X. Speaker 2: Girl X, exactly. And, and because, you know 'cause the media doesn't name rape victims which the, which the girl was-- Speaker 1: And underage. Speaker 2: --and underage (unclear). There was, and on top of that. And, and a few days after--and, and, you know, there was some initial stories, a couple--I mean, one in each paper, and that, that was about it. And a few--the week after that, I was on WVON [WVON Radio, Berwyn, Illinois]. And it was, and I can't even remember what we were talking about. But it was me, a guy from the Nation of Islam, you know, Cliff Kelley, and some others. And there was a break in the program. And we were just talking about everything, you know, how the city is changing and, you know, the, the infrastructure is coming in, and that kind of stuff. And the guy from the Nation of Islam says--Torry Muhammad [ph.]--I think his name was--is. And he says, "Now, this thing about this girl," he says, "You know, in Cabrini-Green--this is awful. She's in--and the media isn't writing anything about it." And then, he says, he says, "You know, if this had happened someplace else, this would be a huge story." So because I'd read some stories--I thought, well, obviously, there is something. I just, you know, I just read the initial stories. I never read anything else. So, I get back to the paper [Chicago Sun-Times], and he was right. I mean, there was, you know, a blip here, a blip here, and a week had passed, and there was nothing. And, maybe it was having, you know, having, you know, our, our kid beat, you know, the kids that were--we kept, kept having or, or there, or something about it. There was something about it that just, in that season, just irked me about this, about the idea of this girl that's sort of left there. And, and, you know, and I thought about my own kids and other kids that, that I knew. And, you know, once again, the, the heart gets engaged. And, and I wrote the, the first column about it, and it got, it got a response. And people started, you know, they're writing me, and they were sending me money to give to the girl. And, and it was, it was terrifying, to be honest. I mean, I, I wrote something that was from a personal place--obviously, you know, writing for people to see, but I-- Speaker 1: That resonated-- Speaker 2: --but I didn't think it was going to resonate that much. So, I ended up getting a couple of columns out of that. And pretty soon, the cops were asking me permission--can we pass out your column around Cabrini to see if we can smoke out the guy or, or get some leads? And, and the cops were giving me stuff. And, and it was, it was just, it was an interesting time. I, I'd forgotten about this--not because it, it wasn't important, but because, frankly, the, the unintended reaction from it. Yeah, it was scary. Story_ID: 611494 Speaker 1: I mean, I had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a, that's really an interesting feeling to come out of that because as a--well, when you were a columnist, what was it that, that you wanted to achieve as a columnist, as opposed to being a beat reporter, or an investigative reporter? What, what was it about that? Speaker 1: Well, as a columnist, before architecture, what I want--I mean, I mean, you know, every, every reporter feels, everybody feels that there's a voice missing from a newspaper. And you want to put it, you want to put in there. But what I saw was that--and I was still, I was young then, I was still young then, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause you're so old now. Speaker 1: So old now--that's right. But what was missing was, I thought, was a voice that wasn't angry, but was kind of at a slow boil that saw things that, that it didn't--he didn't like, and wanting to talk about them, but wanted to talk about them in the way that woke people up, but ultimately, brought them to some sort of solution. I didn't want to blame white people for all of black people's problems. I didn't want to absolve black people from their own issues with the--by giving them the convenient excuse of saying a white man did it, that whatever the rules of the game are, those are the rules of the game. Within that, you got one life to lead, and you gotta do something. But-- Speaker 2: Now, oh, I, I didn't mean to interrupt, but how much would you say that your, your family-- Speaker 1: All-- Speaker 2: --(laughter) there you go. Speaker 1: It's, it's, you know, I didn't realize it at the time, but there was my mother [Lula Dixon Bey] and father [Lee Bey, Sr.] to the bone. I mean, you know, they had saw--they had seen Jim Crow. I mean, they've seen racism at its, at its worse. And to them, the stuff that we were going through, as time went on, was you get on that. You, you can finesse that. You, you can do, you can do something. There's no, there's no excuse. My parents didn't have an education at all. And my father got to the end of high school, but never got a diploma. As I mentioned earlier, my mother got to two years of-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: No, I got that backwards. My mother got to the end. My father got, got through, got through halfway. But the idea that all of us were going to college-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was a fait accompli. I mean, we were gonna go--one way or another (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's--they said that you are going to get educated. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: There's no-- Speaker 1: There's no--just, just, it was no--there was no debate about it. And some of that was in, in what I wrote. But, yet, the, the balancing act was I didn't want to be sort of a reactionary, right-wing person that many black colum- like some black columnists were. Speaker 2: Like [HistoryMaker] Shelby Steele? Speaker 1: Yeah, or, or [HistoryMaker] Armstrong Williams--if he's a journalist or not or, or-- Speaker 2: Well, we know he's not. Speaker 1: He's not, he's not-- Speaker 2: He gets paid-- Speaker 1: He gets paid--he's an advocate (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) by the government (laughter). Speaker 1: And a guy that we're running at the time, Thomas Sowell-- Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: --who, who--they were so blindly right leaning. But they couldn't see that there are times when the, the racial issues of America do--did directly impact this situation. So, I wanted to find, like a pointed middle ground, a reason pointed middle ground, and out of that came--and, and the Girl X in a way was, was out of that. I mean, there's one line that, that I wrote when I said if this, if Girl X had been white, this would have been national news. But I also said, but if, but if the attacker had been white, the civil rights groups would have been having news conferences-- Speaker 2: After-- Speaker 1: --marching around the, the whole thing, and that the, if that, this girl's unfortunate act was be--caught between the extremes of those two, two extremes, that no one could gain--hey, out, out of this. Therefore, she's, she's forgotten about, and that angered me and-- Speaker 2: To even acknowledge that, that was the, the essential truth of that situation. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: It made you angry? Speaker 1: It made me angry. And then I wrote it. I was surprised that there were many other people who were angered about that as well--both black and white. And it, it was just odd. I mean, it, it--I would have been prepared for the attention had it, had I done this later on, like a, like a year or two later. But then, I mean, I wasn't on--I remember being on radio shows after radio shows. Television shows were inviting me on. Geraldo Rivera show ['Geraldo'] made me come on. Speaker 2: Oh, really (laughter)? Speaker 1: I was too smart--I, I didn't go on that. But, but it was, it was that, and that, you know, that again, and again. Story_ID: 611495 Speaker 1: One brief thing--a couple of Februaries before that, there was another story. And these two, in the strange cross switches of my brain, are related, won't be related to anyone who hears this story. But there were--I did, I did stories about these kids. There were twenty-one to twenty-six of them on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] that were living in squalor. The parents were--they, they all lived in this house on the West Side, and this made national to me--international news. And the parents are chasing some drug--I mean, the cops are chasing some drug guy, and they go up in a house, and they find all these kids in the house--twenty-something of them by four different, by four different mothers who are all kind of related. Speaker 2: Oh, I remember. Speaker 1: And, and they're, and they just sort of live in there. And the cops yank them all out and becomes this sort of, you know, this kind of embarrassing, you know, scar to, to Chicago. And I, I, you know, I was mad about that. I mean, I know, I'm always mad, but, but that in this story-- Speaker 2: Your slow boil. Speaker 1: My slow boil--and that, and Girl X, in a way, are, are related. That Girl X and the story about the lead-off to the series ['Who Will Save the Children?' (ph.)] are all kind of related because there is something that we're, we're doing with children that's unhealthy. I mean, and we're letting too many kids fall through gaps. And they're abused by boyfriends or left at home. They're raped in stairwells, and all those things together just happening--those three stories together happened, happened at, at relatively short span of time. And, and that's, you know, and about, then Girl X was just the, the dam that burst and, and all that when I was really feeling--and I'm, I'm a parent, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --for the, you know, for the first and second and then-- Speaker 2: The third time (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) the third time. Story_ID: 611496 Speaker 1: Now, I guess, I want to put you in, in--as a columnist in a wider picture in Chicago [Illinois]. So, there's you at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page at the Trib [Chicago Tribune]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm trying to think who else-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Mary Mitchell-- Speaker 1: Mary Mitchell-- Speaker 2: --yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: --right, as a columnist, that's right. Speaker 2: --who's really the dean of, you know-- Speaker 1: Of, of all-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, you talk--I'm, I'm, yeah, I'm trying to think in my mind who else is--that's it. Speaker 2: There's some--not that, not that many. Speaker 1: That's, that's the black, black voices in Chicago media. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Wow, wow, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, how did--I mean, so you're, you're there. You're, you're--where does that leave you as a, as a journalist like, either, either as a columnist, either you're--that's the end for you or what--plan B? Speaker 2: Well, well, you know, I was, I was part-time as a columnist, full-time as a reporter, but, but that column was, was part-time [at the Chicago Sun-Times]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, you know, as, as it rolls on into, into '96 [1996], and, you know, then architecture comes up. I decided really to, to, to cast my lot with architecture because what I didn't want to be still--I know this is crazy--I still didn't want to be-- Speaker 1: The black-- Speaker 2: --the, the black guy railing against things. And I, I just saw a future of myself, you know, stock prices will go down. Here's what black folks think about it, you know. Ford [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan] goes out of business--well, here's the black folks, here are like, how black folks are impacted. And I thought, I don't want to, I don't, I don't want to do that. I mean, I want to be able to be able to rail against the Girl X if I got to, but I want it to be the, the whole shtick. And what architecture was able to do, and I'll even have my first series on architecture, was about Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but that great series that you're kind of inspired by your dad [Lee Bey, Sr.] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By, by my father. And when I found architecture was a, was a perfect prism--I mean, to look at some of these issues and, and make people listen. I, I can't put it into words--I mean, I can write a series about Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], and people will turn, will turn the pages. If I talked about a building in Englewood that was beautiful, told the history of a building, but yet, how it got in trouble, people would, people, people read it. Speaker 1: Like would-- Speaker 2: And they, they understood more about the neighborhood afterwards. Story_ID: 611497 Speaker 1: This is part two of the interview with [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey. My name is Tracey Lewis, and our videographer for today, and previously, is Scott Stearns. And Lee, if you can just, just say again date and location. Speaker 2: All right. The date is (laughter) January 28th-- Speaker 1: --7th (laughter). Speaker 2: Oops, see, there you go--January 27th, 2006, and I'm in the office of HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] at 1900 South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 611498 Speaker 1: We left off, previously, where you were just starting to talk about your transition from being an editorial columnist to a full-time architectural critic at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. And if we could just kind of go back a little bit--what I, I recall you saying that working on the editorial page was a little dark. And, and you wanted to get away from that, and you were also doing architecture at the same time. So, how did you go from doing a little of both to only being a critic? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was sort of a voluntary phase-out by--I, I stopped writing. The, the editorial page column was on Saturdays, but then I would write extra ones for, for throughout the week, and which was good because they, they paid you for the extra ones you wrote. And, you know, I needed the money. So, so I, I just turned my billiard right fast into, into extra cash. And, but I just had enough of the, of the social issues, addressing them that way at least. So, then, I just started to critique, using the column to kind of critique--not architecture from a building-by-building basis, but just urban planning. I, I took a look at South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], for instance. And I talked about, you know, the, the need for the community to, you know--how, how, with South Shore, it was really a diamond in the rough. And that if the main street could be brought back--71st Street--it could then match the good things that are happening in the neighborhoods, where we have is really, you know, fixing up the old buildings, and the, the people are moving in. And so, I kind of used the, the social voice of the column to address issues of, issues of architecture. I ended up actually doing that before the run of the entire architecture column later on. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: That was sort of the dry run, run for it. And I wish I would--I could say I was smart enough to say, I was testing it out there, so I could do it in the larger scale elsewhere, but I wasn't. I just, I went, I did there, and then said, okay, and end up doing it, you know, with the rest of the coverage as well. Story_ID: 611499 Speaker 1: During your, your tenure as a critic, you were inundated with awards. You won a Studs Terkel Award. Now, what, what is a Studs Terkel Award and, and why did you win it? Speaker 2: Well, the, the Studs Terkel Award is given out by the Community Media Workshop [Public Narrative, Chicago, Illinois] which, which operates out of Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And it's a group that looks to encourage and reward essentially socially conscious reporting. And, and things that are so, that are kind of Chicago [Illinois] centric, and kind of Chicago voiced as well. And so, how we got Studs Terkel to name the--led him to, you know, how to get his permission to name the award after him is beyond me, but somehow they did. And, and the Pullman series that I wrote, His-, Historic Pullman [Pullman Historic District, Chicago, Illinois], this, this remnant of George Pullman's industrial town that was once, when he built it in 1800s, far removed from Chicago, and designed to be a self-contained community for him to have workers to build his railroad cars, famed railroad car, now was a city neighborhood on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], you know, doing well in some respects, but troubled in others. And when a fire there-- Speaker 1: Oh, right. Speaker 2: --burned down the administration building. But the, the state owned--it's always a long story with this stuff--the state owned the Pullman administration building, which is like the city hall, if you will, of old Pullman town. They were going to fix it up. And they sat around, didn't do anything with it for years, and it was open and unguarded. And this guy goes in there, and he sets it on fire--says the voices told him to do it. Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the thing almost burns down, burns to the ground, and that sparked interest in Pullman, and then was the catalyst for the series. But I, I must confess that was not the catalyst for me writing it--that was the excuse. The catalyst was--I can tell this here--was the fire is in December of '98 [1998], I think. About a month or two later, ABC television aired 'The Fugitive,' the Harrison Ford movie-- Speaker 1: Oh, right. Speaker 2: --for the first time. And I saw it on TV for the first time. And there's this scene when Richard Kimble, Harrison Ford, is looking for the one-armed man. And he goes to Pullman, and where the one-armed man lives (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right. Speaker 2: --to 100-, yeah, to 112th [Street] and St. Lawrence [Avenue]. And I'm sitting there, eating a hamburger watching this, and I'm thinking, look at that. And, and he and Harrison Ford climbs up the garage looking for the guy, and breaks into his house, and ransacks his house. It's a, it's a Pullman row house. And I thought, that is wild, that is wild. I mean, you, you didn't think a movie would end up there, right? Speaker 1: Of all the places. Speaker 2: So, of all places. So the next day, I drove out. And, and what struck me was, it looked good. I mean, it looked, it looked great on television. So, I drove out the next day and, you know, saw, you know, saw Pullman, you know, really from the--I mean, I, I was familiar with it--had been there millions of times, but saw it with new eyes. Thanks to Harrison Ford chasing the one-armed man there. And I thought, I gotta, I gotta do something. So, then, I used the fire as an excuse to, to write, you know, to come up with this, with this series, but really, it was, it was Harrison Ford. Speaker 1: It was Harrison Ford-- Speaker 2: Somebody should give him credit for that. Speaker 1: --given his props. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well, now that is something I would have not expected it (laughter) as a reason by an award-winning series. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Harrison Ford-- Speaker 2: Harrison Ford. Speaker 1: --which, of course, again, there is a Chicago connection because he is from Chicago. Speaker 2: That's right, he's from Chicago, that's right. Speaker 1: So, and I think the director-- Speaker 2: Andy Davis, Andrew Davis. Speaker 1: I think he's from Chicago. Speaker 2: Yes, he is. Speaker 1: He has something like a deep Chicago connection. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, I guess it all makes sense then, doesn't it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. We're all talking to each other somehow writing our own, you know. Speaker 1: Shooting movies? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 611500 Speaker 1: One of the interesting aspects of you being architectural critic of the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], your counterpart at the Chicago Tribune was Blair Kamin, which, at this time over these years, made you two the only quote, unquote, dueling architectural critics in the entire nation. Was that ever kind of played up or, or any attention brought to it because that is certainly interesting, and if you could talk a little bit about Blair Kamin's background. Speaker 2: Sure. Well, you know, it was funny because I didn't really realize 'til, 'til the end of the, of my time there that, that we were the only, you know--Roeper [Richard Roeper], Ebert [Roger Ebert], and Siskel [Gene Siskel] then act, you know, architecturally, one guy works at one paper, one guy works for the other. But, you know, having him as, having him, having him across the street was, for me, was amazing, was, was astoundingly intimidating, particularly at first because Blair was, like born to this, right? I mean, he, he went to, you know, went to an Ivy League school, and studied some aspect of architecture, and, and had, had the beat for a number of years before, before I joined. And it was tough because having, you know, he wrote for a broadsheet newspaper. I mean, this paper that's physically bigger than us, tabloid-sheet Sun-Times. He could use the, the space, and the force of his writing, and the, and the fact that he could run pictures larger, and to, to say more, to say a lot more per hit than I could. And he knew the stuff so well. I mean, I mean, if he, he were a hack, you know, you know, I could say, oh, well, I, I could just dismiss. But I mean he, he was like, the eight-hundred-pound gorilla. But, on the other hand, the, the advantage that I had was we had--the papers, generally speaking, have different audiences. And, and so, I knew that, that if I try to--not that I could--but if I tried to replicate what he does, his approach in the, in the Sun-Times wouldn't work. The other thing was, most times an architectural critic's coverage, as stories go in the feature section of the paper, you know, where they put the television stuff and the magazine-like pieces-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --because architecture is still seen as an art. We, at the Sun-Times, saw it as news. For two reasons: one is I didn't want to go the feature section. I was a news guy. I wanted to stay there, and I, I wanted to stay in the newsroom. And I wanted my--well, I wrote to, to be in the news section so because of that, it gave the coverage a different voice. I mean, and when in '98 [1998]--I think it was Falkman [ph.] and Yate [ph.], when I had, when I was given a weekly architecture column every Monday, full page, the--knowing, knowing that it was going to go there, meant, to me, that every story had to be new, had to be newsworthy, have some new element, news element to it. And it's a heck of a constraint to deal with, but in a way, it was liberating. I mean, I could throw away, you know, philosophical exercises on, you know, aesthetics and design, and just tell the reader--here's what's happening, here what's gonna happen, and then my critique would be--so it was so, in some respects, it was closer to, if not in quality, but in closer, in, in tone, and closer in origin to maybe what a page two news columnist would do, like a John Kass or a Mark Brown or, or Royko [Mike Royko]. The--it was, it was closer to that than what a Herbert [ph.], or Blair Kamin--what an architectural critic would do--not to put my work my work, my, my work in a league with those, those luminaries who wrote the page two column, but-- Speaker 1: You can, you can. Speaker 2: --but, thank you. But it was, but it was closer to that where, you know, it was to tell you something new, to show you something you hadn't seen before, to critique it to, you know, to talk about it the way an architectural critic would, but have the news drive it all the time, as opposed to, you know, what-, whatever else was the problem. Story_ID: 611501 Speaker 1: You know, that, that's just really interesting because--now, was that something that, that you were able to speak with your editors about, or was that the overall plan in the first place? Speaker 2: You know, it, it just sort of fell into that. I mean, we, we really--particularly, Roger Flaherty was my, my immediate supervisor [at the Chicago Sun-Times]. I mean, we really made it up as we went along. Whatever rule fit, you know, okay, it, it fit and-- Speaker 1: Because how old were you at, at that time? Speaker 2: I was, I wasn't yet, I just turned thirty, so I was, I was thirty. I was the youngest, I was the youngest critic in, in the nation, I was the only black critic in the nation. I was--all, all that kinds of stuff, but, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. And what's also interesting is that, at that point, you--had you taken any formal course work in architecture, or is just still drawing from what your dad [Lee Bey, Sr.] had, had walked you through Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]? Did, did that love-- Speaker 2: Exactly. You know, that was it. Now, you know, I figured that, that can only carry you so far, so I had to, you know, get books. I remember my, my first, the first week I had the position, my wife [Valencia Scott Bey] actually was the first person, she went to the library, and brought back this, this ton of books and said, "You should read this." And, it was amazing how much of it I already knew and had, had run across, which I think is a function of living in Chicago [Illinois]. I mean, architecture is so much of the city. You just sort of pick up some things, but the firms in town were great about letting me come in, and learn and listen. The architecture schools in town--I mean, IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] was great about, you know, having me out, showing me master plans, and, you know, letting me ask any stupid question that, that I wanted. And, and I just sort of could, could gather it that way. Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's really interesting because no, I don't, I don't have any perception of, of how you would have been treated. But that's, it's nice to know because as you said, you were, were the only black architectural critic in the United States at that time. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, do you recall--was there any kind of news coverage of that fact or just-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --you just were? Speaker 2: --no, I, I just, I just was. And, you know, and it was something that when it came up in conversation, I used to--I mean, to be, to be honest, I, I almost hated it because, you know, you know, occasionally someone, an, an architect, or another person in the media, or someone would say, "You know, you're the only one in the--." And I would say, "Yeah." "Oh, aren't you, aren't you proud?" And I said, "Well if it was was, you know, 1896, yeah, I'd be proud." But at the time, it was 1996, '97 [1997]. I mean, you know, it--there, you know-- Speaker 1: So, were you past this? Speaker 2: Exactly. Hopefully, we, we were past this. That was, that was answer A. And answer B was, you know, it's just writing. It isn't like a cancer surgeon or, you know, or, you know, or a voting rights, you know, activist. It's, it's just a guy who writes for a newspaper. I mean, it's low on the list of--to me, it was low on the list of firsts, you know. It was, yeah, I'm the first but, you know. Story_ID: 611502 Speaker 1: In your criticism, do you feel like you were able to effect some change to bring people's attention to unknown treasures? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I mean, that, that was, that was sort of--I mean, I have, as I think I mentioned before, this kind of rambling spirit where, you know, I like to go someplace where I think no one has been before. I look at something that people haven't seen before. And, and the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] was great about letting me kind of bring that to the, to the fold. And, you know, off--sometimes I'd be out on the weekend and 'cause the neighborhoods that I wrote about--I mean, I, I mean, I, I knew about these places because either I'd frequented them, or went to take pictures, or had some where I passed it up on the way to some place I always go. And at least, a dozen times, during that five years, I'd run into some suburbanite, black or white, who'd be there, you know, at 65th [Street] and Yale [Avenue], looking at some building I wrote about, you know. You know, and, and they'll--, "Hey, I, I read your--didn't you just write--?" "Yeah, I wrote that." "Wow." And, and so, it was good to see that people were, were willing to, to read about something in the paper, and then go see it, and go see it for, for themselves. Speaker 1: Black and white-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --not that I didn't mean to interrupt you-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: I--that I think that's something that's particularly interesting because when architecture is discussed, it, it typically does not include inclusion of black voices. And, I guess, for me, I'll let you finish on your view of how, how black people responded to your, your writings. Speaker 2: It, it was, it, it was always--that, that part of the job was always fun because from '96 [1996] to '98 [1998], I had just a byline in the paper [Chicago Sun-Times]. And then, when the editor, one of the managing editors, no longer there, Joyce Winnecke--came, came up with the idea of running my picture with--the, the Monday architecture page came by accident. I would write long stories for Sunday, and they would hold them, and run them Monday. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and, you know, I just--okay. And then, when one month had passed--September, October--August, September, or something like that of '98 [1998], it happened like, a lot where I would write a story for Sunday, and they would use it, use it for Monday. This managing editor, Joyce, came up with the idea of, let's do this every Monday. I said, "All right." And she says, "And by the way, I want, I want to run your photograph with it." I said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no--." Speaker 1: Why, why? Speaker 2: Did, did not, did not want it, although for the, for the other column, the one, the sort of social column that--when I was part of the Mod Squad-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --they did run the photograph. But I, I was heavier then and my face was fatter. I didn't, I didn't like my photographs anyway. But I thought, you know, no, no, architectural critic has their face with their stuff. I mean, I don't know if that was true or not, but that was my excuse. And she says, "We're running the photo." I said, "All right." So, it--first one came. By the next week, I started getting mail and call, calls from people, black folks. The first letter I got was a guy from the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]--I wish I could remember his name--but I've got the letter because I kept all the letters. Speaker 1: Oh, that's awesome. Speaker 2: He said, you know, "Dear [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey, I did not know you were a brother" (laughter). And then, and he touched upon how he was black, too, and how he was reading me and, and didn't know. I got a call from a, a North African woman one day in '99 [1999], I guess it was. And, and she's got the accent, and she said that she had been picked by this group of people to call. And I guess these people who, people she had breakfast with, and they were reading my column at their Monday--they would have breakfast every morning. They read in the morning, but they would read the, the Monday column, and they were trying to figure out where I came from. So, they, so one guy--she said, said I must be also North African because of the, the Moorish influence, and the Moorish influence in architecture and, and some speaking, you know, so that's coming out of that. One guy says, no, you know, look at the way his face is. He looks--he's from, you know, some other part of Africa. And, and so she, so she says--well, I'm coming to you, to, to ask you, where are you from? And I said, "Where are you standing?" So, she said, I don't, she was at Sheridan [Road] and something. I said, "I'm 100--I was, I am from a spot, 120 blocks, which is south of, south of where you are." And I said, "I was born here, born here." Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And there's this pause on the phone and, and then she, then she just laughs. She cracks up laughing, and she's--we were going through all this to figure out what part of the world you were from. And I said, yep, I'm, I'm born and raised right here. And I told her the story about how we got the last name-- Speaker 1: Right, right-- Speaker 2: --and that kind of thing but-- Speaker 1: --down the street. Speaker 2: --down the street, down the street. But, but I gotta say--I mean, I mean, I cannot say how important it was for me, and how happy I was that black folk embraced what, what I was doing. I mean, I mean it, it just made me feel good. I mean, and they, and, you know, you know because these streets from our streets. These, these are the places where I grew up that I saw, that impacted me. And I think that they, you know, that my people understood that, you know, that, that the things that I wrote was written out of, out of love and affection and, and desire to, to make change in these neighborhoods. Story_ID: 611503 Speaker 1: I want to talk about Chicago [Illinois] and architecture, in particular, and what is it about us, as Chicagoans, and our buildings that we seem to share some kind of DNA, like we're, we're tied to it so deeply somehow and, and maybe you want to talk a little bit about Pilgrim Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Well, you know, you know, architecture becomes so important for, you know, for any city, for any city, but Chicago especially because, you know, Chicago is, is essentially, you know, the, the prototype of the instant city. I mean, here's a city that didn't exist, you know, at all. And it was, you know, du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable] and the fur trappers, and Joliet [Louis Joliet], and all those guys. And then, when it sort of combust itself into existence. And then, from the time it's incorporated 'til, you know, until 1900, it's the fastest growing city on, on Earth. It goes from, you know, a handful of people swapping pelts to each other, from each other, to (laughter), to a full, a full city, like overnight. And it also represented for, for waves of immigrants, and then for African Americans who came after that--a city of opportunity. And, and, but yet in this, as, as this new city, you know, you know, growing up, you know, from childhood to, to teenage years to, to adol-, adolescence overnight, there's always been the sense that because the city had no history that it would create one. And architecture was the, was the most tangible way to do it. I mean, you see it with the World's Fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois]--how the, you know, the city of the future, which it kind of really is, a city of tomorrow, in a sense of the, and of 1800s--ends up designing and building a World's Fair that looks like Old, you know, Old Europe. And the idea is to give it a sense of history, and a sense of beauty, and a, a sense of culture. This will, this will let us know, you know, this, this will tell us who we are, and let others know that we are not just a, you know, a bunch of guys like here on the prairie, you know. Speaker 1: Swapping pelts-- Speaker 2: Yeah, swapping pelts--that there really is, is a, a city here. And so, architecture played an important role in, in legitimizing what, what Chicago was. And, and then, for many less--particularly African Americans, coming up from those of us who have, you know, come, the, you know, the South up to the North via the Central Railroad [Illinois Central Railroad], these buildings also took on an importance because, you know, they were obviously grander than the ones that, that were down South. But it--they, they began to be proof that you had arrived some place, that you weren't, you know, you're no longer a sharecropper. You're no longer, you know, under the boot of Jim Crow, that you know, that you'd, you'd come to a place where the big buildings were, and, and stuff. So, so, all those things, so, so buildings played an important part in, in defining who we are. Most, importantly, who we aren't, as, as Chicagoans. We're not hicks--look at that column on that building. You can't, you don't have in New York [New York], do you? No. You know, that, that kind of thing. And, and, then, Chicago, being the Second City, right, you know, and the euphemism is that it's sort of always had this chip on our shoulder because it, it wasn't New York. And the New Yorkers will, will look down on us, and that kind of thing. Architecture began to be a way to bridge that, that gap, and bridge that, that divide. And then, also, you know, it's a city of superlatives, you know--the longest this, the biggest this. And architecture, the thing you build, it, it can easily fit in that paradigm, so you get the tallest building, and the longest street, Western [Avenue], and you get all those, all those kinds of things. So, that's, that's kind of the, the--my view of what happens, and why our architecture is so much in our DNA. Story_ID: 611504 Speaker 1: I guess that was the beginning of this month of, of January, that Pilgrim Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] caught fire. And you happened to be there to photograph it as well. Could you talk a little, facing a little bit--would you care to share some of your thoughts on, on Pilgrim? Can you give us its, some of its history? Speaker 2: Certainly. Pilgrim Baptist was designed and built in the 1800s--1890. And it was designed by Louis Sullivan and Dankmar Adler. They were like the, the Batman and Robin of architecture, right, you know. Louis Sullivan was the dreamer and the visionary. And, and Adler was the, was the, the brilliant structural engineer who figured out how to make Louis Sullivan's beauty, you know, hold up, and that kind of thing. And so, they were really like, like a team. Adler's father, I think, it was his, his father was rabbi of this congregation, which is how they got the hook-up--another Chicago [Illinois], you know, institution, right? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Nepotism, you know, my boy could do this. Speaker 1: That's real Chicago style. Speaker 2: It's really, it is, it really is. It's how business is done here. So, so they, they design this building. And, of course, it's a synagogue from the 1890s through, through the early 1920s, about 1922. As the neighborhood changes, and goes from being a, a Jewish, a German Jewish stronghold, and African Americans from the Great Migration coming up South, began to take residence around there. The building enjoys a second life as Pilgrim Baptist Church. And then it's here, of course, where Dr. Thomas Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey], and Mahalia Jackson, and Sallie Martin, and all the, and all the luminaries were Gospel, Gospel music, perfected the, the alchemy, and create Gospel music, you know. Dorsey, of course, was a blues musician--Georgia Tom, I think he was, finds the Lord, and puts--brings his blues phrasings, and his blues stylings to religious music. (Gasps) You know, heresy at the time will be like--although this doesn't seem as risky now because you had, but because you have it, but, you know, it would be like when, when hip-hop and Gospel started to kind of marry, it's like, what is, what are the beats doing in the, in the church? It was kind of, it was kind of that, that happening there. Well, it was happening there, but he was director of music--Thomas Dorsey was. So, from this spot, I mean, you get an interesting and one-of-a-kind intersection of history, culture, and architecture. You have the, the beauty of the building, which stands on its own, a beautiful stone building with this arch at the front and a very tricky do at that time, given how big that arched front is. Speaker 1: The top--how--I mean, I've driven past it a zillion times, but how, how big is it really? Speaker 2: I'm terrible at, at guessing, at guessing these things. Speaker 1: Like the, the length of two Cadillacs, the length of (laughter)-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: --a school bus? Speaker 2: --it could be the length of three-quarters of a school bus. I get it, I get it. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, this is big-- Speaker 2: It's pretty, it's pretty big. And, and so, you have the, the, you know, have this large beautiful arched entrance that, that allows you to go in. And, of course, you know, the, the structure has to be such that you have a clear span of the inside, you know, that you don't wanna--nobody wants to worship on the pole, right, and kind of, kind of do this? So, all these, these tricky problems of engineering and architecture are solved in this beautiful package. And then, so you have that, and then beyond that, you have this history. I mean, Gospel music has impacted popular music, you know, as much as blues has. And, you know, and it's all over the world now until--an idea that that comes out of this spot, you know. This, the seed was planted in this spot--makes it one-of-a-kind place. So, when it burned down earlier this month or, or last month, in January, January of 2006--I mean it really is a loss of so many fronts, particularly since Thomas Dorsey's papers, and some of, some of his personal effects were in this building at the time--irreplaceable stuff. But the thing that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That hurts. Speaker 2: --that it, it does hurt. And, and the thing, and the Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] series that I wrote about, and some of the other things kind of tried to underscore this, is black history, black architectural, particularly, black history in particular, built things that celebrate black history, are really endangered. I mean, just, you know, always, you know, about to be torn down, burned down, fallen in--that kind of thing. And, and this jewel, of course, is a, you know, is yet another example of that fact. Story_ID: 611505 Speaker 1: Oh, yes, the loss of--and black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The loss--that's right. Speaker 1: --black history tied with buildings and, and how you said it's, it's always in some state of, of anarchy, about to be torn down, torn down, burnt up, about to be burnt up. It--and I was watching 'Chicago Tonight' on Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. And I can't think of the reporter's name from, like Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. So now, why is all this attention being paid to Pilgrim Baptist [Pilgrim Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], which was built by two white men, Adler [Dankmar Adler] and Sullivan [Louis Sullivan], or Sullivan and Adler? And there's a church over on, on 24th [Street], I think, and Wabash [Avenue] that was built by a black man that it has been left to rot. Speaker 2: It's, it's going to burn down first to get the, to get the attention. Yeah, what I, I'm being, I'm being terrible, but, you know, that church, Quinn Chapel [Quinn Chapel A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois], has gotten a fair amount of attention. And, and, you know, they're, you know, they're, they're both--I mean, I think that there's a, there's a lesson for Quinn Chapel that's learned in the destruction of Pilgrim, which is if, if Pilgrim is so vulnerable that it, that it burns down, then one, one wonders about Quinn Chapel as well which, you know, also has, you know, is in need of repair, has a small congregation, can't make the landmark quality, you know, repair that, that it needs. And, you know, and, again, and like Pilgrim, it's kind of on the bubble there, you know. And, and you know, and you know, and, and, but it shows how fragile, you know, these things are, that black landmarks, particularly in Chicago [Illinois], are probably the most fragile rank of architecture. Story_ID: 611506 Speaker 1: I mean history kind of shows that. I mean, there's, there's one building that used to be on, used to be in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]. I think it was on Michigan [Avenue] near 31st Street [sic.]. It was the Louis Jordan Building [sic.]. Now, what a loss--Joseph Jordan, I'm sorry, Building [J. Jordan Building, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It, you know what, I may have to get that name right for you-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --whether it's Louis Jordan, Jordan--no, Louis Jordan was the [U.S.] Army singer. Speaker 2: The musician, right. Speaker 1: This guy was a musician, too. I think it was Joseph Jordan Building. Speaker 2: 31st and Michigan? Speaker 1: 31st and Michigan. And this, and, and Jordan's history was interesting. He was a musician in the early part of the 20th century, wrote ragtime compositions and other things and was, and was in Chicago [Illinois]. One of his songs got covered by a white Dixie band, and they didn't pay him for it--they, they ripped him off. So here's a black man in the early part of the 20th century. He says, ugh, so he sues, and he wins. So, he gets some substantial settlement from, from this suit, and what does he do with it? He builds a building in Bronzeville. Now Bronzeville, at the time, you know you had, you know, you have black banks. It was, you know, you know you had, you know, it was a center of black commerce. So, he builds a building, the Jordan Building. He, he moves, you know, he does his time in Chicago and moves, moves away. He was alive, even up until the, the '70s [1970s], the early '70s [1970s]. And, but the building, you know, falls into, into decay. And one day in the '80s [1980s], the building just collapses in the street. And what happens--what happened was brick thieves were coming around the back of the building, taking a brick, taking a brick, taking some bricks-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --and leaving the face of the building intact. It was between two buildings, as I recall. And then, they stole so many buildings [sic. bricks]. It was, it was the integrity was breached in the facade. It falls into the street, and then they realized, oh, my God, is, you know. So, so it's, it's that kind of thing--this building with all this history and built with this purpose by black people for black people in black metro-, the heart of black metropolis. And it just falls into the street, like a common, you know, warehouse, you know, and, and there's that. And, and these stories are told over and, and over again. I don't know if I mentioned the Knights of Pythias Temple [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --which is this, this great building at 36th--37th [Place] and State [Street], designed by Walter Burley Griffin--I'm sorry, Walter Thomas Bailey, the state's first licensed black architect. And he designs this building in the, you know, in the late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s], and it's an eight-story building. It's beautiful. It has--it's terracotta, and it has these faces of Egypt. And, and he's trying to find a black vernacular that really, when there really isn't one--design vernacular and there's these, you know, there's like, these Egyptian-like sunbursts, and faces of Cleopatra, and that kind of thing. And this building, you know, becomes--goes from office building to an apartment house, but by 19-, by 1980, it was just another abandoned building on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. It gets torn down, and all that history is lost, but not all the terracotta actually. The terracotta actually sold, and is everywhere. One guy made a fence out of it in, in--he's either in the Cleveland [Ohio] or, or also Detroit [Michigan], I can't remember which one. But in Chicago, you still see the terracotta at 700 North Wells Street in front of the O'Hara Gallery [O'Hara's Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], and they took the terracotta pieces, and made planters out of them. So, they're right there on the street, these Egyptian-style planters. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And it's really pieces from the Knights of Pythias building, designed, it was, it was built--when they, when they designed it, that it was the largest, most expensive building ever designed by black people. Now, I guess that doesn't count the pyramids and stuff like that, but speaking of--I guess, with modern African and Africans, and, and people of African descent, it was supposedly the biggest, the biggest thing that, that we did. All of it is lost. Speaker 2: Where, where was that located? Speaker 1: The, the gallery or the-- Speaker 2: Knights of Pythias building. Speaker 1: On State Street at 37th Street--37th or 38th Street, on, on State, on the west--on the east side of State. It's a corner building. Speaker 2: See now--I'm just going to cry. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: I didn't even know about that and I'm going to cry. Story_ID: 611507 Speaker 1: I mean I have a sense of why I think it, it's, important to preserve buildings. But in, in your years of, of covering architecture in Chicago [Illinois], and your love of it, why do you think historical preservation is, is so vital to us as, as black people and to citizens as a whole? Speaker 2: You know, preservation is, is important because it--the buildings, when they're preserved, historic buildings are as close as you get to a living witness of, of history. I mean, imagine a kid who sees, you know, who's maybe passing the Knights of Pythias Temple [Chicago, Illinois] for years and years and years. And one day, when he's fifteen or fourteen, looks at it and thinks, that's an interesting building. What's the story, what's the story there? And you could tell him--well, you know, you know, these people, this building was built by African, by African Americans. It was built for this purpose so, you know, it, so they, they're living testaments to a, to a, to history, and in our case, to, to black history. But the other reason why, particularly in black neighbor-, black neighborhoods, minority neighborhoods for black neighborhoods, in particular why it's a shame when a building goes down because it almost never gets replaced with anything. I mean, you, you go through some areas, Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] and other places--and, you know, parts of it, of the Near South Side [Chicago, Illinois], the building comes down, torn down in the '70s [1970s], and '80s [1980s], and '90s [1990s], and nothing happens there. It just becomes a vacant lot, and it doesn't contribute to anything, and it adds to the despair and the desolation of the, of the neighborhood. And that's even, so those, between those two reasons, you know, other reasons why, why, you know, you wish, but, you know, in all fairness, sometimes these buildings fall into the hands of bad owners and they fall into, into decay, and that kind of thing. But it's, it's a shame when they go down because the history is lost, the building is lost and, and the, and the opportunity to have something of quality that, quality that occupies that site is also lost. Story_ID: 611508 Speaker 1: So, you have this great knowledge, just an eminent brain box, and a, a deep love, and then you take a job with the city [Chicago, Illinois]. Now, how does a hardcore newsy like you end up working for the city? And I, I not like you're driving a truck but (laughter), not a, not a hired truck (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, not a hired truck, you'll never know. Speaker 1: But tell us how that transition came about from the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] to working for Mayor, Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley]. Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was, it was interesting. And, and, you know, in full disclosure, I should tell the full story of, of how it happened. In early, early 2000--oh, let's see, let me make sure I got that right. Well, mid-2000, Nigel Wade, who's the editor of the Sun-Times when I was architectural critic, you know, leaves, and goes back to Europe where, where he was from. And we got two editors in from, from Canada. One, one guy is Canadian, and one guy was English, but they both worked British, but they both worked in Canada for Canadian Hollinger Newspapers [sic. Hollinger Canadian Newspapers]. They came in Chicago [Illinois]. And I was, the summer they arrived, I was doing this--I was, I was not in the paper a lot. I was off doing this series on urban sprawl, looking at a national service. And, and I--I guess around November of 2000, I really began to relook at the paper for the first time in, in more than a couple of months. And it seemed to me that what I was writing didn't fit anymore. I, I'd just thought, hmm, I mean there was a lot of, you know, a lot of Britney Spears, you know, you know, a lot of 'Sex and the City,' the TV show, not the, the act of, a lot of that. And I just, and I just thought--I wonder, you know, I just, I just wonder. So, come next year, which was 2001, I just, I don't know, I, I just began the year. I remember, remember even telling my wife [Valencia Scott Bey]--I said, I, I want--I'm getting restless. I, I think, I wonder, I wonder if I'm going to be here by the end of the year. And, you know, so around April of 2001, I got a call from mayor's Office from Jackie Heard [Jacquelyn Heard], the mayor's press secretary. She and I are old friends. We've been knowing each other since we were young bucks, you know, her, her writing for the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], she writing for the Tribune, and me at the Sun-Times. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and the mayor and I had--the mayor and I got to know each other over those months because, you know, he read, he read my column. And, and which was great and, you know, we--I'd run into him at press conferences. And we talked a little bit about architecture and stuff like that, and just, it seemed, it seemed like he was really interested in what I had to say. And I thought, oh, you know, he's just, just being polite--that's all. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and then, you know, she called me--Jackie called me up and said, you know, "The mayor wants me to ask you a question. Are you ready for a change?" Like, you know, it's like, what, what an evangelist or Billy Graham might say-- Speaker 1: Okay (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --"Are you ready for a change?" "Yes-- Speaker 1: Praise the Lord. Speaker 2: --I'm ready for a change." So, so that, so, you know, so, you know, and so, they, they offered the position. Come in and talk about it. Let's see what we can do. Speaker 1: And what was the position? Speaker 2: Dep-, it was just the very one--deputy chief of staff, and advice among planning and, and design issues. And my first impression was, oh, no, no, I'm, I'm a writer. I'm not, I'm not that--whatever that, whatever that is. But I got a say, there was a bump up in pay that was measureable. And we just had our fourth, and final child, Sara [Sara Bey] in 2001. And my wife, who's a really talented musician, you know, she's working and stuff, and can't get, you know, the clear shot she needs to, you know, devote the time to what she really wants to do. I'm thinking about that, and I'm really thinking about, you know, it pays, pays more money, and, and then, but also thought about the opportunities. I thought, you know, you know, and it's--I don't know--I wish I could analyze myself to tell you what the, what the root cause of this stuff is. But there's a, always been a part of me that always wants to look ahead a little bit and even when it, when the most of me doesn't want to. There's a part of me that wants to see what's around the corner, what's--I want to get over there, and see what that thing is. And that part really began to kind of eat at me. And then my wife, of all people, who I thought would talk reason into me and say, don't do this. You're, she says, "Well, you know, if you, if you don't do it, you'll always wonder what things would have been like had you done it, had you made the trip." Thinking about it now, I don't know whether that was an endorsement, or whether she was just saying, you know, you're crazy, you know what I mean, whether she was just confirming, you know, the, the inevitable. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, I, I, so I began to think, you know. Well, I, I could do some things here. And so, I, I thought--well, yeah, I was thirty-five then, so, you know, I'm feeling more of my own mortality and things and-- Speaker 1: At thirty-five? Speaker 2: --and I, I don't know, you know. I, I've never been thirty-five before so, to me, I was old. So, so, yeah, so, so, then, and it also, you know, the fatherly gene kicks in. You wanna, you know, if you, you know, you want to able to put yourself in a position where you can do more things for the kids and, and for others. And, although writing was fantastic and, and the pay was good, you know, city hall pay, at that level, was, was better. Speaker 1: Way better-- Speaker 2: And I thought--well, you know, I, I should, I should take this. And if it doesn't work out, I can always somehow go back to writing. Story_ID: 611509 Speaker 1: And so, I said, yeah, I took it. But I tell you, I say that now, like it, like it's just over--wow, it's just nothing, but a thing. It was the most agonizing decision I have ever made of my adult life--before, after, since, everything. I'm not afraid to say to, to--in front of everyone that when I realized that, that yes was going to be the answer, I remember packing my stuff at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. I used to go at night because--and I'm not getting over the spirit of crying, but I was that emotionally, emo-, it was that emotion because I mean, writing had taken me from--I mean, this young brother from the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. And it, it had shown me a world I never would have seen, never knew existed, never would have known about. And, you know, writing was--it was good to me. It was and, and it was a part of me that--and it's funny because, like my kids laugh when I say this, that I'm actually very shy--I mean, really shy. You, you laugh, but that's, that's what the, the core is. But writing was a way for me to step into an extrovert's clothes, and kind of have these experiences through that, that I never would have otherwise had. So, it, it was, it was tied to me. I didn't really realize how autobiographical myarchitecture columns were until--I mean how much of me was, was there until long after I left the paper. And then, as I mentioned, the University of Chicago Press [Chicago, Illinois] was interested in doing a book of my columns. And I'm reading, and I'm thinking, this, this is really, this is, this is shocking--this, this is about me. I mean, it's, and, and I mean, how much of me was, was there. So all of that, you know, by leaving it, I was putting all of that on, on the shelf to do, to, to do what, and to be what, and become what, and, and what's, what's there. So, yeah, it was, it was agonizing. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I guess that deputy chief of staff [for Mayor Richard M. Daley] who is that [HistoryMaker] Lee Bey, you know the writer, Lee Bey-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, who was deputy chief of staff, Lee Bey? Who did he end up being? Speaker 1: He--what he found out, though, is that he, he ended up being the same guy. He, he (laughter), he didn't know that at the time. But, but what, what was amazing was that, that the things that I knew, of experiences that I had, and people that I met as, as a writer, I was able to draw upon the same people and experiences and things as on, on the other side. And, you know, the ability to, to make an argument or, or the, or to state a case--I think that a critic does--turned out to be invaluable on, on the other side. But, on the other hand, it was a great learning experience for me as well. I mean, to learn how deals are put together, how cities are really formed from a political standpoint, and from a governmental standpoint. And, it ended up, waking up a part of me. I mean, what excited me a lot was that intersection between politics and, and architecture and how, and how that works. And, you know, this, this idea, you know, we have--and I still consider myself a layman when it comes to architecture. I mean, I, I am not an architect that, you know, that there's this lone genius, Frank Lloyd Wright. He comes out in the hat and the long frock and the, and the stick. And he, and he points to the rendering, and that's what's was going to be built. And it, and it comes solely from the, the mind of the genius. And what I was fascinated by at city hall, and what being there allowed me to, to peek, peek behind the curtain and see, is how politics, how, you know, an alderman, how a mayor, how political circumstances--all those things shaped architecture and, you know, decides what gets built, what doesn't get built, and how that is part, and parceled to Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] history. So, then, it got me the--I began to see the city in a whole new way. I mean, why the housing projects were there, and why they were so big, and why the streets are so wide when they, they run through them, you know, you know. And all of a sudden, that and, and so going to city hall and, and learning this, this nexus, it was like, it was like a reawakening of, of, in a large sense. So, you know, what, Lee Bey found that he was--is--he was excited, as excited about that as he was about, about writing, and, and just how this, you know, how the city is, is put together, and also fascinated about how race and class play, play a role in this. So, I mean, so I kind of became, you know, like a, like a student, or an active student. I mean, I was helping do deals and advising the mayor, but I was just drinking in everything that I could about how, you know, how neighborhoods are put together, and all, all those things. Story_ID: 611510 Speaker 1: Well, a couple of major things happened or are in the works, but are coming to fruition--Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois] that some call the mistake on the lake, and the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] transformation, which I, obviously, started early, but we see real acceleration of the demolition of Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois]--and is, is Stateway Gardens [Chicago, Illinois], too? Speaker 2: Yeah, Stateway. Speaker 1: And, and could you talk a little--I think that--please share some of your thoughts on, on those events that happened as, as you became deputy chief of staff [for Mayor Richard M. Daley]. Speaker 2: Well, Soldier Field was fascinating because that, that was one that I'd written about when I was architectural critic [for the Chicago Sun-Times], and then ended up having to ride herd over it as, as a deputy. And how it happened was funny. There was, there was a, a deputy on the, on the floor, another deputy, Sarah Pang, who was leaving the mayor's office within my first month or so being there. And there was a party for us--for her--in the suite of offices where we are. So, a sixth sense kept telling me, you know what, the mayor has been--he's going, he's going to approach you about Soldier Field. Even before the party, the week leading up to it, this kept--you know, we would be in meetings, and he--I, I just could feel something about Soldier--I just could feel it. So 'cause no one else, no one, no one in the mayor's office, at the time, was really bird-dogging it, so I thought, okay, stick the new guy with it. So, I, I remember being at this--I remember, you know, at Sarah's party, and I don't want to come out. I mean, I mean, Sarah, I like Sarah a lot, I end up, you know, goodbye. And I can think--I was trying to get back to the office 'cause I was trying to avoid the mayor. So, this crowd dies down. And in my office, I can hear the, you know, the, the voices and the laughter kind of getting further into the distance. Everyone's going their own way. So, I come (unclear) my office, go to the bathroom, and run into the mayor. So, he says, you know, "Lee [HistoryMaker Lee Bey], how you doing?" "It's good, Mayor, how, how are you?" And he says, "Have you, have you seen the, the renderings for Soldier Field?" I said, "Oh, yeah, you know, in October, I mean of last year, when I wrote about them." I'm thinking, you know, hopefully, that will--I'll throw the bone over there, maybe he'll run over there, and get it, right? He says, "Oh, no, no, no, there, there's new stuff, right, there's new things." He says, "Well, I'll be back." So, he goes to his office. And so, I, you know, kind of, do I stay here? So, I stayed there. Came back a few minutes later, and he had the renderings, and, and, you know, he said, and he wanted a few design changes. "Now, what do you think if I put this here and when the seating bowl is too big, suppose we, we make this go down here, and suppose we put some glass around here?" And I said, "Well, you know, yeah, it's a good idea, Mayor, it's a good idea." He said, "Okay, good," and he's looking at me. And I know enough to figure out that means--now you gonna do it. Speaker 1: Oh, no. Speaker 2: So I said, okay. So, I ended up having the first meeting I ever called in life--was getting in, you know, the people who had sweated blood and tears to get the Soldier Field deal, you know, financed and through the General Assembly [Illinois General Assembly], and get the design together. And had, had to call into a meeting in the mayor's office with me in charge, never had called a meeting before to tell them about these new design changes. I got the president of the Bears [Chicago Bears] and, you know, the, the mayor's advisors where they got the, you know, who had financed the deal. And they're looking at me like, like they want to like put a knife through my throat, right (laughter)? So, so who's this newcomer--weren't you just working for the newspaper just a couple of days ago? And now you're tell-, I mean, they, they were kind enough not to say that. So-- Speaker 1: You could see in their yes. Speaker 2: --you could see, you could see in their eyes. And, so, you know, I said, "Gentlemen, I don't see us--I don't see any way we, we can get around this. I think we're going to have to give him what he wants." So, the architects go back, and everyone goes back, and they find a way to give the mayor what he needs. So, then I go back to the mayor, and I say, "Well, Mayor, you know, we did it, you know, here, here it is," thinking that will absolve me. And he says, "Oh, no, no," he said, "well, that's as good, as good as it (unclear). Oh, the city was going to be great," and he's--and, then, then he stops and looks at me again. And I knew then, at that point, that means, you know, you--it's pinned on you now, pal. So, that. so, so, but, but I'm glad he did--I mean, I mean, and to say I had no experience when you heard my story so far, to say I had no experience is an understatement. I mean, I mean, I had negative twelve, no experience, you know. And, you know, I need to build a subdivision to only get up to have no experience and what, and what I was in charge of, of doing. But what, what I found out, though, that, A, he, he'd assembled a great team. It wasn't like I had to go out there and, you know, erect, you know, walls and pour concrete. Speaker 1: This is good. Speaker 2: But, but what it had, but what it needed was sort of like a father in, in a sense, you know, to kind of keep the family together while this thing got built. And, you know, and, occasionally I, I would report to the mayor. Here's what we're doing and, you know, was this all right with you? Now, what can we do, and, and suggesting things, but, but we basically, you know, got it through all eighteen months of construction without much of a problem. Story_ID: 611511 Speaker 1: Now we ran into problems media-wise and public perception-wise-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --'cause people hated it [Solider Field, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Those were--what were, were some of the other nicknames? Speaker 1: Oh, you know, it's called the toilet, you know, it looked like a toilet, and which I never--the toilet one, I never saw. It looked like a-- Speaker 2: A bidet. Speaker 1: --a space ship--a bidet, that's right--a space ship shooting down, you know, raised, a space ship landing on the Parthenon. I mean, it was, it was every unkind thing one can, one can say about that. Speaker 2: Oh, I forgot, I forgot those. Well, now some of the contentiousness and, and the anger was because Soldiers Field [sic. Soldier Field] is on the National Register [National Register of Historic Places]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Is it--it's a national landmark of historic places, or is it the same thing? I can't think-- Speaker 1: Well, it's on both. I mean, there's, there's, it's a National Register, and then above that, it's a National Historic Landmark. So, you got, like places, like Jefferson's [President Thomas Jefferson] Monti-, Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia]. And, you know, and Washington Monument [Washington, D.C]. And, and Soldier Field was, was right there with it. But what, what I found, but what I found out was, and it's very, you know, as we're trying to figure out a way to get the thing built, but then address the public and the media outcry over this--I knew that tracking down the National Register domination for, from that nomination, the National Historic Landmark designation is, is given to it. And I saw that it was floored by the fact that of all the criteria that was listed, architecture by, in and of itself, wasn't one of them. It was--what happened there, you know, the, the, and the boxing matches that happened there, strike boxing matches, the king, you know, the King's, Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assembly, you know, his, his appearance there. The Army-Navy game, I think, you know, so that, so that the events that happened there was one, the fact that it, that it replicated Roman stadiums, was another, was another one. All those things, but the, but the whole of, of what it was or the beauty, the beauty of what it was, was not by itself listed as a, as a factor. What happened there--the fact that it was where it was, in a stadium in the park, and the colonnades, the, the columns that, that surround it, all of which were preserved under the new Soldier Field plan, were all the things that landmark designators, listed as, as reasons why it should be on the list. So, at a bit of sleight of hand, I, I helped craft the argument that the thing that, that they're complaining about wasn't a criteria under which it was landmarked. The whole of, of Soldier Field, itself, is not as valuable from a landmark perspective as the park's. What happened, the colonnades--all these things are, are preserved under the new plan. And so, then, from that point, I had to write an argument to National, to the NHL [National Historic Landmarks Program], to the, to the--well, to National Park Service, kind of arguing in favor of it, and the fact that the National Park Service had never taken back a designation from a place unless it-- Speaker 2: Because they were planning on--that was a possibility they would, would take away-- Speaker 1: They, they would take it back, but they hadn't, they hadn't done it in the past to any place that hadn't, you know, burned down, fell down, or somehow disappeared off, off the Earth. So, well, apparently, the, the argument still hold some water because they, they still-- Speaker 2: See-- Speaker 1: --they're still figuring around at this, at this taping at least, of whether they're going to take it back, or whether they're going, where they're going, you know, keep it. Speaker 2: That's been how many years now? Speaker 1: It's been, you know, it's been, it's been two years since I left, so it's three years probably in total. Story_ID: 611512 Speaker 1: If you'd still been at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] when the, at, at the height of this, do you think your perspective would have been a little different? Speaker 2: See, I wonder about this because the thing, the thing that--I wonder. This is, this is a good question because one of the things about the Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois] argument that began to bother me later on, just, just as a critic was, a former critic at that time, was that Soldier Field really--it's going to be heresy--is a replica. It's not the real thing. A real Rom-, a real Roman stadium, it's, it's stone. This one is, you know, kind of like a, like a fancy concrete that's applied, you know. It has a, you know, you know, you know, it, it's a, it's a 20th century interpretation, faithful in some respects of a classical building, but it isn't a real thing, any more than we see a house with a dome out in the suburbs built in 1994 and say--oh, my God, it's the White House, you know, you know, what I mean, it's, it's like the White House [Washington, D.C.]--it has a dome. I mean, I mean, you know, it isn't, it isn't the same, and that, really the thing that makes Soldier Field unique is really, is what, what happened there, and that is a piece of architecture. It's interesting, but it isn't legitimate, compared to, for instance, buildings that do get torn down in Chicago [Illinois], which are buildings that are really of their age--Chicago school buildings built in the 19-, 1908s, 1920, beautiful buildings that come out of the Chicago experience built by Chicagoans, for Chicago companies, unique architecture, construction forms, pioneered for these buildings. You know, these are, to me, as I begin to think about it, these are the real landmarks, and that Soldier Field is something else. Story_ID: 611513 Speaker 1: Great so, we just left off talking about your earliest days as deputy chief to Mayor Richard M. Daley, and issues surrounding Soldiers Field [sic. Soldier Field, Chicago, Illinois]. What were some of--now, you were there for, like three, about three years? Speaker 2: Three years, just almost three years, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Did--now, for someone crossing that bright line of, of journalism to, to government service, Chicago [Illinois] has a couple of great people who've done it--David Axelrod, from journalism to politics as, as an advocate. How was that, that transition for you because sometimes people--journalists don't look kindly upon people who've, you know, crossed over to the other side. How, how was that for you? Speaker 2: It, it was, it was tough at first because what--and then because there is a steep learning curve. And, you know, and what you find out is that, you know, you know, nature says it's cause and effect in, in it. But what you find in government is that between cause and effect, there's, there's politics. And, and that, and it's like a blob, you know, how big the blob is, you know, and, and when it's going to come down, and when, you know, when there's an obstruction to what you're trying to do, or what is it going to help you do, what you're trying to do. And trying to figure that, that part out was, was interesting and, you know, and difficult. Now, I remember once, we got word that Metropolitan Church [Metropolitan Community Church, Chicago, Illinois] at 40-, on King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], 43rd [Street], I think, and King, 41st [Street] and King Drive, was going to be demolished, that, that it, like Pilgrim [Pilgrim Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] and some others, you know, had a small congregation, some in an historic, beautiful historic building, right there on the boulevard. So, at the time, we were getting--the mayor was getting hammered, hammered pretty good on preservation issues--Soldier Field being one, the preservationists didn't see it as an act of preservation. They saw, they saw as something else and, two, there was a building downtown at Franklin [Street] and Washington [Street], 300 West Washington. It used to be the old Butter and Egg Board [Chicago Butter and Egg Board], the precursor to the, to the Board of Trade [Chicago Board of Trade], to the Board of Trade--handsome building, corner building. And the owners got a demolition permit for it and, and to knock it down. And it wasn't landmarked, and probably could have been, probably should have been, given its history and, and its beauty. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But, you know, they tagged it first, so the, the building was coming down. And the mayor is getting really, you know, pointed at by preservationists saying, what are you doing? These buildings are coming down. Around the heels of this comes Metropolitan Church. So, I went to see the, the pastor and with some other people from the mayor's office. And I said, "Well, what you really want is a building that you can worship in. You don't want have to pay the freight for this, this big building you're in." He says, "Right." I said, "Well, suppose we find out--we, we strike a deal where we'll try to find you some land," and God knows, there's vacant land all over the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. "And we'll try to find a way to get it to you with the idea that we'll try to find a congregation that will go inside this church, so that if it worked out right, it would just be like a swap, right?" You know, we'd identify a congre-, congregation who have the means to deal with a landmark church 'cause we would landmark this church-- Story_ID: 611514 Speaker 1: You can't landmark a church without the church's consent, so we couldn't have landmarked Metropolitan [Metropolitan Community Church, Chicago, Illinois] with that kind of congregation inside because it would, you know, they could-- Speaker 2: They, they wouldn't have agreed. Speaker 1: They wouldn't have agreed which means we wouldn't have gotten far. So, then, it becomes like, switches in a row. We find, we find a congregation, needs a place to stay, doesn't mind being a landmark church. We would get them in there, and we would essentially swap the church for the, for the land. So-- Speaker 2: Now, is that the first time something like that has ever been done? Speaker 1: It's the first time I ever did it (laughter), or tried to do it. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: So, I, I mean, I don't know, you know. And, you know, I, I think I have, I had a law department look into it. And I think there's a way we could do it with some, but, you know, there were some, you know, proviso, small things that not just (unclear) to the plan, but it, but it was, but it turned to be very solid. So, I go back to the mayor [Richard M. Daley] and I said, "I think I got a solution." And then, he told me, you know, "It's great, great." Totally forgotten about the idea that, that there's an alderman in that ward, and it's [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Tillman. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: And Dorothy and I know each other, but I had totally forgotten--never dawned on me, never dawned to me, to call, to call. So, Dorothy never called me about this at first, but I would hear through, like other sources of mine, the planning department that, that she wasn't happy about it. So, I end up calling her up, or somehow we, we end up talking and, and she's very diplomatic about it. She says, "You know, you know, that church, you know, I, I wouldn't get involved in, in that, you know, I'm, I'm not sure." And, you know, and she said, "If I were you, I wouldn't," to me, but not, not as a threat or anything, but just saying, you know, like that, so kindly advice from a person who's traveled the road before. So, now I feel stuck 'cause, you know, obviously, you know, it takes some City Council action to make this kind of thing happen-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, you don't want to, so, you know, so, then, how do I, if support isn't there, and what do we do? But, but long story short, you know, she wasn't that thrilled about the, about the idea. And it was, and, you know, and it was just so stuck that I really thought the church was gonna go down. But it turns out that the, that the congregation that I didn't identify--Leon Finney [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Leon D. Finney, Jr.], Rev- Reverend Finney-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --he ended up going to the church on his own and, and making a deal. And so, the church moved out. The, the congregation moved out, and Reverend Finney, Finney moved in. And I, I still, I still see him from time to time now. He says, "You know, you saved that church, don't you?" And I said, "No, you, you saved that church, and my hide probably, by, by doing that." But it ended up working out anyway, but I learned from that. I, I learned from that about the, about the whole issue of buy-in, you know. There's probably something that, that alderman, in particular, probably wanted from city hall, wasn't getting, that if she had gotten it--I mean, you know, something good, like, you know, help for a vacant lot or, you know, help from the law department doing something. I mean, there's, there's some, some legitimate city service that probably could have bar-, been bartered somewhere in there, that could have smoothed the whole thing over. But, but, yeah, I learned a lot from, from that one. But I don't have, you know, have too many stripes on my back as, as a result, but, but that kind of thing--and that was pretty, pretty early on. And once I figured that out, then, you know, then it was relatively smooth, relatively smooth sailing from, from that point to the, to the end. Now, the part where, where it was difficult was and I, I can say, how to say this without, without slander, or a libel suit is coming my way. The, the chief of staff at the time, Sheila O'Grady, was difficult, to say the least, to work with--extremely much so, and not just for me, but for a raft of people to, to work with. And it got to one point where I had to tell the mayor very directly. I said, "Mayor, you, you hired me to do a job and I can't do it if--" Speaker 2: Maybe you'll (unclear)-- Speaker 1: "--if I'm doing it and fighting her, too." And he says, "Well, I'll, I'll take care of it." And, and, you know, my last year there--well, it, it was fine. I mean, I, and I, went, went through smooth sailing. Story_ID: 611515 Speaker 1: But the whole job [deputy chief of staff for Mayor Richard M. Daley] was great, but I knew going in, that it wasn't the kind of job that I wanted to have for life. I wanted to get in, see what I could learn, see what I could do, play with the controls a little bit, and then see where, where it took me. I didn't think it would take me back to journalism, and that's probably the part, the part that my heart knew, you know, when I was leaving that, you know, it's like, it's one of those doors that you can't, once you walk through them, you can't go back, but where it leads you, I, I don't know. Then, I thought, oh, (unclear), I'm interested, I'm interested to see where, where it goes. And, of course, in, in this case, it led me to, it led me to SOM [Skidmore, Owings and Merrill LLP, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: And also, another interesting transition from government service to working in the private sector which you had not done at all in your career. Speaker 1: I'm glad you said that because newspapers don't count as private. People say, oh, you go back to the private sector. No, no, newspapers don't count because there's no direct link between what you do in the profit that you--you know what I mean, I mean, ultimate, if you put out a good product, you know, it turns a profit. But, but my story doesn't necessarily, in of itself, bring in, bring in money. So, this is, this is really is my first. And, and SOM interested me for that very thing. I wanted to see if, if there was, not only a monetary value to what, to what I knew, but if, if what I knew could, could it--I mean, could it drive a project? Could it cause something to happen? Could it make a way clearer that, that was unclear before--those kind of things? And I needed, and I wanted, and I needed a venue to kind of figure out--and about halfway through my term at the mayor's office, I began to kind of think about this. Well, what, what would the skill--where does it go next? It can't go back to journalism. Well, where, where does it go? And I thought for a minute--well, probably to a developer, probably where, where, you know, where you end up going, work for a developer. But I thought, naw, I don't know. And then, you know, then, then the opportunity for SOM kind of popped up where we, we didn't know, we--I liked them, and they liked me. We didn't know what we were going to, what we were going to do. I'm not an architect--I can't design. But so, I kind of made up the titles that, you know. And, in, in fact, I not only kind of made up the title, I did make up the title because I thought--well, there'd be some government stuff. I figured that'll, that'll be that. And I thought, and I thought media, I thought, you know, I used, you know, you know, I used what I know for about news to, you know, kind of get them the stories. But, so we were trying to figure out a title. What do I call you because the thing never existed. So, there was one of the, you know, in the vast office of the mayors, there's--of the mayor, there is the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, which is, at this point, is under scrutiny for, for being part of this, of job, you know, trade, political job issue-- Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: --that's in the hired truck thing, but the title of it sounded pretty cool. So, I thought, okay, take the inter off--director of governmental affairs--I like that. So, and so, so, so I made it up. So, so I, I said, okay, what, what do you think of this? And SOM said fine. So, I, you know, so once I made the title up, then I kind of attached the duties to it that, that I saw fit. So, you know, I'm--it's, it's part, part lobbying in some way. But it's also guiding the partnership and the designers through, if there's, you know, if there's, if they're, like, for instance, if they're seeking work in another city, for instance, particularly, if it's large municipal work. Then, I'm the guy who reaches out to the city. And the good thing about Chicago [Illinois] is that, is that, you know, all roads still lead here. I mean, there's someone in city hall, if there's, if there's, if it's working in Albuquerque [New Mexico] that we're chasing, the chances are that somebody in city hall that knows the mayor of Albuquerque, and can hook me up in a way that I can get to him to at least put our goods before the table and, and at least get enough information, so that if request for bid is put out for it, for a thing, that, hopefully, in theory that we can attach enough of what that city wants to our proposals that our thing is, is the most favorable--our response is the most favorable. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, tell us about Skidmore, Owings and Merrill. Why would someone outside of Chicago even know--I mean the-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Well, they've done buildings all over the, just about all over the world--I mean, someone in London [England] would see the master plan for Canary, for Canary Wharf [London, England], and, and that's, that's SOM's work. If you're in New York [New York], you've seen the, the New York office's work, Lever House [New York, New York], Freedom Tower [One World Trade Center, New York, New York] if, once it's built. Soon, that'll be the world's tallest building--everyone is going to know about. It's 2,000 feet tall, plus weight well plus. And, and Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, mixed use, which means it's residential, and hotel, and, and other functions in the building that will probably be the, the talk of the world for the, for the decade to come. And, of course, here in Chicago, the Sears Tower [Willis Tower, Chicago, Illinois], John Hancock Building [John Hancock Center, Chicago, Illinois], the Inland Steel Building [Chicago, Illinois] are, are all SOM, SOM's work. Speaker 2: And is that funny because that's why I wanted you to, to describe it because it, it is, like I don't know who they are. But everyone knows those buildings, and which is an interesting kind of architectural connection that, that people share. They, they don't even-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --even know. Story_ID: 611516 Speaker 1: So, now you join them [Skidmore, Owings and Merrill LLP, Chicago, Illinois] in, in 2004. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And how do you, how do you like your, your position, your self-created position [director of governmental affairs]? Speaker 2: No, it-- Speaker 1: What's it--I'll say, what's most compelling, exciting about it for you? Speaker 2: You know it, I, I found that it, it allows me to employ the, the best of my previous worlds. I mean, there, there's a part of working for city government, particularly at that high-up, which is great, where, in which there's, you have, despite being shy, there's, you know, there's, there's a profile you, you enjoy. And, and you would sit down with important people, and, and that kind of thing. That part of, that part of is, is part and parcel to, to this job, and that part I like. Keeping my ear in, in city hall, you know, to hear what was happening there, and to be able to transact that information into an action plan is something that's, you know, you know, a plan of, of action to, you know, to get from, a project from here to there, or to get our desire to be part of the project from here to there. I mean, that, that part is interesting to me. But the most, the most interesting part about it is, is as I, you know, get older (laughter), I, you know, and, and, you know, there's the whole issue of fatherhood and husbandhood, and that kind of thing, that allows me to spend more time and come home at a decent hour. And, and it's a job that I can do while I'm there, and I can come home and, you know, and be--you'll be father, be, be husband. And all that, and also I was going to write the book that I'm writing, too. And it's just enough time in the day for, for that as well. And, and it, it was a good, it was a good transition for me. I mean, I, I didn't realize until actually thinking about this interview that, that we're having now, how much since 1981 to 1985, just how much, you know, running, and hustling, and striving, and plotting, and planning, and things that, that I, I had done, and not that I'm ready like to retire, although I wish I could. Speaker 1: Wouldn't it be nice? Speaker 2: Wouldn't it be nice, wouldn't it be nice? But it, but it, but now, it's, you know, to have a job, a decision in my life, that allows me to like--for instance, in November, I went to Amsterdam [the Netherlands], never been before. My wife [Valencia Scott Bey] sent me there for my, my birthday-- Speaker 1: Nice-- Speaker 2: --and I didn't go to the Red Light District or anything like that. But, but to be able to get on the plane, I said shhh. Speaker 1: What happens in Amsterdam stays-- Speaker 2: Stays there in Amsterdam, you're right. But to be able to, to take the time, take time like that, I couldn't, I couldn't do that before. Either, you know, I was, you know, I was too poor (laughter) to do it, or I couldn't, or the mayor's office, I couldn't cobble together that much time to be off. I was gone, gone a week. Story_ID: 611517 Speaker 1: But now to be able to do, to do that is--and take up all the hobbies that I had. I never really had hobbies but now with photography I do, and-- Speaker 2: Right, that--well, that's a perfect transition. You know, if you were a writer, that would have been-- Speaker 1: I mean, that's right. Speaker 2: I, I did want to talk about your hobbies, uh, photography. Oh, what, now what is your website if--I don't know if anybody watches in the next, say, five years (laughter), it should still be up. You know, it's not on here. But you have, you have a blog-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but you're also part of a, a black photographer's collective-- Speaker 1: Right, that, that's also online, and the pictures there appear first on Flickr, this online photo sharing service that, that's there. And, and it's just a, you know, it's, it's like, a giant bulletin board. You kind of pin your photograph up, and people, you know, see it and make, and make comments. You could see other, other things. And, and it's, it's a great outlet for me because, in a way, it's kind of like newspapering. You see something, and you capture it in some way. And then, you put it out there for people to see, and they respond in, in some way or another. And, and I find--found that it really kind of scratches the same issues that newspapers, newspapering that, you know. And it's immediate, you know. You write a story today and it appears tomorrow. And, and it's much the same way with, with that, and, and, in photography, it's interesting. I mean, I mean, I wasn't--I'd, I'd kind of got into it by accident when I was in a resale store in '97 [1997] with my wife [Valencia Scott Bey], and I saw this old camera from the '50s [1950s], and it was beautiful. It was chrome and had a leather, you know, had a chrome and leather case, and I thought, this is an object. It was, it was really cool. But then, the guy told me--well, this actually works, so I came back another day and, and got it. Speaker 2: What kind of camera is it? Speaker 1: It was, it was an Argus C4 film camera from 1957--it's beautiful. You can even smell the--I guess the guy who had it originally must have been a cigar smoker. You can, you even smell the cigar smoke in the, in, in the camera. And I put my first roll of film in it and shot it, and it all, it all came out. It was, you know, you hit the--it wasn't like an instant camera-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --even when you had kind of fiddle with it to get it to work. And I just kind of, and I, I liked it, and I took photographs off and on, you know, for the next several years. But when I got a digital camera in, in 2004, and that's when it really kind of woke up the--awakened the, the photographer within--if there's such a thing. Speaker 2: And, of course, what do you choose to have as a subject of your photos? Speaker 1: Architecture, yeah, as, as architecture is largely, essentially, is largely architecture and, and also people. I, I find people, you know, obviously, very, you know, very interesting. And I, you know, I'll be, I'll park, and walk around, and just sort of photograph people on the street, scenes of people doing their thing, waiting for the bus, mothers playing with kids, you know, that, that kind of thing. And, you know, what, what the--I don't know, it's, it's just shooting what, what interests me. And I, you know, I don't know, but, but it's, but it's, it's great to do, and kind of, you know, showing these, these images and capturing, particularly parts of the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] that, you know, that many people may not see. They may not wait long enough to see, you know because they're so terrified what's going to happen to them, but it kind of show the beauty, the beauty, and the life that are, that are there. Story_ID: 611518 Speaker 1: Well, another one--I won't say it's a hobby, but it's something else that you do on the side is that you are an adjunct professor at the University of Illinois, Chicago, at the School of Architecture [University of Illinois at Chicago College of Architecture, Design, and the Arts, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, for someone who's not a trained architect, how did you land such a cool gig? Speaker 2: It's, it's another kind of thing by, by happenstance. I ended up giving a lecture there about, maybe almost, maybe almost two years ago now, talking about that idea of the, of the fallacy of the lone genius, that architect that, you know, comes from his brow, you know, this, this design, and to tell them that no, that in reality, you know, when you graduate, you'll find out that it's really collaborative process. And there are all kinds of people who are going to have something to say about your design. And the architect who's able to understand this, and negotiate this, navigate through this will have a far more rewarding career than the guy who's going to be running his head against the wall because developers see that. Developers have been able to quantify every aspect of, of development. And if they see that this architecture firm are blockheads when it comes to being able to get their, their projects through, you know, the maze of bureaucracy, and that kind of thing, and I mean, they, they already know what that's gonna cost me. They may be talented, but they don't, but they're unlearned in that regard. That's when it costs me some money--I'm going to go with the firm that knows how to get things done in this city, whatever city that they are in. And it struck, and that lecture struck a chord. So, the director of the School of Architecture came to me and said, "Would you teach a class that kind of talks about architecture and politics, and however you do it is kind of up to you." So, that's, that's how it started. Speaker 1: Nice-- Speaker 2: So, so we picked three projects--Block 37, the vacant block, at least now, in front of Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company Building, Chicago, Illinois] downtown. We look at Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois]. We look at the failed effort to get a world's fair here in 1992. And, and we end, whatever is in the news, so whatever is, you know, the topic of the day, we discuss it. And I kind of say, well, show them the political forces that either made something happen or killed something. Story_ID: 611519 Speaker 1: Well, and, and kind of touching on political forces and intersection of race, in 1968, Whitney Young gave a speech in front of the AIA [American Institute of Architects] wanting the organization to make real efforts to increase the number of blacks in architecture. Jumping ahead thirty-five-plus years, I think that there are now 147 black women architects, or I'd say there's about 1200 black architects working as architects in the entire nation that, that represent around one percent. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, if you were to pick up Whitney Young's mantle on blacks in, in architecture, what, what are your feelings on, on that? Speaker 2: It's, it's striking that the words that he spoke then, you know, forty years ago, are, are just as, are just as true now. The reas-, I mean, I mean, the, the need to have more African Americans, a greater minority participation in architecture--I mean, I mean, the reasons behind that are, are many. I mean, the one thing is, is that the more diverse a industry is or a company is--I mean, to, to put, put it this way, you know, you know, this isn't the 1960s anymore. I mean, an American company has to compete on a global level. If SOM [Skidmore, Owings and Merrill LLP, Chicago, Illinois] wants to design a building, whether it's here, or whether it's in Shanghai [China], it's gonna, it's gonna to bring the same architects from London [England] and Asia. You know, it's going to bring, it's going to bring, you know, it's the same kind of traveling group of large, larger--'cause your firm is gonna, gonna be at the table, wanting and bidding for this, for this job. So, there is a need for, for, in this, for, for new voices, new thinking, things that can distinguish one firm from another. So, what I'm saying is that while, you know, the, the reason why--I mean the numbers are low. And the industry's response has kind of been like, we'll raise the numbers, like, it's almost like, like, it's a good thing, it's a charity thing, it's like dropping a gold coin inside the Salvation Army bucket, when, in reality, that the reason why the American industry should embrace minorities, and bring 'cause it needs to compete in this global market. It needs everyone, and it, it can't throw anyone away. It can't discount any voice. It needs talent from every, from every corner because the competition overseas that's, that's getting work and doing--I mean, you know, you know, they have, if, if not a racially diverse team, they at least have often social diverse, or culturally diverse, you know, a team. So, you know, it's, it's for the better of the industry to have as many voices designing and, and practicing, and doing the work as, as possible. Now, on the other hand, I think it's incumbent on the African Americans to be able to, to push, and create mechanisms to push individuals into this field because, and they see that Chicago [Illinois], where's all the action happening in black neighborhoods, is where the new buildings are largely. When, when you get away from downtown, urban America all over America, it's almost the same story. There's a built-up downtown, if you're lucky, and then the outlying, outlying areas, where African Americans lived, there's been, you know, thirty years, forty years of demolition. Now, those areas are gonna, are gonna come back. What those areas look like, what they should feel like, how, how they should be planned, all those things cannot happen without some voice from those areas having some say-so, either as designers, or planners, or the bureaucrat in charge, who's the planner. I mean, you know, this, this--and you gonna see this over the next twenty years. You'll see this incredible transformation of, of the inner city. And it's distressing that, in that transformation, there are very few, relatively few black voices that are, that are a part of it, shaping it, you know, making sure that all the elements are, are there. And the easiest thing to do would be to, you know, import some one-size-fits-all, kind of almost suburban model, you know, to, to this because it's convenient and, and quick. But what I want to see, I want to see more voices, and more people from, from those areas in trained positions--not just, you know, the activists, but in, you know, in the process as, as trained designers, begin to shape these things. Story_ID: 611520 Speaker 1: We were talking off camera at the beginning and about, is there such a thing as black architecture. What do you think? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think--I mean, the answer to that question is kind of yes and no. I mean, there's--I mean, there could be, and you see examples of it, like here in Chicago [Illinois] with a couple of churches here and there where they pick up African design cues, you know, shapes that are round, round house forms, that kind of thing, which clearly come from West Africa. So, they can be that, but, you know, maybe, also, the social aspect of the built thing can be shaped--what am I trying to say--that, that there's, there's the clothes that the building wear. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The building is shaped like this, it's colored like this--that's African architecture. But looking at, at our history--African American architecture--but looking at our history, it's a history of improvisation, and reuse and, and invention, and these kind of things. And I think that, that has to be funneled in there, in there, too. I mean, to take an old High-Low [High-Low Foods] grocery store, and turn it into a Baptist Church--to me, is amazing. And you see it, you see it all the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All the time. Speaker 2: --all the time. And, and, you know, it's just, you know, and take the old bank building, and make it the fellowship hall. I mean, I mean, there's, there's--there is something there, I mean there's something there, a respect for what's there. But also, you know, you know, the ability to take that, and adapt it for your, for your own use--those kinds of things. I mean, that, some of that has to be encouraged, and brought, brought into the mix. You know, having spent most of our existence here in America in the South, I want to see us, you know, where, where the agrarian life and planting, and that kind of stuff was probably in existence. You know, I'd like to see African Americans in landscape architecture--what, you know, what would a landscape look like, you know, how do you, you know? I mean, I mean, there's so much and, and, you know, I mean, there's, there's so much, there's so many things like that, where, where the voice is needed, and the opportunity is there, but there needs to be a mechanism from within the community, and from without the community, to, to guide and push us in direction. We don't have any, any schools to teach us that. I mean, there's one school in Chicago now, ACE [ACE Technical Charter High School, Chicago, Illinois], it's a school of architecture, construction, and engineering down on State Street, but this is Chicago, birthplace of modern architecture. You would think that this would be-- Speaker 1: The place-- Speaker 2: --the, the place to do it. Story_ID: 611521 Speaker 1: Great. Now, we left off in the last segment discussing what changes you feel need to be addressed in, in increasing the numbers of, of black architects. But you were also speaking of the black landscape architects and why that was important, so could you just start again with that? Speaker 2: Well, well, yeah, I mean, I mean, there's, I mean, we, we tend of think of architecture as being this, the field of the guy who draws, or creates in the computer the, the plan for, for the building. But there, there are many other fields within the field of architecture and landscape architecture is one of them. In, in Chicago [Illinois], and particularly on the South [South Side] and West Sides where, where there's a concentration of African Americans is also where some of the best landscape architecture in the world is located--the plans for Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois] and, and Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: The plans for Jackson Park and Washington Park--all of these were crafted by landscape architects, guys who can manipulate. You know, these are more than just landscapers. These are guys who, who studied drainage and, and all kinds of plant forms and what environment they'll survive in to create these, these landscapes that when they're done, they look, they look natural. Speaker 1: 'Cause in Chicago, we have Daniel Burnham's master plan, and Frederick Law Olmsted. Speaker 2: Um-hm, exactly, you know, they're very good. And so, so there's a history of great architects--Louis Sullivan, Frank Lloyd Wright. There's a history of strong urban planners like, like Daniel Burnham, and, of course, a beautiful landscape architecture. And, you know, and this is a field that, you know, former agrarian people like, like we were, and this is a field that I really want to see us do--I mean, into. You look at Millennium Park [Chicago, Illinois], for instance, the, the new park here in Chicago now. And the landscape, of course--now this is a park that didn't exist. I mean, this is, this was air rights over a railroad track that was, that was decked over to, to create this park. But, but the landscaping there is the thing that ties it all together and, and gives it the natural feel. And this is so much opportunity in that. And, of course, urban planning--I mean, to kind of be the master plan that puts these elements together, and decides how a city should be shaped, and how a, or how a, a neighborhood should look. I mean, these are, you know, extremely important things. And, you know, and, and it would be--I mean, I, I wish there were a mechanism both, again, within the African American community and outside of it, to, to put more people in-, into these, these fields because it'll be so important. The landscape architecture, especially because there's a, there's a sustainable aspect to, to landscape-, to landscaping it. By sustainable, I mean it can, ecologically, ecologically sustainable. You know, we're at war with our environment and it costs us money. I mean, your house is hot in the summertime, and you got to spend money to cool it. And then, it's cold in the wintertime, and it gets some money, extra money to heat it up. And, you know, if it rains, the water goes some place and whatever. And, and, typically, there's a cost involved in all that. But if a building is, is made more har-, harmonious with its landscape, it makes it, it makes it easier for the building to stay cool. For instance, if you put, you know, the sun, the sun beats down on your house from the south. If you plan a house, and position it so that the, there are trees on that side, or the roof on that side comes down a little more and provide shade, the house doesn't heat up so much in the summertime. And, therefore, it will cost you less to, to cool. Those things, so the idea of putting nature and architecture as one, is really what the next phase of architecture is going. And, and we, as African Americans, have to be at--we, we have to be there. I mean, we just have, we have to be there and, and create the mechanisms to, to put us there. Story_ID: 611522 Speaker 1: Now, you are, as you alluded to earlier, are working on two books actually--one that's a collection of your articles for the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], your architectural articles. And what is your second book? Speaker 2: The second one is, is crazy. It, it looks ahead. It's a, it's, at this point now, it's tentatively called 'The Paper Skyline' ['The Paper Skyline: Plans That Never Got Off the Drawing Board'], and it looks at things proposed for the city but-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: Your second book, 'The Paper Skyline'? Speaker 1: The second book is 'The Paper Skyline.' It looks at things that are proposed for the city, but never built so-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --world's tallest buildings, you know, expressways, you know, you know, thing, things like that. They are proposed, got down the line a little bit, and somehow the deal fell apart. Speaker 2: In, in doing a research for, for that 'cause that sounds sort of intriguing, what was one or two projects that you're like--I, I didn't know about this, or I can't believe they proposed that thing? Speaker 1: Well, the, the one I didn't know about--where, where to begin. There was a proposal in the 1960s to build a world's tallest building in Schaumburg [Illinois], a suburb northwest of us. And, and at some point, that, that was my first impression--what a harebrained idea. Speaker 2: Schaumburg-- Speaker 1: But then, looking at the times, I mean, people thought in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] that suburbia would overtake the city as the dominant force, you know, of, of America. So, it was more of, of an act of faith or, or some sort in what suburbia would be. But that was, but that thing was fascinating in how, you know, in how this guy come up with this, with this idea. And he'd got by in from the mayor of Schaumburg, who was a former country and western singer, who had come to Chicago [Illinois], was a really famous--I mean sometimes in the late '50s [1950s], but understood at the farms, and the country way of the northwest suburbs were gonna yield to the hand of progress. And he kind of positions himself to be mayor of Schaumburg. It's actually a pretty interesting story. Story_ID: 611523 Speaker 1: One thing that, that I'm kind of getting to now is public housing, which is interesting to me, and how, for instance, they're, they're generally dismal, places built that way. I mean, from the, you know, for a person that first moved into, but, but built that way, but how for a while there, there was a sense to make these place- make public housing very-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: --but how, how public housing, and these places are really dismal. But for a while there, in between the 1920s and late 1940s, there was a sense these places could be, you know, could, could really be special places. And I found a plan just a couple of days ago for what became the Ida B. Wells, Ida B. Wells housing project [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. And now, you know, the Ida B. Wells housing project is, you know, really bunker-like, succession-- Speaker 2: And where, can you tell us where it's located? Speaker 1: On the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] near Pershing [Road] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --east of, east of King, east of King Drive along Pershing, between Pershing to the south, and I don't know, maybe 35th Street or something to the, to the north. And, you know, it's, you know, very--it's utilitarian and very bunker-like. It's how it ended up getting built. I found the plan for it from the beginning and it was beautiful. It was large Art Deco buildings and there was a series of fountains. And it was almost laid out like, you know, parts of, of Haussmann's [Georges-Eugene Haussmann] Rome--Haussmann's Paris [France], and with fountains and kind of broad streets that ran through it. And, and the idea was to make it a place that was, that was beautiful. And then, of course, you know, they end up building, you know, the, the quickest, cheapest, you know, you know, thing that they, that they can get their hands on which, of course, if a person doesn't live in the place that makes them feel special, then, you know--that doesn't have a human touch, a human scale to it, you know, it, it causes problems later on. Speaker 2: And the, and the end result is now we're seeing the, what we call in Chicago the, the trans-, the transformation, which it--if you can, could you explain a little bit about what the transformation represents? Speaker 1: Sure. The, the Chicago Housing Authority [CHA], the authority that built, under which all the notorious public housing that we all know about--the Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois], Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois], those stark high rises where the poor were concentrated. The, the city, as well as other cities, got money from the federal government to demolish these buildings, and to plan new communities on the site of the buildings that will return some of the residents there, but also bring, you know, middle-class and working-class people into, into the fold there as well. The idea is to build a new, you know, a real neighborhood again, like it used to be when, you know, in years past when the rich, maybe the almost-rich guy lived there, and the poor guy lived there, and, you know, you know, when the people were of various stripe economically. And so, that's what's happening now. I mean, the first wave of that was maybe in the late '90s [1990s] on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] when the Henry Horner Homes--it's where Alex Kotlowitz's, 'There Are No Children Here' ['There Are No Children Here: The Story of Two Boys Growing Up in the Other America'] book, and Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] movie was, was set, and it, and it's working there. And then, of course, Cabrini, probably the most notorious of public housing. Much of that is gone now, and replaced with these lower-rise--well, low-rise, well, actually, townhomes and low-rise buildings designed to replicate a, a neighborhood, to, to bring back again the feel of a real neighborhood, with streets, and that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: Now, I, I--would you say that represents the New Urbanist ideal? Speaker 1: (Nods head). Story_ID: 611524 Speaker 1: I know that you are scheduled to speak, or you just spoke at a, a New Urbanists conference. I, I printed it out, and now I can't remember (laughter). But is, is that something that you're, you're part of--are you part of that movement? Do you like some of it what it represents? Speaker 2: Sort of--I, I kind of looked at the movement, you know, and sometimes I play, and some-, sometimes I, I don't. New Urbanism is a sense that they would--yeah, right, that it's, it's embodied in this. The, the idea of New Urbanism is that, essentially, we, we built cities and suburbs, especially all wrong, and that we have to return to the planning of these areas--the things we all know makes sense. You know, perpendicular street, low-scale housing, you know, it even goes as far as putting jobs not far from where you work, to put the emphasis, emphasis back on the pedestrian, and the, the human experience, and not so much in suburbia, getting in cars, and driving all over everywhere. And in the city, of having, having people, particularly public housing residents, live in high rise buildings. You know, it's, it's a good thing and, and you would think--well, who can argue with that? Why--who can argue with that? But, you know, it, it still bears to be seen of how some of these things play out in, in the city. I mean, will a person who, in the long term, wants to live next door to a person who lives in public housing, or vice-versa, will a person who is familiar with public housing want to be stuck on a block with a bunch of snoots? I mean, he, he may not, he may not want to. And, and if New Urbanism is more than just a cosmetic approach to solving a problem--if it is just a cosmetic approach to solving a problem--make a building look like this, make a street go this way without some kind of life into it--you run the risk now of doing what the original public housing did back in the '50s [1950s]. Believe it or not-- Speaker 1: I never thought of it that way. Speaker 2: --believe it or not, these, these tower, these, these public housing high rises that we hate, set far back off from the street, no streets surround it, so sort of marooned in the, in, in an acre, you know, acres of land, was actually part of a utopian vision for cities that the French architect planner, Le Corbusier, thought of in the '20s [1920s], the idea being that, that somehow people crammed up in cities and living in a, you know--my house is in the back of yours. And you can walk through your unit to get through mine--that idea of putting everyone, putting everyone in a tower with equal access to, to, land and that kind of thing, was, was a good thing. And this was, this was utopia. And the efficiencies of a tower and elevators, and all, and all that kind of thing would be, would be somehow good. And, of course, it works when you put rich folk in a tower, but it doesn't work when you put poor folk in a tower, and don't take care of the tower once you get them in there. So-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's a strange, crazy thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, and funny how that works though? So, so these ideas are hatched with, you know, with the noblest of intentions. But sometimes when they meet the real world, they fail, and the guy who hatches them, he just says, oh, yeah, I was wrong. And the people who live there are the ones who have to suffer through this thing. Speaker 1: I guess because we've seen the most recent flare-up is in France in the high rises, the, the public housing outside of, of Paris [France], and actually across France, the same thing-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and Le Corbusier is French. Speaker 2: He's from there. And, you know, and it's the same thing. Those, those places in Paris, those suburbs are cut off physically from jobs. I mean, they, they're isolated. They're like reservations. And, and I mean, so it's, so it's very much, very much the same, the same thing. Speaker 1: Yes. So, we have a great experiment that we see does not work. But I never thought about New Urbanism as not working, but putting it in its historic place that, yes, it has the potential. Now, I know there's like one small aspect of it I wanted to address like, in, in the suburbs, what they call those snout houses where the, the most prominent feature is the garage. Speaker 2: Is the garage, right, yeah. Speaker 1: And so, and the, the response to that are planned communities like Seaside [Florida]. And I'm forgetting another one. Speaker 2: Celebration [Florida], I think, is one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Celebration, right-- Speaker 2: --yeah, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) that incorporates those almost that you were speaking of before. Story_ID: 611525 Speaker 1: You live in Oak Park [Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Beverly [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Beverly, oh, okay. Speaker 2: --um-hm, yeah, moved from Oak Park when I got hired by the city, so, um-hm. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. Well, I don't know a whole lot about Beverly, but Oak Park is a really unique community in that it, it seeks to preserve its human skill and, and feel. I know that you were involved somewhat with, with their kind of--you existed out there and advised people. But and so, now you threw in Beverly--you, you threw my whole question off, but it's so funny (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's, it's still the same question. Beverly, Beverly, in many, many respects is like Oak Park, in terms of architecture, and approach, and preservation, and that kind of stuff so. Speaker 1: So, well, so I was going to ask, like do you see the encroachment of that type of development--the, you know, the horrible snout houses and such, and, and the disconnect between people and--I mean, you, as an, as an individual, and not a journalist, not a deputy chief, not a director of government relations, like what do you do when you see things like this happening around you? Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's bothersome. Luckily, in Beverly, like Oak Park, there, there, there really isn't much of that happening at all. I mean, it's--Beverly is all built up so, you know, and the houses that do come, when the house does come, very rarely, it's kind of, has the same kind of early 20th century scale as the ones that are, that are there. But the reason why I think it's bad for many communities, like, for instance, to the south and west of us, south and east of us, still within the city, there's, there's a lot of that. And what it, and the bad part about it is--well, the good part about is, of course, it's convenient, you know, you can, your car is, you know, you get, you get in your car from inside the house, and then you raise the garage door. Your car is already pointed out if you drove, driven it the right way, and, and you go on. But what it, but, but you compare that to how it used to be when, or how it is in some areas where the alley is in the back, and the garage is back there. And it, and there's a porch in front of the house. That becomes a dominant feature is that it encourages people, neighbors to know each other. If you're walking out to your car at the same time your neighbor is walking out to his car through his backyard to his garage, you wave. Speaker 1: It's very true. Speaker 2: You, you play catch-up over the fence. You know, if you're bringing your kids out, your kids kind of look, and they kind of look. So, so it, it's designed to create some kind of interaction, whether it's designed that way, or whether it happens that way, there's, there's human interaction. There's something cold and disconcerting about the idea of getting inside your car while you're still in your house, raising up the car door, and hitting the streets and, and going on. And, and there's no way to, to meet and, and there's no way to have that accidental joy that, you know, meeting someone, or seeing someone or, or that, and waving to the guy across the street, that kind of thing. And when that's not there, it, it kills whatever is there. I mean, we see it on the grand scale, saw in the grand scale, on, State Street in the 70- , in the late '70s [1970s] when they, they thought--well, State Street was slipping away. And they thought, well, suburban malls, suburban malls are, are where it's at. That's where people are going. We're going to make State Street like that. We're going to cut off vehicular traffic. We're gonna, you know, you know, we're going to narrow the street, and widen the sidewalks, and we're going to have this one look throughout the run of State Street. And, and we're going to do this, we're going to do that. And what it took away, in this cosmetic application to, to this problem, it, it took away the soul of what a city is about, and what a street is about, which is, you know, two guys rounding the corner at the Marshall Field [Marshall Field and Company] clock, and looking at it, you know, and talking to each other or, you know, you, you know, picking up my wife [Valencia Scott Bey] from work one night. I'm driving down State Street, and we see something in the window. We, and we, as we're driving by, we're going to come back the next day. And, I mean, all, all those things, most little bitty things that we think, in and of themselves, make no difference--end up really making all the difference in the world. And design plays a role in either making it happen, making, making it happen more, or totally killing it, so it doesn't happen at all. In Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]--now, another example--they created the Englewood Mall. They came, they came up with the same bright idea just ten years earlier that they're going to cut off vehicular traffic through Englewood, and make you take a ring road that led you all the way around the, you know, around the mall several blocks. And then you, you walk in some remote parking. This would save the business district, and it killed it. Once you got on that ring road, and you drive around the thing, you think, what the heck, I'll go to, I'll get on the expressway and go to, go to River Forest [Illinois]. And, and you know, and, and it, it ended, ended up killing it more than--and now, they end up putting it back with the, with the--they're trying to use the, the new city college [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] they're building there, to kind of put that, that, put it back, and put that dynamic sense back. But the hustle and bustle of a city is, is really important, too. Story_ID: 611526 Speaker 1: Well, you know, what--it just so happens through all my great investigative powers-- Speaker 2: Man, you are good. Good Lord, you are going to show me a picture I haven't seen in years, I'm going to scream. Speaker 1: Well, this is a sophomore book. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I mean, I just wanted to show what I was showing him, but I wanted you to take a look at yourself back then in 1981 and (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, when you see yourself, then-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --do you--what, what, yeah, what do you think, like do you, did that guy think he was going to be this guy? Speaker 1: He, he would have liked it--that's for sure (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not a bad gig. Speaker 1: Not, not a bad gig. That's, that's a good question. I mean, it'll, it'll sound funny. I mean, there, there was probably people here, people I haven't seen in years--my goodness. I mean, there's, there's a part, there's a part of me that then, deep down, figured that I was going to do something, just didn't know what it was or, or what it was. But then, there was the other part of me that was, you know, that was, you know, that was, as I mentioned earlier, was irresponsible, wasn't making investments needed to, to do something. But, that's funny, that is really funny (laughter). Yeah, he would have, he would have liked to have turned out better--this guy, but he didn't really do much to, to make himself turn out better. You, you got, you got to turn to the '80-, '82 [1982] book to see what that guy did. And that guy is the one who, who straightened this guy out (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, who, who made things happen? Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, (laughter), '82 [1982] Lee Bey [HistoryMaker Lee Bey]? Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Have to take '81 [1981] Lee Bey out for-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he's-- Speaker 2: --for a little talking to. Speaker 1: --that's right. He's, he's not ready yet. Speaker 2: Well, you know, so-- Speaker 1: And I had hair then, too, boy, look at that. That's the thing. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a big head of hair. Speaker 1: Um-hm. um-hm. Speaker 2: It looks good, it looks good, but, you know, close cut. Speaker 1: No jheri curl either-- Speaker 2: I was going to say, please be glad--you didn't have a curl. Speaker 1: No, jheri curl. Story_ID: 611527 Speaker 1: Even though you are one of our, our youngest HistoryMakers, as you can see, you've had a really interesting life. What--how--what way would you want to be remembered? How do you want people to, to think when they watch this interview, or from meeting you, or, or having heard about you--read one of your articles? How, how would you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: That, that--I hope they, I hope they wonder, I hope he was a good father because, un-, unless he's able to, to teach his own children, you know, something or, or to improve their lot in some way, or enhance--what, what is all for? And I mean that's, I mean, if, if you were asking this question a year ago, two years ago for sure, you know, I may have given you an answer about, you know, wanting to be this, and being of this, and going on this. And oh, I've got this book, and it's going to be--and if this one isn't a million seller, I want, I want the next one to be. But I've had over the past--I guess, maybe year, good friends of varying ages, some as almost as young as I am, if I could still be called young, and, and others who are older, who, you know, just died, you know, suddenly in some cases and some, some lingering illnesses. And, you know, it's that kind of thing that kind of gets you, you know, and you turn forty. And, and it kind of gets you reflective in a sense about what is it really all, all about. And, and, you know, you know, I think about 'Chinatown,' one of my favorite movies, when, when Jack Nicholson has basically had enough of, of John Huston. And he says, essentially, well, how much can you spend, you know, how many, you know, and how many beds can you sleep in--that kind of thing. Now, although I don't have the, that argument when it comes to riches, or anything like that, but, but-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --you know--well, how much can you do, and how much--I mean, it, you know, all those are important, but at the end of the day, you know, what comes after you, your kids, your family? I know it. Every guy says that, right, but it, but it (laughter)-- Speaker 1: No, not really. Speaker 2: I--no, no, but, but, it really is important. I mean, as I look at my, my oldest son now, Ernest [Ernest Scott], and I think, you know, if, if, all this stuff is beautiful, and it's fine, and it's, it's interesting to read about, and I get a kick out of reading this stuff and thinking, yeah, that's me, isn't that funny? But if, if it doesn't help him in some way or, or my daughters [Candace Bey, Cassandra Bey, and Sara Bey], you know, I would--it would be valued less, if you, if you were to ask, would ask me. Story_ID: 611528 Speaker 1: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: -(Simultaneous) I know, it's, it's a strange question 'cause it's, it's a little bit of the same, but-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --so, yes, to your family--it sounds like you want to leave the legacy of, of being a good father. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: What about the rest of us? What do we get? Speaker 1: The rest of us (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, no, but, yeah, what legacy would you, you like to, to, to leave to others? Speaker 1: Well, let's see--I mean-- Speaker 2: And you don't have to be dead to leave a legacy. Speaker 1: Oh, good, well, good 'cause don't, don't kill me off now. I still--pay day is next week. I still gotta collect a couple more--I mean, I, I mean, if, if it's possible to leave, you know, someone with the idea or, or that, that--I mean, I, I don't know if this--maybe this answers the question in some way. Now, this is a great question, and I'm struggling with because there's so much I want to say. But, you know, I drive down the street sometimes and, and I see guys hanging out on the corner, young teenage guys on the corner. And it's so easy to, to write those young brothers off and say, oh, plea-, listen to that loud music, please. And then, you know, and you see something like this. And you think that was you, you know, that, that was you. And, and what a resource, untapped, that is within our communities--I mean of, of young men and young women who are filled with as much potential, more potential than this guy in this 1981, '81 [1981] yearbook. And, and the idea, and, and the idea that, that the worth comes out of those, out of those places, and, and value comes out of those places, and, and distinct voices come out of those places, and people with the ability to change and shape the environment come out of those places. And, and I--I mean, I mean, if, it bothers me at, you know, yes, I was the first and probably only black architectural critic. But it bothers me that no one ever said, well, that guy's voice is unique, did where he, where he was born, and experiences, did that help shape the uniqueness of that voice--led it to go find more? And I, I hope that if anything comes out of that, out of whatever I do, and however, wherever I do, that it, it forces people to look in places like the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], like the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and find and uncover talent that's there because, because it is there, and not to write it off, and forget about it, and jail it but, but to go in there and, and educate it, and, and give it the resources it needs to, to be the people that, that it could, that they're, they're supposed to be. Did that make any sense? Speaker 2: It did. Speaker 1: I mean-- Speaker 2: No, no, it did. I mean, that's a great legacy. Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's what I hope would happen out of this, out of this, this, this strange, strange life I'm living, that, you know, someone else's way will be, will be easier because, you know, what they had. Their talents were recognized, and some-, someone else's way will be easy...