 Story_ID: 16834 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Tyrone Brooks, T-Y-R-O-N-E, B-R-double-O-K-S. Speaker 1: Is that your full name? Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: Senior. Tyrone Leon Brooks, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay, Leon. Speaker 2: Tyrone Leon Brooks, Sr. There is a Junior. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 10/10/45, Warrenton, Georgia. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a State Representative and President of the Georgia Association of Black Elected Officials. I'm a civil rights worker. Speaker 1: All right. What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is May 6, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're sitting in the [Georgia] state Capitol actually. This is a part of the state Capitol complex here in Georgia, in the city of Atlanta, the capital city of Georgia. We're in what we call the Legislative Office Building of the state Capitol. Story_ID: 16835 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Okay. I like turnip greens, fried chicken. I like, I like okra. I like fried green tomatoes. I like meatloaf, banana pudding, onions, you know, soul food. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is from November to New Year's. That's my favorite time of the year. From Thanksgiving, you know, all the way through the holidays up to New Year's. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Africa. I like to go--now, I like to go to southern Africa. Before southern Africa, I liked to visit Nigeria, Gambia, Zambia, Ghana, but I love to visit southern Africa now. Now, that apartheid is dead and, you know, we can go and we can do things in southern Africa that we couldn't do before and now that we have Africans in control of the government in South Africa, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to visit my mother continent. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you, sir, have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. One of my, my favorite phrases is "Unity in the black community is our salvation". Story_ID: 16836 Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: I can trace my family back, personally, to my great-grandparents who came out of Warren County and Hancock County, Georgia. My maternal side of my family, on my mother's side, comes out of Warrenton, Warren County, Georgia. My paternal side of the family comes out of Hancock County, Georgia, which is Sparta. And these two little towns are east of Atlanta [Georgia], and we call it the flatland area of the state, black belt counties. These are black belt counties. And they are still majority black counties today. But to certainly--I can go back to my great-grandparents. Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about what your great-grandparents were doing back in the 19th century, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yes. In talking to my mother [Ruby Cody Brooks], whose still lives, my mother is ninety-four years old. Her birthday is January 15th. She and Martin Luther King were born on the same day. My mother was born January 15, 1909, and we still talk a lot, obviously. My father [Mose Brooks Jr.] has passed on. He passed away at the age of seventy-seven in 1987. But on my mother's side of the family, there's great history. My grandmother, my mother's mother, was born Ada Myrick. And her mother was a woman who had great wealth stemming from her father [John Myrick] who happened to be a white plantation owner. He left her many acres of land. He left her a lot of cash money. And so my grandmother was a very prosperous black woman in this little small community where I grew up. She had all of the features of her white father, and, which gave her some unique opportunities. My mother and that side of the family have her features. My mother married a very black man, the color of my outfit. And he came out of Hancock County. And he and his father [Mose Brooks Sr.] have a lineage that's a little different--his grandfather was a slave, really, and worked on a plantation in Hancock County. And his father became an employee of this plantation as he began to matriculate into adulthood. And this particular plantation, plantation owner left my grandfather acres of land based on his loyalty and based on his hard work. And so my father really inherited some of that property from his father. When you go to Hancock County, Georgia today, you will see a county that's eighty percent black. All of the elected officials on the county level happen to be African American. The sheriff, the county commissioners, the probate judge, the clerk of superior court, all of the county officials are black. If you go to the city of Sparta, most of the officials are black, not all, but you have a black mayor and a majority black council. And when you go to the school system, you have an African American superintendent and all of, most of the officials. The county is eighty percent black. It's one of the highest percentages of black population in the black belt counties across the deep South, stretching from Virginia all the way across over Arkansas. Now, this particular county has received a great deal of media coverage over the years because of the richness of its soil, the cotton, the soybeans, the lakes and the ponds and the streams. And because over the years, there has been a great deal of interest in the civil rights organizations, particularly the NAACP [National Association for Advancement of Colored People], SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], in building on this black political power. I remember when Reverend Hosea Williams organized a team of us staff members to go in there, to do the voter registration. We did the voter registration which led to the election of all of these African Americans. Then he pulled us out and he sent in a team of business developers, entrepreneurs, who could organize from a business standpoint. The Ford Foundation, the Lilly Foundation, federal funds from [U.S. Departments of] Labor and Agriculture and many other federal agencies, were pouring into this county in the '70s [1970s] because it became a model of black entrepreneurship, black political power, black economic development. That was going on here, while at the same time, up the road in [Warren County] North Carolina, Floyd McKissick [leader of Congress of Racial Equality] was building what he called Soul City, North Carolina. But over here in Georgia, we had Hancock County. And so when you look at your history, you study your news clips or whatever, you'll find that Hancock County has been profiled and projected across the media as one of the shining lights in the black belt of America. And so my father's from there. My mother still lives in Warrenton, Warren County, which is not far from Atlanta, about a hundred miles from downtown Atlanta. Story_ID: 16837 Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that period that you can remember that were passed down through the family? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. One of the stories, certainly one that I can relate to personally, is that I often asked my mother [Ruby Cody Brooks] why my grandmother [Ada Myrick Cody] looked so different from us. I said "She, she looks, she looks like these white folks, Mama." And one day I saw this white man sitting up on my grandmama's porch talking to my grandmama. And I went to my mother and said, "Well, who is that man?" And she said, "Well, that's, that's your grandmama's daddy," [John Myrick]. And I said, "How could he be her daddy?" She said, "Well, you need to understand that, you know, oftentimes parents have children by different wives or different, different mothers who have birthed their children." And she said, "You know, this is your grandmama's daddy, and you need to come meet him." So she took me up on this porch. And this white man was sitting there in his overalls. And he had his red pick-up truck in the yard. And I walked up to him, and he shook my hand. And he told me who he was, and he reached in his overall pocket and gave me a little piece of peppermint candy. And he said he was gonna come back to see me and take me for a ride in his truck one day. So he left, and I asked my grandmama, I said, "Grandmama, you never told me about your daddy." And she said, "Well, I knew one day as you grew up, you would, you would meet him." And she didn't want to talk about him too much, but my mother explained how he became her father and how, how much he loved her and the fact that he always would care for her. He took care of her. He, he helped educate her. He gave her money. He gave her land. And, and I noticed that as I was growing up as a little boy in my hometown, my grandmother would take me places that other black children didn't go. She would take me into the courthouse, and I'd walk up to the water fountain that was reserved for whites. And I would get water cause I didn't, you know, I, I just wanted water. So I'd just go and get up on a little stool and get water. And oftentimes black folks would say, "You're not supposed to drink from that fountain." And my grandmama would say, "Well, he can drink from any fountain he wants to." I remember one day she took me into the local pharmacy, drugstore. This particular pharmacy was selling hamburgers and milkshakes. And she put me up on this stool so that I could sit at the counter. And she said, "Well, order what you want." And I said, "I want a cheeseburger and I want a chocolate milkshake." And the man behind the counter said, "Sure." He brought me the food. Well, there was a black man in the store sweeping up, a clean-up man. And he came up to me, and he said, "You can't sit up here." And my grandmama heard him say that to me. And she walked over, and she said, "This is my grandson. He could sit anywhere he wants to." And so the man behind the counter said, "That's right, Ms. Ada." And everyone knew my mother--my grandmother. They called her Ada, Ada, Ms. Ada. That was her name, Ada. And one day, as I grew older, I, I asked my grandmother, I said, "Grandmama, why do these, these black people tell me that I can't sit certain places, can't drink out of this fountain, can't do this." She said, "Well, that's the way it is. That's the custom. That's the law." She said, "But, as long as you're with me, you don't have to worry about that." So as I grew older and, you know, got into high school and began to join into the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth Divisions and began to get active, we began to address some of those same issues: segregation in public accommodations, public theater, segregation in the public schools. We had an all-black and an all-white school system. And as teenagers, we decided that we were going to desegregate these school systems. We were gonna merge them. We were gonna force them to merge. We were inspired by what we were reading in the 'Ebonys' [magazine] and the 'Jets' [magazine] and the 'Pittsburgh Couriers' and the 'Atlanta Daily Worlds' and, and all of the black media that were coming up--'Muhammad Speaks,' [newspaper of the Nation of Islam] by the way. And by the way, my, my grandmother, my grandmother knew and had an acquaintance with Elijah Poole, who later became Elijah Muhammad. He was born about thirty miles from my hometown, in a little place, Sandersville [Georgia]. And his little community is called Deepstep. It's right outside of the city of Sandersville, it's call Deepstep. And as a child, I noticed that my grandmother, Ada, would always buy a copy of 'Muhammad Speaks' every Saturday. And one day I said, "Grandmama, why do you always get this paper?" She said, "I get this paper because of this man." She pointed to the picture of Elijah Muhammad. And she said, "I know him. He comes from down near Sandersville. We knew each other a long time ago. His name was Elijah Poole." And she said, "I want you to read this paper." She said, "You don't have to believe everything you read, but just, just read it." And she would subscribe to the 'Atlanta Daily World', the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and the 'Atlanta Journal [-Constitution']. Those were the three papers that would come to our home weekly. But we were inspired to stand up as children to address the issue of segregation based on the media that was coming in from television and from radio and print. Story_ID: 16838 Speaker 1: Did you ever find out who exactly your grandfather was in terms of status in the white community? I mean why, what made him so powerful? Speaker 2: He was a big landowner. He was a man who had great wealth. He, he farmed cotton, soybeans. He grew cattle and hogs and chickens and goats and everything you can imagine. A very, very wealthy entrepreneur. He had, he had timber. He did pulp wooding. And I asked my grandmama [Ada Myrick Cody], I said, "Grandmama, what is his name?" She said "His name is John Myrick." I said "That's--your name is Myrick." She said, "That's right. I have his name." And I said, "Oh," just like that. But Grandmama told me, eventually, she said, "He is my daddy because he really took advantage of my mother." I said, "How did he take advantage of your mother, Grandmama?" She said, "He took advantage of her, just like white men have always taken advantage of black women, going back to the days of slavery." And she said, "That's why some of you are brown, mulatto-looking, and some of us are real white-looking and some of us are real black." She said, "Because, you know, from the continent of Africa, we didn't come here this way." And she said, "When you look at"--she said that big word, "miscegenation and integration, this is why we have become the various shades and the hues and the tones that we are today." And said, "You need to understand that." And so she taught me a great deal about what had happened, and she said this was the norm, and there was nothing to be ashamed of. There was nothing for me to be angry about. It just happened. And she said whether her mother wanted to or not, this man wanted to have a relationship with her and he did. And they produced a baby, even though he had a family. He had his own children by another woman. He was married. He made a baby by a black woman. Speaker 1: Now, did your great-grandmother work for their family or something? Is that how this happened or do you know? Speaker 2: She was on the plantation. She was on that plantation working and-- Speaker 1: Then that would have been in the--back in the days when-- Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. So she was working on the plantation--she was in the house. Speaker 1: This was back in slavery days. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah. And she was in the house. She was what you would call a 'house nigger', using their word, a 'house nigger'. And she was one of those women in the house. And-- Speaker 1: She couldn't say no. Speaker 2: Could not. If you said, no, you know what happened to you. She couldn't say no. If she said, whatever, she didn't have to say anything. This was common. And this is a fact of history. And so Grandmama began to explain it to me, and as I grew older, I began to understand and read about that period in our history and understand it better. And sometimes it's sad, but you have to come to grip with the fact that this is reality. This is a part of your history and you can't change that. You just simply cannot change it. Speaker 1: So many people don't know anything about, I mean, you can't--don't know the details (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. But I was fortunate-- Speaker 1: They know what happened in general, but they don't know the details. Speaker 2: I was fortunate enough to have a grandmother who was very articulate, who was able to pass on as much information to her grandchildren and children as possible. And instill in them a sense of knowledge and a desire to gain more information at every opportunity, to learn about who you are and where you come from and pass it on. And I've taught my son, Tyrone [Brooks] Jr., this history. I've talked to him extensively about it. Took, taken him back to my hometown from infancy all the way up to now. And, and told him, "This is something that you need to know and there's nothing for you to be ashamed of." We have family reunions and we do have some of those photographs here. You'll see one photograph of my mother [Ruby Cody Brooks] who was probably about a year old, being held by her mother. And then surrounding you'll see all of these faces, and you just look at the crowd. And every other face you see will, will appear to be a Caucasian person, but they're actually black people. They just have the features. But they're actually black. Story_ID: 16839 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, my, my father's name, was named Mose Brooks Sr. My father, my father's name-- Speaker 1: M-O-S-E? Speaker 2: M-O-S-E, Mose, M-O-S-E, Brooks. My father is Mose Jr. His daddy is Mose Sr. My paternal grandmother's maiden name was Josephine Swain. She married Mose Brooks, Sr. They had one son whose name is Mose Brooks, Jr. Josephine Swain was born in Mayfield, Georgia, which is actually a little, small hamlet that sits between Hancock County and Warren County. Some of it is in Warren and some of it is in Hancock. But that's where Josephine Swain comes from and she married Mose Brooks, Sr., and they had one son. And that one son married my mother [Ruby Cody Brooks]. My daddy was born July 12th, 1908 and he was a railroad man. My daddy worked on the railroad from the age of eighteen until the time he was forced to retire in his late sixties. He worked and worked and he passed the retirement age. And finally the railroad said, "Well, Mose," they said, "You got to go. We got to make room for these young folks." But he worked on the CSX Railroad which ran from Augusta [Georgia] into the Carolinas back around to Warrenton [Georgia]. And when he left Georgia, he went to Pennsylvania and worked for Penn Central [Pennsylvania Central Railroad]. And when he got to Penn Central, he was promoted to work as a Pullman porter. And he joined the A. Phillip Randolph Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters Union and began to become an advocate for the rights of black men who worked in those Pullman cars, serving people, taking care of people. So he was really a union man coming from the A. Phillip Randolph era in the railroad system. My mother, who still lives today-- Speaker 1: Let me (unclear) your father's (unclear) before (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: What was his temperament like? What was he like as a person? Speaker 2: My father was a very kind, gentle man, who--quiet, hard worker. He was serious. He loved to drink. He would drink his alcohol after work. He'd smoke his cigars, but he'd come in from the railroad, from working. And he'd take his bath. He'd have his meal. He'd smoke his cigar. And then he'd dress up real clean. And he'd put on clothes and he'd walk around, and he'd drive around every day. He'd come in and clean up. And he looked like he was going to church or something. And he'd go out, and he'd come back home. And he'd go to bed, get up early. He was, he was a man that believed in the clock. Railroad people, if you notice people who work on the railroad, they believe in that clock. So he always got up at a certain time. He always ate his breakfast at a certain time. He always ate his lunch at a certain time and his dinner. He was a clock person, you know, everything was by the clock, clock. But he was a very, very handsome black man, real dark features. And he dressed immaculately. He dressed immaculately, real sharp all the time. But a real quiet, you know, person. Not a very outgoing person, but, you know, real nice to talk to, real--he left a lot of decisions to my mother. He wasn't a person who was domineering. I never saw a chauvinistic sign from him at all. He basically--he made the money and he turned it over to her and told her to handle everything, you know, and that was the kind of person he was. He provided and he left the details up to Mama. And Mama basically ran everything. She controlled the money and resources of the family and basically took care of, took care of all the business in other words. Speaker 1: Now, tell us about her. Now, what's her full name and how do you spell her name and where and when was she born? Speaker 2: She was really Brooks because she married my father, but she was born Ruby Cody because her mother [Ada Myrick Cody] married Ronie Cody, Sr. Speaker 1: That's C-O-D-? Speaker 2: C-O-D-Y. And she was born Ruby--Ruby Cody and married Mose Brooks and had two boys, myself and my brother, [Wilbur] Jerome [Brooks]. Now, my mother still lives in Warrenton, Georgia today. She turned ninety-four on January 15th of 2003. And she's had some declining health problems over the last few years. She had foot surgery on her left foot November 5th of last year. But she's at home and she's recuperating, and she's doing fairly well for a person ninety-four years old. She has had a pretty good life though. I have photographs of my mother here where you'll see my mother modeling clothes. You'll see a very beautiful woman who, in her day she was, I call her a knockout. And I told my mama one day, I said, "Well, I can see why my daddy was interested in you." And she said, "Well, your daddy was more than interested." She said, "Your daddy chased me for, for months and months and months. He wouldn't give up. I kept saying no, and he would come from Sparta, Georgia, all twenty-two miles just to ask my mother if he could court me." And he, he did very well because I, I told him one time, I said, "Well, you know, I think when you, when you finally got my mother to say yes, to dating you, you realized you had the best thing that could come out of this county. And even though you were twenty-two miles away, you never let that distance get in the way of your, your feelings and your attractions to her." But she's been a very good mother. She raised her children and provided for us and loves her grandchildren and great-grandchildren. And, and she's, she's like the [sic] patriarch of the family now. Story_ID: 16840 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your mother [Ruby Cody Brooks] and father [Mose Brooks Jr.] met? Speaker 2: Well, the story goes like this. He was working on the railroad. And he would ride the train from Sparta [Georgia] down to Warrenton [Georgia] to get on his route. And he saw my mother walking past the little train station, coming from uptown, going into our community, 'cause in my little community, the black folks lived on one side of the railroad tracks and the white folks lived on the other side of the railroad tracks. So he saw my mother walking from uptown, coming by this station. He was waiting on his train to pull out to go over to Augusta [Georgia]. And he, he saw her, and he asked about her. And someone said, "Well, that's, that's Ruby Cody." And he wanted to get her address. He wanted to write her a letter. He finally got the address and wrote her and told her who he was and the fact that he had seen her passing by, and he would like to come back to request of her mother [Ada Myrick Cody] if he could court her. And my mother never responded. She never would write him back. And finally one day, Mama says he showed up and knocked on my grandmother's door. And my grandmama came to the door, and he told her who he was and he wanted to know if he could meet my mother. And my grandmama said, "Well, we'll think about it. Who are you?" And he said, "My name is Mose Brooks, and I live in Sparta, and I work on the railroad." And the word goes that my grandmother told him, "Well, we'll think about it. You come back in about a week, and we'll give you a answer." So he popped up again in about a week. And they invited him in, introduced himself and everybody sat around. And he told them who he was again. And he asked if he could court--that was the word used then. They didn't say 'date', court my mother. And finally my grandmother gave him permission. And they began to date. And he began to take her out, and after awhile he asked for her hand. And, and my mama said, "Well, I have to think about that," then grandmama had to make the final decision. But finally the decision was made, and they got married. Story_ID: 16841 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have one brother [Wilbur Jerome Brooks] and I have three sisters [Adelaide Burnett, Elmer Jean Brooks, and Brenda Johnson]. Now, let me explain. My brother and I are the children of Mose Brooks and Ruby Brooks. And my mother married a second time. My father was the last husband for my mother, but prior to my daddy, she had a daughter and after my daddy, she had another daughter. So my brother and I are like the two middle children in my immediate family. My daddy had a daughter outside of the family and so I count the three sisters. But actually, one of my sisters is a direct sister from my father, and my brother and I have the same father. And even though she's outside of the family, I still call her my sister because she and I have the same father. We don't have the same mother. So actually, there're five of us. Yeah, five of us. Story_ID: 16842 Speaker 1: I want you to reflect back and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Oh, man, I'll tell you. I had a great upbringing. I wish I could relive it. I wish my son [Tyrone Brooks Jr.] could just go back in time and have a chance to grow up in this little small town [Warrenton, Georgia], excluding the segregation part though, because my--I had an uncle, my mother's [Ruby Cody Brooks] brother, whose name was Ronie Cody, Jr. R-O-N-I-E, Cody, Jr. He owned a farm. He owned his own land. He owned his own land because his mother [Ada Myrick Cody] was able to give him land. His mother was able to give him land because her father [John Myrick] had given her a bunch of land. So he had--he owned land. He farmed on this land, and he grew, he [sic] grew horses and cows and goats and chickens and everything you can imagine, cotton, soybeans, all kinds of vegetables. But he also had a, a liquor still, where you make liquor, white lightening liquor, that looks like water. Speaker 1: The illegal kind (chuckle). Speaker 2: Illegal, but it's a white lightening liquor. He made it on his farm. He had this liquor still on his farm. But he, he had a unofficial partnership with the sheriff of the county. So he and the sheriff were really--unofficially, they were in business together. And I learned all this as I got into my early twenties. But he had this wonderful farm where we could go to his farm, and we could take advantage of the horses. He had the plums and the pear trees and the apple trees and the ponds to go fishing. We could, we could drive his tractors and trucks on the farm. We couldn't drive them on the road, but we could drive them. As long as we were on his private land, we could drive--that's how I learned how to drive. I never went to driving school. But it was a very, very good upbringing. We had fun. We had the baseball teams, the football, and we did all of the fun things. My grandmama would bring us to Atlanta [Georgia] during the summer, take us to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, New York, Washington, D.C. We would come to Atlanta, and she would take us down Auburn Avenue and educate us as to the richness of Auburn Avenue, all of those beautiful businesses that were on the street, just gorgeous businesses. And-- Speaker 1: Now, Auburn Avenue is the business district in, in the-- Speaker 2: In Atlanta. Speaker 1: --in the black community? Speaker 2: Yeah, Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia. It's like the black Wall Street. And as a child growing up, being brought to see this, coming out of a little small country town, and then being able to go to New York and go to Harlem, to go to Washington, D.C. to visit the sights and every now and then get into Chicago [Illinois] or Miami [Florida], it was just wonderful, a wonderful opportunity. I can't complain at all about my upbringing. It was wonderful. It was beautiful. Story_ID: 16843 Speaker 1: The part that was sad, though, was that even though black folks lived on one side of the railroad tracks and white people lived on the other side, every now and then, white children and black children would get together and play. But as you get older, you find out that you're not supposed to really be together, you know, you're really not. The black children would stay over here, and the white children would stay over there. And so your friendships sometimes were interrupted because of the laws of segregation. I remember my oldest sister and a white boy used to play in my mother's [Ruby Cody Brooks] backyard almost every day after school. And as they grew older, they were told, "Well, it's time for y'all to cut that out. You can't do that anymore." Today, this white guy is the superior court judge in my hometown [Warrenton, Georgia]. And every time he comes to Atlanta, Georgia, he seeks me out. He'll come over to the [Georgia State] Capitol [Building]. Sometimes we're in session, sometimes we're not, but he'll seek me out. One day, he walked up to me and he asked me did I know him? I looked at him. I said, "Sure, I know you. I've been knowing you all my life. Your name is Parnell Davis, and you and my sister used to play together in my mama's backyard." And he said, "I just didn't think you would remember me." I said, "Sure, I remember you." You know, you know, he's older than I am. I said, "Sure I know you." But he's a superior court judge. So it was a wonderful upbringing. The sad part about it was the segregation. It was like an apartheid system, segregation would interfere with so many of the good things about the upbringing that I was having here in my hometown of Warrenton, Georgia and experiencing it across the South. Segregation, you know, you--it would get in the way of your travel. You're traveling, you're driving and all of a sudden you got to use a restroom, and you realize you can't go in that public facility there. You get hungry, if you didn't have your food--if you go to a restaurant, you got to go to the back window. You can't go in the front door. You gotta go around to the back. I saw my grandmother [Ada Myrick Cody] and my mother go through that. And it was very disturbing, very dehumanizing to watch that from your parents and your grandparents. You, you didn't like that. That was the sad part about growing up, but other than that, it was a wonderful upbringing. It was, it was fun and we really enjoyed it. Unfortunately, today my hometown is no longer the little prosperous, busy town that it was then. The population has drifted away. People have moved to Atlanta, New York, Chicago [Illinois], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], out west, you know. People have moved because they followed the jobs, but other than that, it's still a little quiet town, nice place to go to get away from the big city of Atlanta. Story_ID: 16844 Speaker 1: Other than the segregated facilities, are there any--ever any big conflict down there or any big incident of racial violence or something like that? Speaker 2: We had, we had conflict for sure. We had conflict when us teenagers--I was fifteen, and there were others around me who were sixteen and seventeen, we decided we were going to desegregate the schools, desegregate the theater and public businesses. And I remember when we started picketing the Board of Education to demand an end to a segregated school system, the Ku Klux Klan burned a cross in front of my grandmama's [Ada Myrick Cody] yard. My grandmama had a house, she had these tall hedges around the yard on the outskirts there, and a gate and a fence. Now, I remember one night we smelled something in the air and didn't know what it was. And it was a cross burning on the street, outside of her, her hedges, her beautiful tall hedges. And my uncle [Ronie Cody Jr.] and other men in the neighborhood got together and went out and put water on it. And they met that night, and they decided that the next night what they would do was they was going to camp out in my grandmama's yard. And if these people came back who burned whatever it was, it was made out--made into a cross, wood or whatever it was, they were going to be waiting for them. And the word got out I guess, that these black men were, were camping out in her yard with shotguns and rifles. And so the next night, the Klan didn't come back. But I remember them calling my mother's [Ruby Cody Brooks] house and, and leaving threats. And I remember when we invited Reverend Hosea Williams to come in and speak in my hometown [Warrenton, Georgia]. I remember when Martin Luther King, Jr. came through my hometown going into Aiken, South Carolina for whatever. I remember how the white people began to respond and the reaction from the Klan, and you know, racist hate groups. I remember when one of my uncles got into a fight with a white man at a Chevrolet dealership. My uncle worked at this Chevrolet dealership. And a white man came in and, and called him a nigger. And they got into a altercation, right there in front of the Chevrolet dealership on the main street in town. My father, my uncle won the fight. And my, my father [Mose Brooks Jr.] came in from work from the railroad, and he asked me to ride with him. And he drove to Augusta [Georgia] and put my uncle on the train to go to New York because they said, "If we don't get him out of town, he's going to be killed. They going, they going, they going pick him up, put him in jail, and then they going take him out and kill him like they been doing." And I heard these words, "like they been doing," like they, this is a common thing that they do to black folk, particularly black men. There was an incident where, at a drugstore, another drugstore, not the one that my grandmama took me to, but another drugstore, where one of the black employees and the son of the white owner got into a fight on the sidewalk one day. And the police came and the police basically charged this young black boy with everything under the sun, and didn't even charge the white guy. And that created an uproar in the black community. And black people began to march on the police department and threaten boycotts. But my, my little hometown, even though it didn't became a Selma, Alabama or it didn't become a Birmingham [Alabama], it had its share of racial incidents, no riots, but its share of racial incidents for sure. No question about that. Story_ID: 16845 Speaker 1: Tell me about school. Now, where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: Warrenton, Georgia. Right, the schools are Warrenton Elementary and High School. Speaker 1: And that was a black school? Speaker 2: All black. Speaker 1: And I assume that there was a white (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There was a white counterpart. Across town, there was the Warren County High School and on our side of town, it was called the Warren County Elementary and High. But all the white children went to school over here across town. All the black children went to school over here. The white children did not have any black teachers, but over on our side of town, there were some white teachers in our school, but there were no black teachers over there teaching white children. And, and us black children, now, we're beginning to gain knowledge of what's going on in the world. And we say, wait a minute. If Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy or Roy Wilkins and Adam Clayton Powell and all these great leaders can fight for us to break down these walls of segregation around the country, we can begin to do some things here. And, you know, we, we're watching tv We're watching CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] News, ABC [American Broadcasting Company], NBC [National Broadcasting Company], watching Chet Huntley and David Brinkley, Walter Cronkite. We grew up on this stuff. So we're watching the news. The news was coming to us every day. And we were seeing what black people were doing across this country--the sit-ins, you know, the bus rides, [civil rights activist] John Lewis and, and all those guys, riding buses, you know, desegregating the lunch counters in North Carolina and coming down in Alabama. In Anniston, Alabama, we watched on, on the news one night this bus being burned in Anniston, Alabama, the Freedom Riders Bus. Speaker 1: Didn't they try to burn it up with the Freedom Riders on the bus? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's correct. Speaker 1: But they got off. Speaker 2: They got off the bus. But, so we were inspired by what we were seeing in the media, reading it and watching it on tv. Believe me, the television coverage of the [Civil Rights] Movement was so intense, you couldn't sit still if you watched these newscasts everyday. Believe me, it had an impact on us--on this generation. And, and we were inspired, and I think that's why the Movement was so successful because the children of the Movement were getting this information from the media every day. And you couldn't help but want to stand up and fight in your local community. And that's why you saw so many children coming across the Movement, across the Southern states. And some students from the North were so inspired that they came down to work with us, particularly college students. And, you know, Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman came down from the North and they joined James Chaney over in Philadelphia, Mississippi. They went out to do voter registration, and they were killed by the [Ku Klux] Klan. And these kind of incidents just gave us inspiration to get up and do something and fight back against racism. Story_ID: 16846 Speaker 1: In Warrenton [Georgia] grade school and elementary school--how did you like school? Did you-- Speaker 2: Oh, I enjoyed it. It was fun. When I go back home and I see some of my old teachers who are still there. Most of them are retired now. We talk about things. We talk about--they talk about the things that I excelled in and, you know, how well I did in certain areas. And I always say, "Nah, I was, I was a slow student. I was a slow learner, and I had to get a lot of help." And they say, "Ah well, we remember what you were doing." They said, "You had a little business." I said, "What kind of little business?" I didn't think one of my teachers knew this. They say, "We know you used to do homework for some of your buddies." I said, "I did?" They said, "Yeah, you used to do homework. And one of your buddies told us they would pay you a quarter to do their homework." I said, "How did y'all know that?" They said, "Ah, you can't keep secrets from us." So they--there's a gentleman who is now the Chairman of the Deacon Board in my home church, the Pleasant Grove Baptist Church. He comes to my mother's [Ruby Cody Brooks] house a lot. And he saw me at my mother's house a few weeks ago. And he asked me the question, "When you going run for governor?" I said, "Me? Never. You won't see me running for governor." But they are very proud of me because, you know, they look at me and they say well, here is something positive that came out of our hometown. And, and, you know, I'm humbled by that feeling that they look at me as a role model, and they look at me as someone they--in their words, they consider me a semblance of success. When they look at the, the number of children who have matriculated from that little town, and they look at me as a man who did not end up on drugs and alcohol, did not go to jail as a criminal, didn't--did not get accused of being a wife-beater, did not get accused of running off and leaving his children, didn't become one of those statistics behind the walls of a prison or a jail. And then they look at me and say, "Well, you know, he's up there, a lawmaker, he's up there making laws for the people of Georgia. And, you know, he, he worked in the Movement with the Hosea Williams and Jesse Jacksons and the Andrew Youngs and the Ralph David Abernathys and the Dorothy Cottons and the Bernard Lees and the C.T. Vivians and the Martin Luther King, Jrs. He grew up with these guys, he was like a little kid under them. And, and there he is now." So they look at me, and they, they get sense of, of pride and, and rejoice out of it. It's a very humbling experience for me to have people look at me in this light because I consider myself just a regular, ordinary person from a little, small country town who's just been lucky, whose been blessed. And God has truly blessed me. But, you know, I-- Speaker 1: Well, were there teachers who, that--you said, there were some good teachers there. Do you want to name some of them that were mentors to you? Speaker 2: Ms. Audrey Walker. She is--I tell you, I have to tell you, this woman had such an impact on my life. I don't, I don't have the words to describe the impact. But she took care of me like I was her son. Ms. Mildred Ray, who was my first grade teacher. I considered her to be a mean lady because she would get her belt or her paddle. If you acted up, she'd get you in the classroom. But it was her form of love and discipline to keep you straight so that you wouldn't go astray and become one of those statistics on death row or some kind of criminal wanted by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or something, you know. She was, she was demonstrating her caring love for us by keeping us straight. And in those days, teachers could do that to children, and they would get the support of the parents. Story_ID: 16847 Speaker 1: My mother [Ruby Cody Brooks] would go to the school and praise the teachers for getting a belt on me. The neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Did you understand it at the time? Speaker 1: I didn't understand it at the time. I couldn't, I couldn't fathom. "Why Mama, why you're gonna let--?" Mama said this. She said, "Listen, I don't have the time to follow your every movement. So I have to have the friends and the neighbors and the teachers and the preachers and everybody else to help me raise these children cause daddy [Mose Brooks Jr.], you know, he's gone off working every day, come in late at night." Well, the thing about it, if you read Hillary [Rodham] Clinton's book about the village raising the child, she gets that book, she gets the basis and the foundation for that book from studying the African American family, studying the African American family because it was truly a village raising us up. And so when you look at the Jesse Jacksons of the world today, the Kweisi Mfumes or the John Lewises, you, you--Maxine Waters, you look at all of these famous black leaders that we have, I promise you, you go back to their old neighborhoods and you talk to the neighbors about them, they will say, "Well, you know what, we helped raise them." I wouldn't be where I am today, had not it been for the neighborhood assisting my mother and grandmother [Ada Myrick Cody] in raising us, truly raising us. I mean if I got in trouble in the community, if I did something wrong, the neighbors could chastise me, send me home. And when I got, when I got home, I got another one. No questions asked. If I acted up in school, my mother would find out about it. She would come to the school or she'd wait on me to come home. I got another whipping. And I didn't understand all that then. I thought, whoa, my God, why am I getting all--well, I was bad. My brother [Wilbur Jerome Brooks] was bad. The other boys were bad. Some of the girls were bad. But thank God, they cared enough for us, they loved us so much that they were willing to take the time to get their belts and to get their switches and to chastise us because they saved us from going astray and becoming statistics in the criminal justice system. There was no doubt about it. Corporal punishment can be used as a deterrent to, to prevent children from going astray. Now, I don't believe in abuse. I would never condone abuse. As an adult today, I would never, ever, ever sanction abuse, never condone abuse. But I do believe there's a place for corporal punishment. I do believe that using it properly in your family, in the community, you can save children. One of the reasons that we have a prison population and a juvenile justice system bursting away at the seams is because discipline has been taken away from the families. Discipline has been taken away from the schools. Discipline has been taken away from the neighborhoods today. Today, parents sometimes are afraid to discipline their children because the children are going to call 911, call the police. Here come the police, what are you doing to your child? Did you bruise your child? If you bruise your child, the state comes, takes your child away from you, DEFACS, the Department of Family and Children Services. They come take the children. Speaker 2: But do you think that it's the corporal punishment or corporal punishment in combination with something else that might be the solution? Because I, I've known a lot of parents, you know, dispense corporal punishment pretty liberally, or a smack, you know, at the bus stop-- Speaker 1: No, that's not, that's not corporal punishment. That's, that's--when you say smack-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No, no, no. Not, I would never, ever, ever-- Speaker 2: Yank or whatever. Speaker 1: No, no. Corporal punishment is a form discipline that you use very delicately inside your family. You do it in your home. You train your children. You instill this sense of discipline in your children at home. When you go out to the bus stop and you go to the ballgame and you go to church, you go to the shopping center, your children not going act up because they know the rules of the game. When you see children acting up out in the community, acting up in the street, at the bus stop, at a ballgame, at a concert, those are children who don't have discipline. They do not get discipline at home. I would never, ever condone abuse. If I see abuse on a child, I would report it. But I believe that you have got to save your children by instilling a sense of discipline in them. When they act up and it's got to start at an early age. You cannot wait until they're teenagers. You got to start in their infancy, in the cradle. You've got to begin to instill in them, "Look, these are the dos and don'ts. These are the rules of the house. I'm in charge, you know. You're my child. I'm in charge, and you're going to obey my rules." Now, you instill that early on in life, you won't have any problems. But oftentimes parents will not take the time to instill that sense of discipline in their children, will not set the rules. And then the children go out, and they play by a different set of rules. They play by neighborhood rules. They play by gang rules. They play by the rules of their peers. And that's when the children begin to go astray, get confused, end up in Juvenile Detention and from Juvenile Detention, end up in a big prison, with a life sentence sometimes or death row sometimes. Story_ID: 16848 Speaker 1: Were you involved in any high school activities? Did you get involved with sports or music? Speaker 2: Yeah, I played baseball. And was too, too short to play basketball they said. The boys who played basketball were like giants, and I wasn't tall enough to compete with them. But I could play some baseball. I'd play short stop, second base, center field. My brother [Wilbur Jerome Brooks] was a great third baseman. He had a arm that could knock you down. He could get that ball over there on the deep side of third base and fire that ball across to first base so fast. I mean he had a arm on him, and he, he could really play some third base. But I played inside, second base, short stop, sometimes in the outfield. But I was basically an infield person. They called us the Brook Brothers. They put him on third, and put me on second-- Speaker 1: The Brooks Brothers. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Brooks Brothers, yeah, we could, we could move that ball, we--double plays. Yeah, we were pretty good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But running a little track. And my brother was more of an athlete than I was. He, he really, he really was more, much more--a better athlete, all around athlete. He did it all, everything you can imagine. He was a great quarterback too. He could throw that ball, great quarterback, but basically, mine was, mine was baseball. Story_ID: 16849 Speaker 1: And then here comes the [Civil Rights] Movement, the Movement, you see the Movement touched me at the age of fifteen. And-- Speaker 2: And you were fifteen in what year? Speaker 1: 1960. Um-hum. Here comes the Movement, and, you know, all of a sudden we're dealing with integration and desegregation. And here comes the Hosea Williams of the world and-- Speaker 2: And the lunch counter movement (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the lunch counters-- Speaker 2: --1960? Speaker 1: That's right. 1960, the Freedom Rides, lunch counter, sit-ins, Woolworth's cafeteria, you know, and all that. So the Movement began to get my attention. And I'm the only one in the family that really, really grabbed it and said, this is something that I want to do even though it was dangerous. I just, I just felt a burning desire in my soul to get involved in the Movement. Speaker 2: Now, did you join a group? Speaker 1: I joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth Chapter first. And from the NAACP Youth Chapter, SCLC, Southern Christian Leadership Conference. And then into SCLC's Youth Division. And then from joining the SCLC Youth Division, beginning to travel with the SCLC staff members who would come from Atlanta [Georgia] to my hometown [Warrenton, Georgia], pick me up and take me around the country, take me all over the country, wherever SCLC was having functions, conventions or seminars or, or whatever, you know, I would go, workshops. I remember going to Frogmore, South Carolina. That's where I met Jesse Jackson. I remember going down to the Dorchester Center in Hinesville, Georgia [sic, McIntosh, Georgia], which is Liberty County, near Savannah [Georgia], to a workshop at the Dorchester Center. And that's where I met Dorothy Cotton who was the only female in Dr. [Martin Luther] King's cabinet, by the way, Dorothy Cotton. The Dorchester Center still stands in Hinesville, Georgia today. It's an old school. It's called the Dorchester Center. I remember going to Macon, Georgia to the First African Baptist Church and the Tremont Temple Baptist Church there in Macon, Georgia to SCLC seminars and workshops. And the children from the South, I mean from different states, were recruited. If SCLC staff members saw something in you and if there was an indication that you were really serious about the Movement, they would come, and they would pick you up and take you--with your parents' permission, take you to various activities. But you had to demonstrate an interest and a commitment to some extent, that this was what you wanted to do. Story_ID: 16850 Speaker 1: Sir, I wanted to ask you, how were you recruited to the [Civil Rights] Movement? What specifically happened? Speaker 2: Here's what happened. Hosea Williams came to my hometown [Warrenton, Georgia] to speak. He was a schoolteacher when he first came. He was teaching school in Conyers, Georgia. He came down at the invitation of adults, teachers and other folks, to speak. And I'm fifteen years old, and I'm sitting in this church and I listened to this man speak. And I had never heard anything like this. This, this, was a speech. This was a motivational kind of a seminar to awaken the black community and to challenge black people to stand up and exercise your rights. And you don't have to live like this. You don't have to be segregated. You don't have to go to second-class schools. You don't have to go to the back doors of restaurants. You don't have to go to the, to the balcony of the theater. You know, and this was the message. And he was talking to the adults, but he was also talking to the children. And I'm fifteen years old, and I get inspired by this. And I said, well, you know, I'm watching Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy. I'm reading about Adam Clayton Powell. My grandmama [Ada Myrick Cody] is subscribing to 'Muhammad Speaks.' I'm getting all this information from the 'Atlanta Daily World', The 'Pittsburgh Courier' and the 'Atlanta Journal [-Constitution'] and the 'Augusta Chronicle'. All of this stuff is coming into our home, and here comes this wonderful speech by this man called Hosea Williams. That was an unusual name for a black person, Hosea, H-O-S-E-A, not J-O-S-E, apostrophe e, but H-O-S-E. I said, "I never heard of anybody named Hosea." But anyway, that was his name. That speech kind of, it kind of lit a spark among the youth and some adults to challenge us to begin to stand up and do things to bring about change in our community. And so that's how us students began to move on the Board of Education to fight for desegregation of schools and integrating the theater and fighting for blacks to be employed in those businesses where we were spending our money. And once we started as children, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] sent staff members in to work with us. The activities of us children made the news, believe it or not. The 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution', 'Augusta Chronicle', and so from the media exposure, I guess Dr. Abernathy or Dr. King said, "I want some of my staff members to go down there." The first staff member that came was a gentleman by the name of Carl Farris. Now, Carl Farris was related to Mrs. Christine King Farris' husband, Isaac Farris. But Carl Farris passed away in 1979 because he, he had been beaten up in a march in Mississippi. And this brutal beating left a, left a tumor on his brain. The tumor grew over the years. It kept growing over the years and kept growing over the years, and finally, he had to have surgery. And the doctors who performed the surgery--these surgeons told him, they said, "If it comes back, that means it's malignant and there's nothing we can do." The tumor came back, and it killed him. He died at the age--a young man at the age of--he was probably forty, forty-five years old when he died. But that was '79 [1979], but he was the first staff member. The second staff member was Willie Bolden. Now, Willie Bolden is now employed by the Atlanta Board of Education, and he's a minister now. We call him Reverend Bolden now. But those were the first two. Then the third one was Dorothy Cotton who was Dr. King's only female executive staff member. And Dorothy Cotton, for some reason, wanted me on her staff. Carl Farris worked for Dorothy Cotton. Her program in SCLC was Citizenship Education. The Citizenship Education Program, CEP. She wanted me to travel with Carl and to do the work that he was doing. He was more of an educator, organizing literacy training programs and sometimes voter registration and education, but he was the guy that introduced me to Dorothy. And Dorothy wanted me on her staff, but Hosea Williams also wanted me on his staff. Speaker 1: Now, how old were you at this time? Speaker 2: Well, when I first met him, when I first met Carl was right after Hosea Williams' speech, I met Carl Farris. And after Carl Farris, Willie Bolden, so I'm like sixteen going on seventeen. And Hosea Williams remembered my hometown, and I remember, one day Willie Bolden reintroduced me to Hosea in the headquarters of SCLC on Auburn Avenue here in Atlanta [Georgia]. And Willie Bolden told him, say "Well, you spoke in his hometown of Warrenton, Georgia and he remembers you. And he was so impressed by your speech and so, so, so, and he's been volunteering in our Youth Chapter over the years so, so, so." And Hosea said, "Yeah, I remember his hometown," and he kept going, and he said, "I remember that name, Tyrone too, because his name is showing up in a lot of our reports." And he said, "Don't you want to be on my staff one day?" Now, here's the way it worked. If you were not of adulthood, SCLC had a program in the youth, where the young youth could be employed as part-time subsistence workers, not a full-time staff person, but a part-time--they called it subsistence. You would get a little stipend of money. If you were adult, and employed full time, then you would go on salary. So Hosea wanted me on his staff. And Dorothy Cotton wanted me on her staff. And I had these two executive staff members of Dr. King both tugging at me saying, Dorothy saying, "Well, you need to be on my staff," and Hosea was saying "You need to be on my staff." And I tell people all the time that was--that has been the only period in my life in which I really felt important, where I had these two SCLC staff members saying, "We both want you on our staff," the only time in my whole life that I've ever felt important. Yeah, I was only seventeen years old, and they were telling me, "Well, you've got to get ready 'cause we want to employ you now. We want you full time." Story_ID: 16851 Speaker 1: Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy were traveling through my hometown [Warrenton, Georgia]. We did not have Interstate 20 completed all the way into South Carolina, but it was under construction. So they would come down from Atlanta [Georgia], and they'd have to get off Interstate 20. At some point, they'd get on Highway 278 which runs right through my hometown. It's like, it's a U.S. Interstate highway almost. You had to come through this highway to travel into South Carolina and on up. And so anyway, on this particular day, we were told, these children, we were, you know, teenagers, we were told, "Wait over here on this little roadside park. Stand under the tree because Dr. King is gonna be coming through in this black Cadillac." So we waited on this Cadillac to come through. And we stood over there under this tree, in roadside park, and we saw this Cadillac approaching us. And it pulled over, and we had been seeing Dr. King on television. I thought Dr. King was a real tall person. But when he got out of this car, he was no more taller than us children almost. He was just a short man. He was a short person. He was not a big person, but on tv he looked large. And so he got out of the car. Dr. Abernathy got out of the car. Dr. Abernathy was a little chubbier than him. And then other ministers got out of the car, this big Cadillac. About five people got out of that car, a pretty, shiny black Cadillac. When Dr. King stepped out of the car, we looked down at his shoes, and his shoes were shining. The sun was, was reflecting off of his shiny shoes, pretty black shoes. He had on a white shirt. He had his sleeves rolled up to the elbow, and he had loosened his tie. And he, he got out of the car, and we had some lemonade waiting for him. We gave them some lemonade. And all of them got out and they drank lemonade, and they stood around. So the SCLC staff told us to just stand over on the side, and we did. We were very mannerly, very orderly. And Dr. Abernathy came over and spoke to us first, and then he introduced Dr. King. Dr. Abernathy would always introduce King. That was the, that was the way it worked. If Abernathy was there, he was the man that introduced King. Somebody else could introduce Abernathy, but Abernathy was all, was always gonna introduce King. So he introduced--he called him Martin. And he introduced Dr. King. Dr. King shook our hands and we had been seeing Dr. King on tv and in the newspapers and magazines. And Lord knows, when we shook his hand, it was like electrifying 'cause here, here was--here we are little country children, and all of a sudden here come this, this national giant of a man in our little hometown, passing through. He didn't have time to come to a church or home. He just said, "Meet us on the side of the road," and we did. Well, he spoke to us for about five, ten minutes. And he said to us that he was gonna leave some of his staff members there in my hometown to work with us to really help us become organized and to teach us the art of nonviolence, nonviolence was the word. And he said he would come back if needed, but he was rushing over to South Carolina and they had to go. They didn't have much time, and he said, "I would hope that we'll see you at our next workshop," which was going to be in Macon, Georgia the next two week, like on a Saturday morning. So Carl Farris came back in, in the next two week period. And he picked me up, and he drove me to Macon, Georgia to this workshop. And going to that workshop, I remember Hosea Williams speaking and another gentleman by the name of Randolph Blackwell. And Hosea Williams' speech was fiery and motivational and Randolph Blackwell's speech was about organization, more, more subdued, more businesslike. But that was one of the workshops. There were children from across the South sitting in this congregation, listening to these great leaders. But that's really the way it happened for me. And I'm sure, across the country, it happened to young people in, in similar fashions. Story_ID: 16852 Speaker 1: So while you were in school, you were involved-- Speaker 2: Volunteering-- Speaker 1: Locally volunteering. Speaker 2: Yeah, volunteering in the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] youth chapter. See, the way it's structured is, you'll have an SCLC Chapter, and then you'll have youth divisions. You'll have Economic Divisions. You'll have Education Division; you'll have Voter Registration, Political Education, so, so, so. And the Youth would have its own little structure. I was elected to be the president of the SCLC youth chapter. And from that, from that position, it took me across the country. SCLC staff would come and get me because my job was to come back and report to the youth of my hometown [Warrenton, Georgia] and inspire the youth to get involved and, and to conduct programs, voter registration, citizenship education, to do constructive work back in my hometown. My job was to be the leader of the youth. And then it went on, and I graduated on and moved on. And, and finally, 1967, Reverend Hosea Williams said to me, he says, "You know, we, we want you to become a full-time staffer." And I listened to Hosea talk and he said--he had all these glorious ideas and he was telling me, "Well, you know, we need you now. Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and [Dr. Ralph] Abernathy remember you and all that you've been doing for us." And so Hosea offered me this position. He said, "We have this position reserved for you." And, and he told me how much money it paid. I said, "Hosea, I got a job offer in New York. I said, "My relatives up there in New York, some of them are working with Percy Sutton, and they told me to come to New York, and they're gonna give me a job. And I'm gonna be making three or four times the amount of money up there than I"--and he said, "But it ain't about the money. The [Civil Rights] Movement is not about the money. The Movement is about freedom and justice." And he said, "This is your opportunity." He said, "If you go to New York, you're not gonna be happy." He said, "You're gonna want to come back to the Movement." He said, "You know, you're not going"--he said, "You can make all the money in the world, but what you really want to do is work in this Movement." And so he sold me on this position. I accepted the position working on his staff, as a field staffer in the department of voter registration and political education. Now, Dorothy Cotton was very upset with me because she wanted me to work in Citizenship Education, the other program that she was conducting. But I chose to go with Hosea because I liked Hosea's style. I like Hosea's activism. I liked, I liked his charisma, his, his dynamite kind of attitude about taking on racism and discrimination and taking on the Ku Klux Klan and, and fighting Jim Crow. And Hosea was out there in the trenches, in the streets, marching and picketing, going to jail and, and I kind of liked that part of, of the Movement. And I said, "Well, you know, this is what I want to do" and, and I did it. And, you know, for twenty years, I gave SCLC twenty years of my life, and I'm very proud of it because I tell young people wherever I go today, no matter what I am today, whatever I am today, you can attribute it to my upbringing, my parents, my grandparents and SCLC. I mean I got the foundation from my home, but SCLC gave me the training. SCLC gave me the opportunities, and here I am a twenty-three year veteran of the House of Representatives. That never would have happened had not it been for SCLC. And had not it been for the inspiration and the, the value system coming out of my family, it never would have happened. But I, I give credit to SCLC as an organization because, you know, it is my organization. It is the organization that made it possible for me and for over 10,000 black people in this country to hold public office. Story_ID: 16853 Speaker 1: Did you finish high school? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You graduated in-- Speaker 2: '63 [1963], yeah. And then following Warrenton, I went to a place called Boggs Academy which is right down below my hometown in Keysville [Georgia], private preparatory school-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: --founded in 1905 by the Presbyterian Church. And it was for black children. Obviously, segregation in the South prevented us from having the opportunities to mingle with white children in their enclave. So we had to have these black prep schools. And the Presbyterian church gave us an opportunity to do that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to that, that prep school-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Boggs Academy. Speaker 1: Bogg Academy for-- Speaker 2: Two years actually, two summers. Now, let me tell you, Boggs Academy is no longer the educational center that it was. Unfortunately, the Presbyterian Church withdrew its funding in the mid-'80s [1980s] and Boggs is no longer a preparatory school. The building structures are there. The campus is there, but in terms of it being a preparatory school, that's gone. After the, the Presbyterian Church USA withdrew its funds, and it has been used, the campus has been used as a multi-purpose center for that region of the state, serving farmers, conducting programs on literacy training, programs of teenage--prevention of teenage pregnancy, a meeting place for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], The Georgia Association of Black Elected Officials, National Conference of Black Mayors, Georgia Conference of Black Mayors, etc. But unfortunately, we don't have those private preparatory schools that were founded at the turn of the century to serve African American children. We don't have them anymore. Story_ID: 16854 Speaker 1: When you graduated from college, I mean from high school, what were your--what did you think you'd do, you think you have done? Were your ambitions just to get immediately involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement? Speaker 2: No, I, I had this desire to go up to Washington [D.C.] where we had relatives. And I got up to Washington and some of them had connections at Howard University, had a chance to meet Reverend Walter Fauntroy who was working for Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy. He was like the bureau chief of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] in Washington, D.C. And through my family connection and through him, I was able to get into Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. I got into Howard University. Then I met this gentleman by the name of Tony Brown, who, who became the dean of the School of Communications. And, you know, Tony Brown has moved on now and become a giant in his own way, with his own tv show and a very successful entrepreneur. On the campus, a very active campus, busy, a lot of political activity, being so close to, to the White House and the U.S. Congress and all of the surroundings. You, it's just so much activity, it was just like a beehive. SCLC's Bureau in Washington, being like the point of, of SCLC's activity became, I guess you could call it my, my office away from, from my hometown of Warrenton [Georgia] and Atlanta [Georgia] because you see, Walter Fauntroy, who was the bureau chief, he had an outreach program to Howard, Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] and all of those schools around there. He basically was recruiting students, and he said, "We're going to make SCLC's Bureau here become the outreach bureau for all of these campuses around us and--even down to Hampton [University] in [Hampton], Virginia." But I remember the office being over there on, on 14th and U Street, 14th and U [Street], which when Marion Barry became mayor, they started developing and tearing down all those old buildings. And they destroyed that office, and it broke my heart. I said, "Lord, I know, I don't know how in the world we could let this happen 'cause that should have been a landmark." I mean it should have been a building that should never be torn down. It should be on the National Register of Historic sites because, you see, this building became the building where Dr. King and Abernathy and Bayard Rustin and all of them would use--Roy Wilkins even would use to conduct the Poor People's Campaign, the marches on Washington. It was that, that building there, the 14th and Street U, U Building. That building is gone now, and it's, it's really a part of the District of Columbia government now, that, on that whole strip down in there. But Fauntroy, of course, you know, he, he goes on to the Congress. He becomes the delegate from the District of Columbia and a minister. But he was like the lightening rod that was attracting all these students from all of these campuses to get involved in the marches and the demonstrations and, and to, to be the fuel for the Movement that was always coming to Washington. We don't have the movements going to Washington as often as we used to, but it seemed like to me that the Movements were so successful because we always had an office in Washington that was the catalyst in, in knowing how to reach out there and grab the young people who were interested and, and who had the energy, who wanted to participate. So there'll always be a special place in my heart for Washington. I love D.C. , I love D.C. And SCLC would send me back to represent the organization at the Congressional Black Caucus, AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations], testify before Congressional Committees, whatever needed to be done. I would have that opportunity working for the organization for twenty years. And every chance I get--when I talk to Fauntroy, I have to thank him for, for being that, that role model and that inspiration for not only me, but for so many young people who've come through. It disappoints me that he's no longer in Congress because he ran for mayor and lost, but he really should have stayed in Congress. He really should have stayed in that seat, but he took a chance and gave his seat up to run for mayor, which God knows I couldn't understand why. But he called me two weeks ago and he asked me if I could help him with, with doing some voter registration, outreach across Georgia, with he and Russell Simmons. As you know, Russell Simmons is the godfather of hip-hop. And they're doing a lot of voter registration work on the campuses and trying to organize the youth to get involved politically. And so we're gonna be playing a role in that to some extent, particularly this summer. Story_ID: 16855 Speaker 1: When you got involved with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], what was the first crisis that you had a role in trying to do or something as a staff member of SCLC? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, let me tell you. The very first one that stands out was a march in a little place called Lincolnton, Georgia, Lincolnton, like [President] Abraham Lincoln, Lincolnton, Georgia. Now, it's not--it's ironic that it's not far from my hometown [Warrenton, Georgia]. It's, it's right on the South Carolina border. It's kind of east of Atlanta [Georgia], over near the Augusta [Georgia] area. It's in that little corner on that South Carolina border. Linolnton, Georgia. Let me tell you why it's so, why it's important to articulate this one. Reverend Willie Bolden, who was one of those staff members that came to my hometown first, he was on assignment in that area. And he took me and some other young folks from Warrenton, Crawfordville, Sparta [Georgia] and other little towns, he took us on this march to Lincolnton. And, and this was, this march in Lincolnton is a march that is totally different from any march I've ever been in my life. When we get to Lincolnton, Reverend Bolden is leading this march through the town, protesting police brutality, protesting segregation. And all of a sudden here comes a mob of black folks to stop the march, black people with ax handles, tire irons and chains, and they going to block, they going stop us from marching in Lincolnton. Now, I said, "Wait a minute, come on now. This is not the Ku Klux Klan. This is not the White Citizens Council. These are black faces on these people here. What, what's going on?" Now, here I am, you know, kind of nave and Reverend Bolden said, "These black folks have been paid by the white power structure to stop us, to bust up the, to bust up this march." We didn't let that happen. We marched. And we said, "Ain't gon let nobody turn us around." We started singing, "Ain't gon let no Uncle Tom turn me round, turn me round, turn me round, ain't gonna let no Uncle Tom turn me"--we shamed them out. We kept marching. We made our point. They wanted to incite violence. And then they would say, well, we came into Lincolnton to start violence. They wanted to create a riot scene, and then they would blame us for it. We knew how to get out of that. So we did our part. We made our march and then we left. We did not, we did not react to that. We sang our freedom songs, "Ain't gon' let nobody turn us around, gonna keep on marching." And we marched in and we marched out. That was the first one. That was a major potential for confrontation that we avoided. Story_ID: 16856 Speaker 1: Crawfordsville, Georgia, Crawfordsville, which is not far from Atlanta [Georgia] either. It's between and Augusta, down I-20 East. I remember Hosea Williams coming in to Crawfordsville with a big cadre of staff members, Willie Bolden and Big Lester Hankerson and Jimmy Wells and Bobby Nelson and James Orange and going--Leon Clark, Leon Hall--Ben Clark, Leon Hall. And I remember a group of us children coming up from Warrenton [Georgia] to join this, this Movement in Crawfordsville. I remember a big family in Crawfordsville whose name was Bates, B-A-T-E-S. Frank Bates and his brothers and others, Frederick Moore from Crawfordsville. I remember Hosea Williams being the point man. I mean Hosea Williams, the fiery, Hosea Williams, the point man on the scene. But I also remember Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] coming to speak in Crawfordsville at a church out in the rural area. And we go into this church--we couldn't get into the church. It was packed, and people were sitting in the open windows, hanging out the windows and Dr. King was inside speaking. You could hear him preaching. And I remember we marched from that church out in the rural area, all the way from the church into town to the courthouse. And I remember walking along the way over in the ditches, there were state troopers, FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents and everybody out there because the [Ku Klux] Klan had threatened to come and bomb the church and to assassinate Dr. King. This was 1965. So we marched from the little church back into town, and I remember Dr. King getting up on the steps of this courthouse in Crawfordsville. And all of these floodlights from the tv, tv trucks and everything shining on Dr. King, these big bright lights shining on him, and I remember Dr. King standing up there and delivering such a great speech, motivational speech, speech against fear, a speech to challenge you to stand up and be a real person, a real man or woman; a speech to fight discrimination in Crawfordsville and Taliaferro County. And a speech to motivate everybody who came from the surrounding counties as far as away from Atlanta and other places. Now, all of the national media was there, every network was there, 'Washington Post', 'New York Times', Atlanta papers, CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System], NBC [National Broadcasting Company], ABC [American Broadcasting Company], all--every network was there, local media. But I saw Martin Luther King standing up there delivering, God knows, one of the most powerful messages. This was 1965. Story_ID: 16857 Speaker 1: --to represent the family, but his mother [ref. to murdered civil rights worker Viola Liuzzo] gave her life. She was driving--see after the march got to Montgomery [Alabama], a lot of the people had to get back to Selma [Alabama] 'cause they had marched all the way from Selma. And she was transporting people back who didn't have their own vehicles. She was just driving them back, and this car pulled up beside her and they shot in her car and killed her. Now, we had built kind of a monument to her legacy right there in White Hall. It's Lowndes County between Selma and Montgomery. You know this is where the Ku--this is where the Black Panthers was founded-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Lowndes County. Speaker 1: Lowndes County. Well, we built this--SCLC/WOMEN [Southern Christian Leadership Conference/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now, Inc.] did it, I said we, it was the SCLC/WOMEN, Mrs. Evelyn Lowery, they built monument up on the hill there. And she's gotten the Alabama Power Company to put a fence around it with some lights up. The reason she had to do that is because the Ku Klux Klan would come by, and they would shoot it up, even years after she'd been buried. They would shoot at it, the monument, shoot it. They would go up and vandalize it. So they got this fence, this, this wrought iron fence with a gate on it. Now, you just can't walk in. You can see it from the outside, but they had to put the fence around it. And they, Georgia--Alabama Power has put up these big, bright lights over it. And if you drive from Selma to Montgomery on Highway 80, say if you're in Selma going to Montgomery, it's on your right-hand side, you know, right there in, about halfway up in the White Hall, in Lowndes County. You can't miss it. It's a beautiful monument up on the hill. It's a little white church right next to it, but every first weekend in March, Mrs. Evelyn Lowery takes hundreds, primarily youth which she tries to recruit the youth from the high schools and the colleges. And she takes them on this trip. I've been on it several times. Story_ID: 16858 Speaker 1: Did they give you organizing training at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]? Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes. Oh, you have to have training. That was the purpose of the workshops and the seminars and the training programs in Macon [Georgia], Dorchester [Georgia], Frogmore [South Carolina], wherever we went, and Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Let me ask you about part of the training. There are a lot of people that organize that would love to hear this on tape from somebody that actually organized for SCLC. Now, how do you get people to come out--how would you get me, for instance, to come out and participate in a march if you were knocking on my door or something? What would you say to me? Speaker 2: Part of the training program would instill in you a sense of, of confidence to the extent that you knew how to persuade people. And you know how to touch the nerve in a person to show them what this march would do to improve their life. And not necessarily march sometimes. Getting involved in constructive activity such as voter registration, political education or literacy training or coming in the office to answer the phone or stuffing envelopes. Whatever the goal was to attract people in, you were trained to do it. But also, you were trained to be nonviolent, now, because you were in a movement that was oftentimes the victims, victimized by violence. And so you were taught and trained not to fall into that trap and not to become the hater that your enemy was. But if I came up to you, and say you were sitting in your home. You're reading the paper or watching the news and you've been working all day. We normally try to catch people after work, first of all, if you're going to a home or whatever. I ring your doorbell, and you come to the door, and I introduce myself. And I ask you if you have a few minutes. I tell you who I am. "My name is Tyrone Brooks. I work for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. And by the way, do you know who the Southern Christian Leadership Conference is, you know what that organization does? You--SCLC. That's Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy, you know." "Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah," that's what you'd probably say. And then I would say to you, "We're gonna be having a march in your hometown soon. And this march is to call on your local leadership, your political leadership, your business leadership to employ black people in these stores. We spend our money with them, but they won't hire us. They make big profits from us and they take the profits back to their neighborhoods and build up their neighborhoods, provide jobs for their people, their children, their relatives, their friends. But we can't get the job even though they are taking our money that--we spend our money with them, but we can't enjoy, you know, the fruits of our investments. We can't get dividends back by jobs." And, and I would say to you, "You have children. You have nephews and nieces and cousins and you have relatives. Don't you believe that they should be able to work--and maybe you want to work in one of these store--businesses. And the only way we can get these people's attention, to get them to do right, is we've got to have this big march." And you might say, "Well, you know, I've never been in a march. I'm afraid to march. I might get killed. They might come and burn my house down. They might bomb my church, might, whatever." I say, "Well, Dr. King always said, 'You know, we have to control fear. We can't let fear control us.' And Dr. King would say, 'If a person hasn't found something that they're willing to stand up for or even die for, really that person is already dead.' And Dr. King would say, 'If a man hadn't found something he's willing to stand up for, he really isn't a man.' And it's really not about you so much. It's about your children. It's about your grandchildren. It's about unborn generations." And we really believe if we can get more black men to come out--cause it's gonna have a lot of women. Now, there's gonna always be a lot of women. I tell the folks it's gonna be a lot of women. Speaker 1: That's probably what you would (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's gonna, always gonna be a lot of women out here. That's what I would say. Women and children are always the first ones on the front line of these marches. That's a fact. I'd say, we need some men. And we're just not getting the participation from men that we deserve. The women are out there, the children are out there, the teenagers are out there. We need more men. And when I finish with him, he would say, "All right, what time? Where you, where you gonna meet?" "Well, we're gonna meet down at Brown Chapel AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church." "What time?" "Seven o'clock. We gonna gather at 7:00. We're gonna march at 8:00." And I'll say, "Hosea Williams gonna lead it." And--"Hosea Williams?" I say, "Yeah." "Hosea gonna be here?" "Yeah, Hosea Williams gonna lead it." Hosea Williams was a great attraction, believe it or not. He was electrifying. I, I tell you, I've been in towns where SCLC staffers were assigned to organize a town. They couldn't get anything going. It was dead. They'd try every trick in the book. Nothing happens. Hosea Williams shows up. In a few hours, he's got the town on fire. He's got it on fire. Singing his freedom songs, dressed in his overalls and boots. He was a very charismatic man. He had, he had charisma and he had the ability to articulate a message that ordinary people on the street could relate to. The folks who were hanging out on the corner, those brothers who were just hanging on the corner, you know, looking, all the time doing nothing, Hosea could relate to them. I've been with Hosea when he would walk over into a group of those guys on the corner, guys playing checkers, shooting pool in the pool room, drinking their beer, wine, whatever. He'd walk right into the middle of them and say, "Let me shoot some pool with you or let me play some checkers or let me have a drink of that, whatever you're drinking." And then all of a sudden he'd say, "You know, it's time for us black men to be men." And he'd talk about how Dr. King would speak about "A man can't ride your back unless it is bent. And once you straighten your back up, nobody can ride it." And so Hosea was a very motivational person. And he could, (snapping fingers) just like that. He could get a town moving like no other staff member that I've ever seen working for Dr. King. But we were trained before we were sent out on assignments, you never went out on assignment without completing your training. You had to go through training because, you see, if you weren't trained properly, you could hurt the [Civil Rights] Movement. Story_ID: 16859 Speaker 1: You, you had to be trained to the extent that you were willing to accept a beating for the sake of the [Civil Rights] Movement, not for yourself, but, you know, you, you get hit by the cop with the billy club. You get hit by a mob of [Ku Klux] Klansmen or whatever, and you say well, I've been trained to accept this because I know if I fight back, I'm hurting the Movement. And it wasn't about you as an individual. It was about the Movement. It was a collective kind of thing. Speaker 2: So in other words, if you came to my house and recruited me as in this previous scenario, and you know, I was reluctant at first, you kind of agitated me about being a man and to grow up. Now, I'm ready to show I'm a man, and then you tell me I can't--if somebody hits me or something, I can't hit them back. Speaker 1: That's right, we would tell, yeah, we would-- Speaker 2: So you definitely have to have the training before I go (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I have to tell you, I have to tell you, first of all, what's at stake if you do march. There's a possibility we will be attacked. There's a possibility someone may shoot into the crowd. There's a possibility someone may throw rocks on us. There's a possibility someone will sic mean dogs on us. There's a possibility someone may run a vehicle into the crowd. There's a possibility of anything and everything happening. But-- Speaker 2: All of those things did happen. Speaker 1: Yeah, they did happen from--in different situations. They sure did. But we felt a sense of obligation and responsibility to say to that person we're trying to recruit, these are the things that could happen, but think about those who have already died for us to be where we are. Think about those who have suffered for us to be where we are. Are we willing to suffer for the next generation? Are we willing to put our lives on the line? Now, sometimes we march and nothing happens. Beautiful, peaceful, no incidents, no name calling, no bricks and bottles, no violence, no Klan, just a beautiful march. But usually we have police protection. Sometimes we didn't, sometimes we did, but usually we did. And, and oftentimes most of these marches are at night. And there's a lot of media. And you tell the people this is what to expect. But if you are assaulted in our march, you're not supposed to fight back because fighting back is giving your enemy exactly what they want. And Dr. King would say, this is what we tell people when we're trying to recruit them, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] would say, "Before your enemies can destroy you, they first must make you angry. If you don't let your enemy make you angry, you are in control. But the moment, the moment you succumb to anger, and you let your enemy get you angry, your enemy is then in control." So we had to, we had to teach people how to control their anger if you're spat upon, if you're kicked, if you're hit. Control your anger because if you respond likewise, you have done exactly what your enemy wants you to do. You have played right into your enemy's hands. So do not fall into that trap. But this is part of your training. And we're taught, we're taught how to protect our bodies if we are attacked, how to, how to roll up, you know, and get in that fetal position and ball yourself up and, you know, just try to cover your head. And so when the billy club comes down, it comes down on the part of your body that has a semblance of tissue and not striking your, your, your bones to break a bone or whatever and not hitting you in the head or your eyes. But in spite of all that protection, you still sometimes get injured, like that's what happened to Carl Farris on this march in Mississippi where he developed a brain tumor. And it grew and grew over the years, and it finally killed him in 1979. Story_ID: 16860 Speaker 1: What's the most, I guess the most dangerous incident that you were involved in or the most scary moment that you had in the (unclear)? Speaker 2: One of the most frightening moments for me was in 1966 in Grenada, Mississippi. I went to the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] Convention in Jackson, Mississippi with Carl Farris. He picked me up and drove me with him to the convention. We get to Jackson, Mississippi and Hosea Williams is leading a movement in Grenada, Mississippi. So some of us decided to go and join Hosea and participate in a particular march that he's having, kicking off--leading up to the opening of the convention. We get to Grenada, Mississippi and Hosea is leading this march in downtown Grenada. And we marched downtown Grenada. We're coming from the church coming into the downtown area. And there's this wall of police officers and [Ku Klux] Klansmen and racist white people with sticks and bottles and bricks and guns and everything else you can imagine. And Hosea Williams is leading it. He's up front. And he's got his bullhorn and he's talking, singing freedom songs. "Ain't gon' let nobody turn us around." And we get down to the point where this line of police officers and Klansmen are and everybody wonders, what is Hosea gonna do? Hosea's got about a thousand people in this march. And we get down to the point where they're standing in the street. And Hosea tells everybody to be calm and cool, but just keep walking. Don't stop walking, keep moving, keep moving. We're in twos, we're lined up in twos. And he says, "Keep moving, do not stop! Keep moving." So he's up front leading us. So when he gets to this line, he just walks right into the line and bursts through the line. Everybody behind him just keep moving, keep moving, keep moving. And I guess these cops were so shocked that this man had the nerve to come right through them, they just stood back. And Hosea took us up to the County Courthouse. We had a rally. He spoke, other local leaders spoke. And then we left. We thought we were gonna be shot and just slaughtered. But the nerve of Hosea Williams and his faith and his determination, I think, is what kept those officers from turning their guns on us and just shooting us down like dogs that night. So we didn't, we didn't get shot. We didn't die. The next day at the convention in Jackson, this particular march is the talk of the, the town and the convention itself, this march by Hosea Williams. He's on the front page of all the major newspapers. And he's kind of like the hero for not backing down. Story_ID: 16861 Speaker 1: One of the other times that I thought I was gonna actually die was in 1970 in Covington, Georgia, which is Newton County. Hosea [Williams] had sent me down on assignment to work this community. Students in this particular high school had decided to march and boycott because the Board of Education had decided to take the name of R. L. Cousins off the school, which is named in honor of a black person, take Cousins off and put up the name of Robert E. Lee or something. And--yeah, that's right. 1970. And these students-- Speaker 2: Was this a black school? Speaker 1: This was a predominantly black school. And these children went crazy, said "Wait a minute. You're not going to do this." So they called the headquarters of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Hosea Williams said, "Tyrone, you need to go down and take this, take this, take on this project." And I did. And I became the center of attention. I'm the SCLC staffer on the scene, going on twenty-four years old. And I'm leading the Movement, and the Movement grew and grew and grew. And it was attracting all of the media from Atlanta [Georgia], on the front page of the Constitution-Journal [sic, 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution'] every day, on tv news every evening. And it just got big and big and big. And all of a sudden, the black folks began to make demands on the county and the city, more jobs in the businesses, more services in the black community, just the basic services that white folks are getting and we're not getting. We're paying our taxes and we want the same treatment; more blacks hired on the police department and sheriff's department, more black teachers in the, in the school system. Basic things that you would expect to come when you're paying taxes, and, you know, you're helping to run your government financially. So we began to march at night and then the local leaders decided they wanted to call an economic boycott to force the leadership to respond to these demands. So the Movement just kept getting bigger and bigger and bigger. Finally, one night, after we had had our march and rally in downtown Covington, we were marching back to our meeting place, this beautiful church. And the sheriff of the county who was a mean sheriff, had a reputation such as a Jim Clark or [Birmingham, Alabama Police Commissioner Eugene] 'Bull' Connor. He pulled his car out of an alley. He blocked the march. He was alone in his car, a very hot summer night. He pulled his car out of an alley. He blocked the march, and he had his, his windows down. And I'm leading the march. I walked right up to the car. He took a, a double-barrelled shotgun, and he places it up on the window of the, of the vehicle, right on the, the window. And he's got the windows down. And he cocks both of the triggers, click, click, like that. And he's got this gun pointed right at me. And I'm standing so close to him, I could smell alcohol on his breath. I could smell alcohol on him. And his name was Junior Odom, O-D-O-M. That was his name. Sheriff Junior Odom. And he had a mean, mean disposition about himself, disposition. He was just--he was mean and he used the n-word. And so I walked up--plus, he had his reputation of killing and beating blacks over the years. I walked up to that car. I had about 500 people behind me in this march. All of them were not nonviolent. I knew that, but we'd been preaching nonviolence, but I knew some of those brothers behind me, they were not nonviolent. And I knew that if the, if the sheriff did anything to me, they were gonna do it back to him. Well, he threatened me. This sheriff said, "Nigger," he said, "I'm tired of you leading these marches. I'm tired of you wrecking my town. I'm tired of you with all these speeches. And nigger, if you don't get out of my town tonight, I'm gonna blow your so and so away. I'm gonna blow you away, so and so and so." He used a lot of profanity. And I stood there for a minute. I was real skinny. I didn't have a lot of weight on me when I was twenty-four. I had a big afro, had on a dashiki with my Tommy Smith and John Carlos [ref. to 1968 Olympians] medallion around my neck. And he, he said, "Nigger, I, I'm a blow you away if you don't get out of my damn town." And I said, "Sheriff, if you don't pull those triggers and kill me tonight, I promise you, I will be back tomorrow." He said, "You are a crazy nigger." He said, "You just a crazy nigger." He said, "You damn nigger, you just a crazy nigger." And he pulled that shotgun off the window, and he threw it back on the seat, and he pulled off in that car. He had his lights on and, you know, he pulled off in that car. He burned that rubber on those tires. He burned the rubber. And everybody behind just stood in a moment of silence. I just told them. I said, "Just wait a minute." I said, "Just hold it." And we stood in a moment of silence. And then we marched on back to our church, our regular meeting place. And we get back to the church, and we have an all-night vigil. We had an all-night vigil in the church. So we get to the church. And believe it or not, the sheriff come to the church. He comes inside the church. And you could smell alcohol on the man. He walks in the church. He has a deputy with him and this deputy stood at the back door. And he walks in the church, and he's just mumbling this and that about he's tired of this and he's tired of that. And he's not going to take this any more, and he's going call the governor and see if the governor can't stop this, this stuff and these marches, and-- Speaker 2: Was it Governor [Lester] Maddox then? Speaker 1: Maddox was actually going out of office and Jimmy Carter was getting ready to come in. But Maddox was still in the governor's office. He was, he was literally the governor, but his term was ending, and Jimmy Carter was getting ready to run. Well, we, we listened to this sheriff. He was all incoherent and full of alcohol, and then he just finally walks out. Story_ID: 16862 Speaker 1: The media was covering this, of course, and the next day the headlines around the state [Georgia], 'Sheriff Threatens Brooks.' 'Sheriff Threatens to Kill Civil Rights Worker.' And that generated so much anger in the black community and on these campuses that the next night, Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy came, Hosea Williams came, students from the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], students from Emory at Oxford [College of Emory University, Oxford, Georgia]. They have a campus down there right out of Covington in Newton County. Oxford. Students from Paine College in Augusta [Georgia], Fort Valley College [now Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley Georgia], Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta]. It just seemed like all these campuses, these students just like, "We're coming." The next night, we probably had three or four thousand people, the next night cause the media blew it up. The next day it was, it was the talk of Georgia, man. I mean it was everywhere, headlines and tv coverage. So the next night when Hosea and Dr. Abernathy showed up, we had a meeting prior to the march. And since, you know, they were my superiors, they were my bosses, I assumed that they wanted to lead it. And Dr. Abernathy said, "Well, no, no, no." He said, "You're in charge. You're on the scene. We're here to back you up." And he said, "We--you lead--you're going to lead the march tonight." And I said, "Okay." So we--they said, "We're gonna be right behind you. And we're gonna show the sheriff [Junior Odom] that if he bothers you, he's gonna have to deal with us. And if he bothers us, there's gonna be some more people behind us." And so anyway, that was the point they were trying to make. So we gathered at our church, same church. We marched uptown to the little square in downtown Covington. We had our rally in the park. I had Hosea and Dr. Abernathy to speak, and then we marched out of the park. And we went over to the jailhouse, looking for the sheriff. Couldn't find him. Then we marched to his house where he lives; couldn't find him. We marched all over town, singing, "Ain't gon' let Junior Odom turn us around, ain't gon' let Sheriff Odom turn us around". And we couldn't find him. He didn't show up that night. So we go back to the church, have a big victory rally, and the Movement continues on. So about a week later, I'm leading this march and the sheriff pulls up in his car beside me and he got his, couple of deputies with him. He jumps out, and he says, "Well, you're under arrest." It was not uncommon to go to jail all the time in the Movement. "You're under arrest." "For what?" "Inciting a riot, marching without a permit." I said, "Well, the United States Constitution is our permit, and where did you get the, the accusation that I'm inciting a riot?" "Well, we've heard a lot of speeches and maybe you didn't say it, but somebody, somebody said something about some violence is gonna happen if we don't do this or that." Well, he arrest me. He put me in jail. The next day Hosea sends Robert Johnson down. And Robert Johnson leads another march. He's arrested. The next day Hosea sends Lloyd Jackson down. Lloyd leads a march. He's arrested. And the next day, we have Forrest Sawyer, one of the local leaders. He leads a march. He's arrested. Then the next day Joe Lightfoot. It just kept going on. And every night, they would arrest a leader, always get one leader. That's what the sheriff would do. He thought this was going break the Movement. What it did was, it gave the Movement energy 'cause every time they would put one of us in jail, it would seem like a hundred more people would come out and it would just get bigger and bigger and big--and the crowd just grew. And so we were in the jail, awaiting trial on these little Civil Rights trumped-up charges. Now, we're in jail. We could see out of the windows. You could actually open the windows up. They had these bars on the windows, but you could open the glass part and look out. The, the marchers would come to the jail every night to protest our arrest. But the boycott of the businesses intensified. It just got bigger and stronger. Black folks were not spending their money in the county or the city. They would drive to Conyers and Monroe and Social Circle, Monticello, Atlanta, Decatur, Conyers, wherever. They would not spend money there. So the local economy was hurt. Story_ID: 16863 Speaker 1: The boycott was having its effect. It was-- Speaker 2: Junior Odom? Speaker 1: Sheriff Junior Odom. I will never forget that man. Speaker 2: Now, at this juncture, a lot of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] staff members and leadership are in jail-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: And the economic boycott is having an effect on-- Speaker 1: It's, it's really breaking the back of the local economy. Speaker 2: And Junior Odom is getting madder and madder, I guess. Speaker 1: Every day. So he had arrested me and he kept arresting the, the leadership, but the [Civil Rights] Movement kept growing. And finally after we had sat in jail awaiting trial on these charges, we sat in jail forty-five days awaiting trial, civil rights charges, they said, "Well, if y'all just confess, we'll let you go." We said, "We're not confessing to anything because we're not guilty of anything, inciting a riot, marching without a permit and that kind of thing. We, we're not going to do that. We're not going to do that." So Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy began to send lawyers in to bond us out. He sent Maynard Jackson who, who is an attorney, who was vice mayor of Atlanta [Georgia]. He sent Maynard Jackson down to represent us, to bond us out. Maynard brought the sufficient funds and the sheriff told Maynard that they had just doubled the bond that day. So Maynard comes back to Atlanta. Dr. Abernathy authorizes another check to bond us out, and the Sheriff said, "Well, we just doubled it again. We just raised it again." You know, he had that kind of power. And finally Dr. Abernathy began to use a different tact. He said, what we'll do is, we will employ lawyers to work on the, what they call a habeas corpus and civil rights appeals in Federal Court. He employed Attorney Howard Moore who had been a great, great civil rights lawyer for years. He's the brother-in-law of Julian Bond. And Howard Moore went into federal court and he signed paperwork stipulating that he was going to move this case from Newton County [Georgia] into the federal court system, give the federal courts jurisdiction. And he filed a motion before a federal judge requesting that this judge order the county to try us on these civil rights charges or release us. And so when the county was served these federal documents stipulating a speedy trial had to be held, and they had to either try us or release us, and drop these charges. The county elected to drop the charges, but we stayed in jail forty-five days awaiting trial. For forty-five days we fasted. We did not eat any food. We drank juice and water for forty-five days. And we were very young, twenty-four, twenty-three years old. And, you know, we, we were very, very strong and idealistic and very committed to the Movement and the principles of the Movement, which is you do not plead guilty to charges coming out of a Movement. Well, we, we were--we were brought to the courthouse one morning after the federal judge ordered these charges to be dropped, brought into the courthouse. And the district attorney announced to the court that the county did not seek to prosecute, that charges were being dismissed. It was after forty-five days. It was a great victory for the Movement. We walked out of jail on this particular day, and immediately drove to Perry, Georgia and joined Hosea Williams who was leading a march from Perry to Atlanta. This, this is a march that he called a March Against Repression. We had had uprisings at Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi], Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] and Augusta, Georgia had burned because of a major riot. So there was a lot of-- Speaker 2: And at Jackson State two black students were killed-- Speaker 1: Shot and killed. Speaker 2: Shot and killed. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. That's right and Kent State. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Didn't get as much attention as the students that were shot at Kent State. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. And so we, we marched from Perry to Atlanta to highlight the repression that, that African Americans and whites at Kent State were, were facing. And so this was a march against repression. And Hosea Williams was the leader. And we went straight from the jailhouse in Covington [Georgia] to join Hosea Williams in Perry. We walked from Perry to Atlanta over several days. And after we arrived in Atlanta to end this march, I went immediately back to Covington and resumed the Movement. Story_ID: 16864 Speaker 1: As fate would have it, and as the Lord continues to do his wonderful things and amazes us, I'm sitting in a courtroom in Covington [Georgia] five years later at the request of an Atlanta [Georgia] police detective whose name is John Gresham. John had asked me to come and appear as a character witness for a woman who had been falsely arrested on a shoplifting charge. This woman is from Atlanta. She was in Covington visiting relatives and she was arrested on, falsely, you know, it was--they had the wrong person on an outstanding warrant for shoplifting. So I said, "John, come on, I'll ride with you down. And I'll, I'll do this for you." So I'm sitting in the courtroom waiting to be called as a character witness for this particular woman. And I feel a tap on my shoulder. I turn around and it's Sheriff Junior Odom. And he said, "When you get a moment, I, I need to talk to you." I said, "Okay." So after we finished the business in the courtroom on behalf of this lady who was innocent, I walked out and the sheriff was waiting on the steps of the courthouse. And he said, "I just been meaning to talk to you. I wanted to call you." He said, "Every time I see you on TV or read about you," he said, "I think about what I did to y'all in 1970, five years ago." And he said, "It's been troubling me. It's been heavy on my heart." And he said, "I just saw you here today, and I just wanted to come and ask you for forgiveness." And I said, "Have you asked God for forgiveness?" He said, "Yes." He said, "I pray to God for forgiveness. I asked God to forgive me." He said, "God has been punishing me." He said, "I've had a stroke. I've had a heart attack. I got all kind of illnesses." And he said, "I just think God is punishing me." I said, "Well, God is probably punishing you for a lot of your sins that go back far beyond 1970." I said, "You really have asked God for forgiveness?" He said, "Yes." He said, "But until you forgive me, I won't be able to rest." And he started crying. Tears started flowing down his cheeks, this sheriff, with a big badge and a gun on. Tears just flowing. We're standing on the, on the top steps of the courthouse. And as people are coming in and out, they're stopping to look at this. They recognized me, most of them, and they knew, certainly knew him. And he's standing there with tears flowing, and he's asking for forgiveness. And finally, I said, "Sheriff, I do forgive you, but I'll never forget what you did." I said, "You didn't do to us what you've done to others 'cause I've heard that you have a history of brutalizing people, beating people for no reason, assaulting inmates in the jail and even killing people." And he said, "I'm guilty of all of that." And he kept crying, I mean really crying. And I told him, I said, "Well, I forgive you." And then he, he extended his hand and I shook his hand. And then all of a sudden, he just pulled me to him and gave me a bear hug. And he said, "I, I feel better now." He said, "I've been waiting to tell you." He said, "I knew you were going to come back to Covington, and I knew I would have a chance to see you." He said, "You have a lot of friends here." And I said, "Yeah, I do." At that point I was really dating a young lady in Covington, and he knew it. And he finally caught me at the courthouse and he came by to beg for forgiveness. But it reminds me of something Dr. Joseph Lowery told me a few years ago. He said [Alabama Governor] George Wallace called him and asked him could he attend a meeting in Montgomery [Alabama] during the celebration of the 20th anniversary of the Voting Rights Act [1965], this annual trek that Mrs. [Evelyn] Lowery and the SCLC/WOMEN [Southern Christian Leadership Conference/Women's Organizational Movement for Equality Now, Inc.] conduct from Atlanta [Georgia] to Marion [Georgia] to Birmingham [Alabama] to Selma [Alabama], White Hall [Alabama], Montgomery [Alabama]. And Dr. Lowery said he got this call, and at first he said, "No, I don't want to talk to George Wallace." But he said he kept thinking about that call. And then he finally said, you know, "We always talk about redemption. We talk about reconciliation and he said, if I'm not willing to talk to George Wallace, then what kind of man am I? What kind of preacher am I?" So he said he finally sent word back that he would allow Wallace to come by this particular meeting. It was at St. Jude's, this huge Catholic complex in Montgomery that has been a very, very key meeting place during our--throughout the [Civil Rights] Movement. I was not at the meeting, but Dr. Lowery said, when Wallace came into the church, he was rolled in, in his wheelchair by this big, tall black man, rolled him all the way down front. When Wallace came down front, he was handed a microphone to speak, and he said, the only thing Wallace did was he asked for forgiveness, asked the people to forgive him for all of his sins and crimes that he committed over the years against black people and white people too, and his racist, incendiary rhetoric which led to the assassination of civil rights workers and the bombing of churches, the burning of homes, the beating of innocent citizens. And Dr. Lowery said Wallace pleaded for forgiveness. He cried, he cried, he cried. And he said after Wallace's plea, he asked the church, "How do you feel about this? What is your, what is your response?" And he said the people in the church almost unanimously said, "We forgive him. We, we, we accept his apology. We accept his plea for forgiveness and repentance." He said Wallace was just crying like a baby. I was not there, but I've been told this story by Dr. Lowery and others over and over. And I believe it was a very moving moment. But it was a moving moment for me in Covington five years after this sheriff had jailed us for no reason, kept us incarcerated for forty-five days. And it reminds me of Nelson Mandela walking out of the prison on Robben Island [South Africa] and coming out with his head held high, strong backed, proud. That's the way we came out of that jail. And when I saw Nelson Mandela walking out of that prison, Robben Island, 1990, I had to reflect back to 1970, just twenty years earlier when we were incarcerated for civil rights activities. Nelson Mandela was incarcerated for almost twenty-eight years for civil rights activities in South Africa. But the Lord has a way of forcing your enemies to come back to the victim to plead and to beg for forgiveness. And that's exactly what I've seen. I've seen George Wallace--I've heard about George Wallace, didn't actually participate in that meeting in Montgomery, but Dr. Lowery has told me that story over and over. And I can imagine what it was like in that church. Dr. Lowery said it got real quiet as Wallace was speaking and begging for forgiveness, real quiet. So Covington was a major victory for us. We won the battle. The sheriff apologized. All charges were dropped. And now we have African Americans holding public offices there in that county, Covington and, and Newton County. We see black entrepreneurs building and growing businesses there. The population of African Americans is increasing. Latinos and Asians are moving in. It's a better community, but Sheriff Junior Odom has passed on. Before he died, he really accomplished one of his goals, and that was to get me to say, "Yes, I forgive you." And I hope God forgave him because I did. Speaker 2: Did his behavior as sheriff change or-- Speaker 1: Right after, right after our, our peaceful confrontation in 1975, he passed away. And his son became sheriff, succeeding his father. And I'm told by the citizens who have known the family for years, that his son is just the opposite of his daddy. I don't know if his son is the sheriff today. But his son was sheriff for several years, maybe today. I don't--I just don't know. Story_ID: 16865 Speaker 1: I guess it's the kind of thing that vindicates the strategy, I guess. Speaker 2: It does. We had a nonviolent peaceful strategy. We were trained to be nonviolent warriors. And, and I, I think the nonviolent philosophy of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], which he received from Mahatma [Mohandas] Gandhi and translated through Dr. King's preachings and teachings into us. And we become his disciples and warriors on this nonviolent mission of freedom and justice and equality changing the face of America and the world. That's kind of like, to me, the missing part of the struggle in this country, for liberation. That's like a missing ingredient that doesn't get the kind of play, it doesn't get the articulation in the writings and the media coverage of the [Civil Rights] Movement. The, the nonviolent philosophy and the impact it has had on America, the transformation of America's South from a segregated, apartheid barren land, to a very prosperous integrated competitive region, global. Just look at Atlanta [Georgia]. Look at Atlanta now, look at Birmingham [Alabama]. Look at Jackson, Mississippi, look at all of these enclaves from the slave plantation era into what they are now, Charleston, South Carolina, Savannah, Georgia. Look at Atlanta, and you see a huge monstrosity of a landscape, a skyline that's competitive with any region in the world, including Tokyo [Japan], South Africa, Peking [Beijing, China], London [England, United Kingdom], Moscow [Russia], Jakarta [Indonesia], Sydney [Australia], very competitive skyline. And then you look at the [Atlanta] Braves, the [Atlanta] Falcons, the [Atlanta] Hawks, the [Atlanta] Thrashers. You look at CNN [Cable News Network]. You look at the fact that we've had the Olympics. We've had two Super Bowls. We have more international consulates representing countries around the world than any city in the South except Houston, Texas. Speaker 1: Well, do you think those things would exist if the South had stayed segregated? Speaker 2: If the South had stayed segregated, none of this would have happened. If the South had stayed segregated, [Presidents] Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton never would have won the White House. If the South had stayed segregated, we wouldn't have the Voting Rights Act [1965], the Civil Rights Act [1964], Andrew Young would not have become Ambassador to the United Nations. You would not have the global competitives that we see today, you know. If the South had remained segregated and remained that Confederate enclave of this region, there is no doubt in my mind, Atlanta and all of these great cities down in this sunbelt, the slave-trade beltway, would still be a hundred years behind the rest of the country, no doubt about it. Story_ID: 16866 Speaker 1: I want to share with you another thing. Now, we talked about this 1970 [Civil Rights] Movement in Covington [Georgia], but just two years earlier after the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], we were, of course, on assignment following the assassination of Dr. King. And I was not in Memphis [Tennessee] that day. I was on assignment in Social Circle, Georgia on the day that Dr. King was assassinated. But just prior to the assassination--the assassination occurred on April 4th, 1968, but in March of '68 [1968] I was on assignment. Hosea Williams had sent me to Social Circle, Georgia, which is not far from Atlanta, to work on a campaign with Reverend Willie Bolden. This campaign was about dealing with issues in public education, the school system. And we had a great Movement going. We'd been arrested and jailed, but we went to this meeting in Macon, Georgia to see Dr. King and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy at a rally, middle of the week. And I remember after the rally, Hosea Williams took us in the back of the church. And he said, "We're gonna have a little meeting with Dr. King and Abernathy before they leave." And I remembe--we called him Papa Billy Randall,Sr-- convening that meeting and facilitating all of this for King and Abernathy. But in the back of this church, we gave a report on our Movement in Social Circle, in Walton County. And I remember us telling Dr. King about all the things we were doing and telling Abernathy too because Abernathy was really the man that made all the decisions about which, which projects were gonna be on, on board, which projects were gonna be funded. And Abernathy was really the power behind the throne. King was out front as the spokesman, but it was Abernathy behind the scenes making all the decisions. So we gave him a full report-- Speaker 2: So he was a pretty good strategist? Speaker 1: No doubt about it. He was, he was the man that hired everybody, fired everybody, programs. King didn't hardly breathe without Abernathy being there to kind of help him make decisions. Abernathy was very close to Dr. King. But I remember sitting in Macon when we gave our report, and I remember Dr. King saying, "Well, I will come and help you all. Let me go to Memphis. The sanitation workers in Memphis are calling me," said, "Andy Young doesn't want me to go, but I must go because if I don't go to, to Memphis to help these sanitation workers, Hosea Williams has already said I don't deserve to be president of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]." That's the way Hosea was. But he said, "I'm going to Memphis, and when I come back from Memphis, then I'll come over here. And I'll help you all with your project." But then Dr. King said, he said, "Listen," he said, "I'm familiar with this County. This is Walton County." And he said, "I have a friend over there in Walton County, in Social Circle, Monroe, whose name is Dan Young. He owns a funeral home in Monroe and one over in Covington, in Newton County." He said, "But y'all tell Dan that you over here." And he said, "You know, I go down to Dan's farm in Social Circle quite often to just relax," which is only forty or fifty miles from Atlanta. But he said, "I want you all to be careful in that county because that county has been the headquarters for the Ku Klux Klan, and don't you all remember?" He said, "Some of y'all are too young to remember." He said, "But there's some of us who do." And he said, "In 1946, four black people were captured and lynched and their bodies were shot up and hung up in trees by the Ku Klux Klan." And he said, "Be careful." I told him, I said, "Well, you know, when I first went into the county on assignment by Hosea, Dan Young took me into his basement of his funeral home. And he pulled out a folder and he opened it up and he showed me some photographs of four black dead folks. And he said he picked the bodies up from this lynching site. And he brought them to his funeral home. And he said one of the women was seven months pregnant. These four blacks had been killed because one of the black men had gotten into an altercation with a white farmer. And they were jailed and finally being released on bond. One of the neighbors of this white farmer went and got them out of jail, brought them to--what they thought they were going back to the farm, but he brought them to a bridge where the Ku Klux Klan was waiting. And this bridge was at the county line of Walton and Oconee. This bridge was called the Moore's Ford Bridge, M-O-O-R-E, apostrophe S, Ford Bridge. Moore's Ford Bridge. Now, we're meeting with Dr. King in 1968 in Macon, and he's talking about this. And I told him, I said, "Well, Dan Young has shown me the photographs and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Crisis Magazine has ran a big full spread with these pictures." And I said, "When I saw these pictures, it just upset me." I was only twenty-one years old. I'd never seen anything like that. And here we are dealing with this Movement in Walton County in '68 [1968], meeting with the great leader, King and Abernathy over in Macon. And they're promising us they're going to come and help us when they finish with Memphis. Well, Dr. King is assassinated in Memphis, and he doesn't make it back to help us in Walton County. It's ironic that today, we're still working on that unsolved mass murder case of these four African Americans, even today, right now. We got Governor Roy Barnes to reopen this case three years ago. And the state law enforcement officers, GBI, Georgia Bureau of Investigation are working this case constantly. We had a little bit of help from the federal government when [President] Bill Clinton was in the White House, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and federal agencies, U.S. Attorneys were working to help us. But now Georgia has the responsibility of cracking this case, and we've posted a $27,000 reward fund seeking information that can lead to the arrest and conviction of those who may connected in any way to this massacre. Hosea Williams used to say, "This is the last open public lynching of black people in this country." We're working the case, today, right now. I was in that county just this past Saturday. Story_ID: 16867 Speaker 1: Now, following the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King, Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy takes us to Washington, D.C. to complete this mission called The Poor People's Campaign, the great march on Washington. We built Resurrection City from the Washington Monument all the way down to the Lincoln Monument, all around that [National] Mall area. We had tents. And I remember we came--Hosea [Williams] sent me out to Marks, Mississippi to be on this mule train with Reverend Willie Bolden. Bolden was our wagon master. And from Marks, Mississippi all the way across Mississippi, we had state patrol escorting us. All the way across Alabama, we had state patrol escorting us. As soon as we come into Georgia, cross that Georgia line from Alabama, Governor Lester Maddox, the ax-handle, pick-rick racist segregationist, Lester Maddox ordered us arrested 'cause we were coming up I-20, coming into Atlanta. He ordered us arrested. Many of us was, were placed in the, the jail in Tallapoosa, some of us were placed in the jail in Douglasville. And all the media called Dr. Abernathy up. "Dr. Abernathy, your mule train has been arrested down in Georgia. What are you going to do about this?" And he said, "Well, you know, we've had different legs coming in from around the country into D.C., some from Chicago [Illinois], New York, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], on, you know, all around the country. And we had this mule train to come from Marks, Mississippi up here because we wanted to dramatize the poverty that Dr. King and I witnessed when we visited Marks, Mississippi just a year ago." And he said, "If Governor Maddox does not release my mule train within twenty-four hours, we're going to consider moving Resurrection City from Washington to Atlanta [Georgia]." Now, that got headlines, and all the media reported this. 'Abernathy Threatens to Move Resurrection City from Washington to Atlanta.' And the next day, Lester Maddox held a news conference at the capital, right here where I am now, and he said, "I'm going to order the state patrol to go out, lead that mule train down Interstate 20 into Atlanta, and they're going to have their rally in Atlanta. And when they get ready to leave, they--the troopers are going to escort them all the way over to, through Augusta [Georgia], across the South Carolina line, and this is what the state of Georgia is going to do." It took that announcement from Dr. Abernathy to force the Governor to come to his senses 'cause Dr. Abernathy, I thought, they would--they thought he was serious about moving it from Washington to Atlanta. Story_ID: 16868 Speaker 1: Lester Maddox came to his senses, even though he was a racist segregationist and still is today. In public interviews today, he says he's a segregationist. He has nothing to apologize for. But one thing he did was, he came to his senses in 1968 and realized that Atlanta [Georgia] could not afford to have Resurrection City. And so he ordered those troopers to come and get us and lead us out. They took care of us too. Now, we get, we get to Washington [D.C.]. And we bring the mule train in to Resurrection City. And it's raining, seemed like it rained almost every day during the campaign in Washington. We called it Mudville over there between the Washington and Lincoln Monuments up and down that [National] Mall area, just mud. But we had our tents out there. So we stayed in the tents. But on the second day of being in Washington, Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy, Hosea Williams, Bobby Nelson, Willie Bolden and I went over to the Capitol Building to meet one of our staff members whose name is Jimmy Wells. Jimmy Wells is now the Chief Deputy Marshall for the Fulton County [Georgia] Marshall Service here. He's in law enforcement now, but he was on the staff of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Jimmy had had a march on the U.S. Capitol Building this particular day. During the Resurrection City campaign, the Poor People's March on Washington, every day we would have major marches. Some days we'd march on the Agriculture, Health and Education and Welfare, Justice Department, on the Congress, on Interior, State Department, White House. We'd march every day, major march. So on this particular day, Jimmy had had his march on the, on the Capitol. So we went up to greet him. And as soon as we walked up to him, right at the bottom of the steps at the Capitol Building, the Capitol Hill police came around and circled us and said, "Y'all under arrest." And the march was over. But they saw an opportunity to get Dr. Abernathy, Hosea Williams and a lot of key staff members at the same time to try to stop the Movement. So they arrested us, took us to the District of Columbia jail and I remember we were placed in these cells. And the next morning, we went before an African American judge, a black man sitting up in the robe and presiding over this court. And he was very kind to Dr. Abernathy. He praised Dr. Abernathy for his legacy and his leadership and, and his, his partnership with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. And he praised Dr. Abernathy for his spirit of nonviolence and maintaining discipline. And then he said, "Well, Dr. Abernathy, you and your staff have violated the code, whatever, section, whatever, of the District of Columbia law. And, unfortunately, I have to sentence you to thirty days in jail or fine you $200. You have an option of taking either one." And Dr. Abernathy said, "Well, you know, this is the Poor People's Campaign. And we don't have the $200 to pay the District of Columbia and we'll just do the thirty days." The next day, Dr. Abernathy ordered Hosea Williams to get out on bond to go back over to Resurrection City because Jesse Jackson was pretty much in charge. And Dr. Abernathy said, "Jesse Jackson needs some help," said, "Hosea, you need to go back over and help Jesse out." And so Hosea got out. Then the next day, the rest of us said, "Dr. Abernathy, you're, you, you know, you're the president. You don't need to be in here. There's--you, you need to be at Resurrection City. You're, you're the Mayor of Resurrection City. You need to be over there. You're the leader." And so he got out, but the rest of us, we, we did twelve days in the D.C. jail. And on the 13th day, they transported us to the federal prison in Lorton, Virginia. They ran out of space in the District of Columbia jail cause civil rights workers were marching and filling up the jails from Resurrection City. So they took us to this--they had rented space in the Lorton, Virginia prison. The District of Columbia government had contracted with Lorton, Virginia prison to take the overflow. So they took those of us who had already been arrested and served some time in the District of Columbia jail, they took us over to Lorton, Virginia. And on the 13th day, we, we arrived and we all lined up there at the front, front area of the prison. And this warden walked up to me--we were all in line there. And I'm the first one in line, and I had a huge afro and my dashiki on and, you know. And he said, "Ah, son, how old are you?" I said, "I'm going on twenty-two." And he said, "Well, we have a policy here, if you would work one day, you get one day off." I said, "Sir, I work for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. I am not going work for your prison." He said, "Well, then you go to solitary confinement, the hole." I said, "That's all right with me." I said, "I'll do my thirteen days in the hole then." He came on down the line. Everybody else said the same thing, Willie Bolden, Bobbie Nelson and Jimmy Wells. "We'll do our thirteen days in the hole just like Tyrone." So they put us in these little single cells, small cells, with a little bunk, thin mattress, one little blanket, no windows. You, you had a little wash basin that you could wash your hands, your face. And you had a commode over in the corner. They would bring your food, and they would slide it under the door. So every day that they brought our food, we would push the food back and keep the liquids. We'd keep the juice, the milk, the water. We wouldn't eat their food. For 13 days, we fasted. And I was already skin and bones, but some of my colleagues weighed a little more than I did so they could use the fasting. So I asked one of my colleagues to bring me all of Dr. King's books. So I had all of these books piled up in the jail. And I read everything on Dr. King while I was incarcerated for 13 days, 'cause you didn't know if it was sun-up or sun-down. I mean, you know, you couldn't see the sun, you couldn't see the night. It was--you were just in this cell with no windows, just one little light above you. You could turn the light on and off if you wanted to, but that was it. So I read all the books. The thirteen days went by real fast, real fast. And when we were released, Reverend Walter Fauntroy came and picked us up and brought us back down to Metropolitan Baptist Church. Then he took us over to Resurrection City. He took us by the church to eat first. We got some food, some fruit, light food 'cause we had been fasting. And he said, "You all can't eat no heavy stuff." And we said, "We're not really hungry." We really wasn't hungry. And Dick Gregory was at the church, and Dick Gregory said, "Well, I know y'all have been fasting." He said, "I do it all the time," and he said, "I have some nutrition. I have some liquids for you, and I want all of you to, to take some of these with you," and we did. Dick was a part of Resurrection City. He, he had always been a supporter of the Movement going back to the early days of the Movement when he was a great comedian, when he weighed 300 pounds. Well, we go back to Resurrection City. Walter Fauntroy take us back. And we receive a hero's welcome. It's like we're these heroes; we've been off to some war. And Fauntroy said, "Well, you all have been in a war, but you, you know, you've been in detention. You've been like a political prisoner, and here you are back." So we received this big welcome from the Resurrection City. And they put us up on the stage. And Dr. Abernathy talked about our service and all. We felt kind of, little bit of importance there, a little bit of a little important. But us rookies in the Movement were very grateful that we were still living. And I'm, I think Jimmy Wells and I were probably the two youngest ones in the group that stayed in jail. And so after we come out, I'm asked to remain in Washington after Resurrection City is over. Story_ID: 16869 Speaker 1: I was asked to stay in Washington [D.C.] to work out of the Washington Bureau. And I did. Then Hosea Williams said, "We need you go come back South because we've got projects in Mississippi and Alabama and Florida, the Carolinas, Tennessee, Arkansas and everywhere. And we need you now." And he said, "You got, you got stuff to do in, in Washington and New York and Chicago [Illinois] and other places, Los Angeles [California], but we really need you to focus on the South a little bit more." I said, "Okay." So I came back and began to work directly with Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy. I became his Special Assistant, Communications Director, National Field Director, and wherever Dr. Abernathy went, I was there--carrying his bags, getting his plane tickets, checking into the hotel, helping him out with his speeches, whatever. And when he left in 1977, I stayed in SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. I remained there. But I also helped Hosea Williams organize the Atlanta chapter cause we'd never had an Atlanta chapter until Hosea decided that we just really needed to concentrate on Atlanta [Georgia]. You see, even though Atlanta was, was Dr. [Martin Luther] King's home, born and raised here, Atlanta had never really had a major [Civil Rights] Movement. Dr. King had led movements around the world, but he had never led any major movements in Atlanta. And Hosea said, "You know, this is the hometown of Dr. King. This is where the headquarters is. And we really have neglected it. We, we need to do more here." So he convinced Dr. Abernathy to allow him to set up a local chapter. And he asked Dr. Abernathy to loan me from the national office over to the, the local chapter for a period of time. And that's when Hosea began to take on all of the major giant corporations in this city that had, had not respected or appreciated the diversity of Atlanta. And we began to break down those walls at Sears Roebuck, C&S Bank, Pepsi Cola, Prestolite Batteries, Coca-Cola, Mead Packaging Company. We took them all on, and we won. And so we saw the, the employment of African Americans increasing, the promotion of African Americans increasing. We saw more contracts being signed with African American-owned, entrepreneurs from these major corporations. We took on Delta Airlines and Eastern Airlines and Prestolite Batteries, big international, giant battery company. We, we--you know, it was Hosea's leadership. But also in 1970, Hosea decided that we would start what is called the Feed the Hungry Program, that we'd feed the poor and the hungry on the streets, people off the street, bringing them in, particularly around holidays. It started at the Wheat Street Baptist Church on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia]. So we go through that period, and then Dr. Abernathy decides that I need to come back to the national. Story_ID: 16870 Speaker 1: And in 1976, it was 1976 on Thanksgiving Day, Dick Gregory makes a recommendation to Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy. He said, "Dr. Abernathy," he says, "You know, we've just had this uprising in South Africa, young students have been murdered, shot in the back, killed by South African police in Soweto." He said, "We, as a national organization, need to do something around this issue. We need to do something." So Dr. Abernathy said, "Dick, what do you have in mind?" So Dick Gregory said, "Well, I tell you what." He said, "I think we ought to march on Washington [D.C.]. We ought to march on the White House. We ought to march on the South--from the White House around to Embassy Row to the South African Consulate Offices." Dr. Abernathy said, "You know, that's a good idea." So on Thanksgiving Day, 1976, Dr. Ralph David Abernathy, Dick Gregory, myself, and many other staff members and volunteers, we went to Washington, one of the coldest days in my life, snow on the ground, wind, blizzards. We marched in front of the White House. Then we went around to the South African Embassy, locked arms in front of their embassy, and were arrested, protesting the massacre in Soweto, protesting apartheid. That was the first--the real arrest, the first real arrest in Washington leading into the whole movement to break the back of apartheid in South Africa in 1976 on Thanksgiving Day. Story_ID: 16871 Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter had been elected President and was preparing for his inauguration. But we were there in front of that White House-- Speaker 2: I just want to backtrack a little bit and talk about the emergence of Jimmy Carter-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --in Georgia-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and the changes that, that brought about, not just in Georgia, but nationally. Can you reflect on--did you know Jimmy Carter personally or do you know him? He's still around. Speaker 1: I know, I know President Carter. Sure, I know President Carter. I, I met President Carter through Hosea Williams at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. You see, Hosea Williams was the political point man from SCLC. And Hosea knew a lot of elected officials. And he would introduce me. I would travel with Hosea, and he would introduce me. He would bring me to the capital here, in this state Capital [Atlanta, Georgia] where we are now. And he would introduce me to all kinds of folks. But he introduced me to Jimmy Carter because, you see, Jimmy Carter was the one that succeeded Lester Maddox. And-- Speaker 2: And that really meant a dramatic change in leadership in Georgia? Speaker 1: It was a tremendous change, from Lester Maddox getting, getting the Governor's office in 1966 and Jimmy Carter coming in, following him. And then Jimmy Carter placing Dr. [Martin Luther] King's portrait in the Capitol. Ku Klux Klan protested. One Klansman came in the night after the portrait was hung and slashed the, the portrait with, with some sharp object, object, maybe a knife or something. Jimmy Carter had a black woman on his staff whose name was Rita--is Rita Samuels. And Rita had recommended to President Carter that the portrait of Dr. King should come into the building. And Jimmy Carter agreed, and they, they commissioned this great artist, George Bendus, to do the painting of Dr. King. It's still hanging in the Capitol today, right next to the Governor's office, right next to Governor Roy Barnes' portrait. But, yes, Jimmy Carter, coming from Plains, Georgia, a peanut farmer, who became a member of his board of education first, then elected to the [Georgia] state senate, then to the governor's office, then running for, for the White House in 19, 1976. Now, Jimmy Carter was honored by the legislature last month here at the Capitol. And in his speech to a joint session of the legislature, he said, "I never would have been elected President had not it been for the Civil Rights Movement." And he said, "There are only two people who've ever received Nobel Peace Prizes from this state of Georgia, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., a native son of Atlanta, and myself." And he gave the Movement the credit for opening up the process so that African Americans could play a role in the body politic as voters and then having leadership in the body politic as legislators and others who went out on the campaign trail and campaigned for him. Now, there were legislators who preceded me here on Capitol Hill who worked in what they called the peanut brigade. Hosea Williams and Billy McKinney and Julian Bond and Ben Brown and others, they went out across America, they were out there promoting this peanut farmer from Georgia who had been governor. He was coming out of the Governor's office, and, and they helped him in New Hampshire and other places in the early primaries, planting the seed of Jimmy Carter. And Jimmy Carter won, and he gave the Movement credit in his speech to a joint session of the legislature just last month here. The same day that we were getting ready to take up the flag issue, Jimmy Carter was speaking to us in a joint session, and he was thanking the Movement for opening up the American body politic to the extent it helped a son of the South, a peanut farmer from Georgia to go to the White House. And he also mentioned the fact that Bill Clinton never would have become President had not it been for the Civil Rights Movement giving him and this guy from Arkansas, an opportunity to receive the support to allow them to win. I mean that support primarily came from the black community, the black vote put both of them in the White House. But the Movement gave us an opportunity to get the right to vote. Had not it been for the Civil Rights Movement, the Civil Rights Act [1964] and the Voting Rights Act [1965], never would have become a reality and therefore, we wouldn't--I wouldn't be an elected official. Jimmy Carter wouldn't have gone to the White House. Bill Clinton never would have gone to the White House. And you wouldn't have all these members of Congress from the African American community today, and you know, I think today across the country, we have over 10,000 black people serving in elected offices. And that number is big, but if you look at the percentage, percentage, that's less than 2 percent of all elected officials in the country. In the state of Georgia, where we're 30 percent of the population, only 6 percent of the elect, elected officials are black, 6 percent. 6 percent of the judges, one percent of the prosecutors, but over 70 percent, 70 percent of the inmates in the jails and prisons are black. That tells you we have a lot of work to do still today. So, yes, I've seen, I've seen the transformation of Jimmy Carter. Story_ID: 16872 Speaker 1: I've seen him [Jimmy Carter] in his post-White House years, make some great contributions to our society. His Carter Project [ref. to the Carter Center] here in Atlanta [Georgia], his international project around the world, particularly, concentrating on Africa. The Guinea Worm [Eradication] Project that he started to, to focus the UN [United Nations] on resources to, to attack the Guinea worm in Africa, which gets in the water. You can't see it. You drink the water and it gets in your body. And it starts with the children primarily, when the children drink this water, and the worm festers and grows in their body. It becomes a, a living, a organ in their, in their own system. And so Jimmy Carter's doing great work. The other things he's done in his post-years from the White House is that he's worked around the, the globe internationally as an Ambassador for Peace in working to help bring about democracy in many parts of the world and making countries respect the, the mandate of conducting fair elections. I've seen that in Haiti, in Liberia, in various parts of Europe, Central South America, Jimmy Carter has been there, and-- Speaker 2: Well, what's he like as a person. I mean (unclear)-- Speaker 1: He's a very--Jimmy in his age--he's approaching eighty now. But, but President Carter is a very humble person. I've never seen arrogance. I've never seen him act as if he is using his position for himself. He's always projecting himself as someone whose concerned about ordinary people, little people, the little folks that society just kind of discards. Now, I've seen a different Jimmy Carter since he left the White House than I saw when he was in the White House because actually, when he was in the White House, I helped lead a march on him. When he came to Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] as President, Hosea Williams recommended that we march on him because as he was balancing his budget in his, in the term of his many years in the White House, Jimmy Carter was balancing his budget on the backs of the poor. And Hosea Williams, Dr. Joseph Lowery and many others, you know, Jesse Jackson, all of us, we marched on Ebenezer to protest his policies as President. And I remember I went on a bus caravan to Plains [Georgia] in 1979 with the Georgia Citizens Coalition on Hunger. Reverend Sandra Robinson, Ms. Ethel May Matthews and with Grace Davis and many others. We went down to Plains to, to launch a protest over the same issues, balancing his budget on the backs of the poor, but also to protest the firing of Andrew Young as Ambassador to United Nations. We just could not sit idly by and see Andrew Young, a product of the Movement, on Martin Luther King, Jr.'s staff and [Ralph] Abernathy's staff go into Congress, giving up his Congressional seat, working at the State Department as Ambassador to the UN, all of a sudden, because of one meeting with the PLO [Palestinian Liberation Organization] representative, all of a sudden, he's in this firestorm, and Jimmy Carter really terminates him, demands his resignation. And I'll never forget Jesse Jackson taking the lead to protest the way Andrew Young was treated. Jesse Jackson was out there more than anybody. But we took buses, caravaned to Plains to protest, not only the firing of Andrew Young, but also the fact that the Carter administration, as President had adopted the trickle-down theory, had adopted the supply-side economic theory that you can balance your budgets on the backs of the poor. You make the rich richer. And you just hope that some of that richness trickles down to the little folks at the bottom. It never works. It never trickles down to the poor. It always stops somewhere in the middle. It never gets down to the poor, and so anyway, but after President Carter, serving as President for four years and being defeated by [Ronald] Reagan, when he came out of the White House, he immediately hit the ground running to focus on a lot of the social issues. He set up what he calls in Atlanta, the Atlanta Project to focus on the poverty and the homelessness and the, and the so-called underclass in this community of Atlanta. And that project was run from the Carter Center from Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] for several years. And now he has gone kind of more global, focusing on the problems of the world. I'm so happy he's received his Nobel Peace Prize. I think it's appropriate. I think he deserves it, I think he's earned it. And, and I'm, I'm happy for him. It's a major plus for Georgia. It's a major plus for his hometown of Plains. Story_ID: 16873 Speaker 1: But I, I think it's a plus for the whole nation for a former President [Jimmy Carter] to receive the Nobel Peace Prize. And the fact that he's from Georgia and Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was a native Georgian, now we have two sons from Georgia who received Nobel Peace Prizes. I'm going to nominate Dr. Joseph Lowery. I'm going to write a letter to Nobel Committee and nominate Dr. Joseph Lowery and urge them to consider granting him a Nobel Peace Prize. He'll be eighty-two years old soon, and I think he deserves it. He still works, carrying out that mission that he and Dr. King and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy and Fred Shuttlesworth and C.K. [Charles Kenzie] Steele and T.J. Jimmerson and all those great warriors. That mission and that work that they started in 1955, '57 [1957] and on now, he carries on that legacy. I mean he's the dean of the [Civil Rights] Movement today. And, and I just think we ought to give people their flowers while they can smell them, give them their roses now because once they leave us, we can't do anything for them. Only God can take care of them once we--they leave us. So I'm going to be nominating Dr. Joseph Lowery as a recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize. I'm going to write that Nobel Committee on behalf of the Georgia Association of Black Elected Officials. But, yes, Jimmy Carter, he deserves it. And I'm happy for him. Story_ID: 16874 Speaker 1: Do you think in retrospect--well, Jimmy Carter's often said that he, I think he said it a couple of times yourself that a peanut farmer becomes President, but, you know, he's, he was a nuclear physicist, you know, in the Navy and-- Speaker 2: Yes, he was. Speaker 1: --and he's a real bright man. And highly trained-- Speaker 2: He's a brilliant man, highly trained. Speaker 1: Brilliant man, and he's a poet. He did a lot of things. But to think that--and when he went to the White House, from what we understand today, he tried to work sixteen-hour days. He, you know, it seemed as though that he was maybe outgunned by his enemies at a certain point, that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: He made mistakes. And one of the mistakes I saw as he was building his cabinet was, he was building his cabinet basically from Georgia. If you looked at his cabinet, just about everybody in strategic positions happened to come from-- Speaker 1: Joey Brown-- Speaker 2: Hamilton Jordan and Burt Lance, Andrew Young, Bill Allison. You can just go on and on and on. I mean they were all good people, all great people, qualified and qualifiable and able to do whatever, but when you're the President of the United States, you have to think out of the box. You got to think outside of your state. And, and I think that gave the media, the Washington Post, the Washington Times, the New York Times, you know the media, that beltway, that beltway mafia to come after him in a way in which it was almost indefensible. But, but I'm happy we had Jimmy Carter to go to the White House from Georgia. It's, I think it's a major plus for us, and I'm happy that he, that he had the courage to appoint Andrew Young as Ambassador to the United Nations. That meant so much for, for us because here he--Andy is a product of the [Civil Rights] Movement. And he's one of us and here he is up there, you know, the Ambassador at the UN. Story_ID: 16875 Speaker 1: 1980 is pivotal for you and for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for a number of reasons. Speaker 2: And 1980 is, because it's the year that Reverend Joseph Boone who had been the leader of Operation Breadbasket in Atlanta [Georgia] for Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] from SCLC and Dr. Ralph David Abernathy, who was Dr. King's partner, they had--Boone had come to me first. Then Abernathy came because Boone called Abernathy. "Well, yeah, I'm trying to get Tyrone to run for the legislature and he don't want to do that. He doesn't think he need to go into politics. He wants to leave Georgia and go to New York and join his relatives up there and make a whole lot of money and that kind of thing. And he, he, he's, he's just feels like he's paid his dues, and he wants to get out of Georgia now." So Dr. Abernathy and Boone kept working it and working it and finally got Reverend Jasper Williams and Reverend Frank Norwood and Ms. Chris Dobbins and everybody--the Pascals who owned the Pascal's Restaurant Hotel, the Pascal brothers. All these folks came together on me, man, they just like said, "This is what we want you to do. You got to do this, you got to do this." And so we did it. But in the meantime, while I'm, while I'm sitting in Pascal's one day with Hosea [Williams]--Hosea called me up and he says, "Well, I know you're running, but I want to run something by you. I want to get your feedback." I said, "What is it, Hosea?" See Hosea was like a daddy to me. People, people--many people think he's real, was my real father, but people say we even look alike. But he was just like a godfather to me. Well, he took me to lunch, and he was real serious this particular day. He said, "I just wanted to come and talk to you because, you, you mean so much to me and to Ralph. We both have raised you in the [Civil Rights] Movement and we're very proud of you. And you're getting ready to go to the [Georgia] legislature," but he said, "I just got to ask you this question." I said, "What is it?" He said, "How would you feel if, if Ralph and I endorsed Ronald Reagan?" I said, "You know, Reagan is running against [Jimmy] Carter. Carter is going to have a hard time winning it cause he's lost a big chunk of the black vote. Blacks are disappointed and this conservative tide is sweeping the country. Reagan had fought it in the--Reagan and [George H. W.] Bush had fought it in their, in their primaries and Bush is going to support Reagan and Reagan is going pick Bush to be on his ticket. And Carter is going run with Walter Mondale and it's going to be tough for him." And he said, "What do you think about this?" I said, "Well, you know, I'm going to vote for Carter." He said, "Well, suppose Ralph and I endorse Reagan? What are you going to--how you going to feel? What are you going to say?" I said, "I'm not going to criticize you," I said, "But there will be many black leaders across this country who will criticize, ostracize, condemn you, tar and feather you." I said, "Be prepared for that." I said, "Secondly, a lot of the journalists, black media, journalists, 'Washington Post', 'New York Times', 'New York Post', 'Washington Times', 'Los Angeles Times', 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution'" I said, "The media beltway, the, the mafia in the beltway around [Washington] D.C. going to condemn you. And there's black preachers across America are going to condemn you." I said, "Be prepared, members of the Congressional Black Caucus, members of state legislatures, they're going to condemn you. They're going to say everything under"--I said, "They're going to forget about you and Dr. Abernathy's great record in the Civil Rights Movement. And they just going to call you everything but a child of God." He said, "Yeah, we're prepared for that, but we just want to know how you feel and how others in the Movement are going to respond." I said, "Well, I'm not going to criticize you 'cause you have a right to endorse and support whomever." I said, "I'm going to support Carter and vote for Carter in spite of my differences, in spite of my criticisms, in spite of the fact that we marched on him when he came to Ebenezer [Baptist Church] in Atlanta [Georgia] and we marched on him in Plains [Georgia] and all of that." I said, "When I weigh Carter against Reagan, when I weigh the two, and I have to make a decision," I said, "I would far prefer Carter being re-elected than having Ronald Reagan come into the White House." And, and so that's the way I left it. I said, "I'm not going to be critical of you or Dr. Abernathy. I have respect for you," and I said, "Everything that we fought for means that we should give you the opportunity to enjoy what the Constitution of the United States stands for, and that is freedom of speech and freedom of expression. And whomever you endorses is a part of that basic Constitutional promise that was made to all of us when the Constitution was written." I said, "So therefore, you won't get that, even though I may disagree with you. I will not condemn you. You have a right to do it, even though I disagree with it." And so that was it on, on--on the Carter-Reagan race. In 1980, Reagan won, and he was re-elected, of course. Story_ID: 16876 Speaker 1: Who did you run against? Speaker 2: Well, in, in 1980, when we ran, there was an incumbent in the office and Reverend Joe Boone and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy came to me. And they said "Well, there's a woman in the seat, but we're very disappointed about her representation of, of our community and, and the issues"-- Speaker 1: Was this a black woman? Speaker 2: Yes, a black woman in the seat. Her name happens to be Lottie Watkins, a very wealthy real estate broker, property owner, business manager, big-time player in the Democratic party, major contributor to big-time Democrats over the years, very wealthy, wealthy person. And they said, "But the person, you know, doesn't represent us. And that person is kind of like an embarrassment to us, and the person, you know, the person is all right in terms of making money, but the person simply doesn't articulate and, and stand up on the issues that are so important to the black community. And we need you to go and, and represent the [Civil Rights] Movement in the legislature." And I said, "Well, Hosea [Williams] is already down there. Why, why should I go?" They said, "Well, yeah, Hosea is already there, but, you know, he needs some help. He could use some help." And I said, "Okay"--finally, I said, "Okay, let's do it." And basically, I made a commitment for a couple of terms. I said, "Okay, I'll, I'll do a couple of terms, and then I'll get out, and I'm going on up to New York." Well, that couple of terms has turned into twelve terms and almost twenty-four years. And I'll be going into my 24th year next year. Story_ID: 16877 Speaker 1: The legislature has been a challenge to some extent, similar to the [Civil Rights] Movement, the challenges in the Movement. When I came in 1980, we were going through what was called the Missing and Murdered Children's Cases, where young black boys and young adult black men were being snatched up and killed in Atlanta [Georgia]. It was an international media, kind of frenzy descending on Atlanta. It was, it was big-time news, you know, really. Maynard Jackson was wrestling with it, the nation was wrestling with it. George [H. W.] Bush was Vice President. He came down here and basically said to Atlanta and to the state, "If you all don't move on getting this case resolved soon, the federal government is going to take it over. And we're going to move on some people that we know are suspects." And we went through that. So I come into the legislature in 1980 and my very first year, I have to introduce legislation to address all of these things that are happening to Atlanta. And one of the things that was happening was, that people were coming in from all over the country taking advantage of this tragedy on Atlanta. And many people were just--believe me, it was, it was a circus. It was, it was awful. And people were hustling over the tragedy, the families, and so I had to come in. The community said to me, "We want you to introduce legislation to try to corral this, focus on this, and, and deal with it." So I had to come in and strengthen the law on what we called the Charitable Solicitations Act, my very first year. Got that done, with a lot of help. Story_ID: 16878 Speaker 1: Then 1981, '82 [1982], we went through our first reapportionment, my first reapportionment. Not--the first apportionment for the, for the African American legislators who were here. We went through the first one. And it was ugly. It was, it was tough. We were fighting for one majority black congressional district out of ten. There were ten congressional districts. We only wanted one, and we wanted it right here in Atlanta [Georgia] where we made up sufficient population to justify one. The leadership of the Democratic Party said, "No, you can't have one in this reapportionment process." Speaker 2: Just a question now. Now, what is the percentage of black residents in Georgia? Speaker 1: The percentage of black residents in the state of Georgia is about 30 percent. In Atlanta, it's about seventy percent. So in 1981, '82 [1982], we were fighting over one majority black district in the whole Congressional delegation. The leadership of the Democratic Party said, "No, we're not going to give it to you." The Democrats controlled the House [of Representatives], Democrats controlled the Senate, and they controlled the Executive branch, the Governor's office. So us [Georgia] Legislative Black Caucus members decided to fight to get one, one out of ten. We had to sue the state. That year Black Caucus members, which numbered probably fifteen or twenty--today we're forty-nine, but then we were about fifteen or twenty, we formed an alliance with the Republicans in the legislature. We formed this alliance. And we went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, and we won. We won that district. We beat back the attempts to deny us that one district. And today, John Lewis is representing us in the United States Congress in the 5th Congressional District from Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 16879 Speaker 1: Then the next year, 1983, we had an escalation of violence from the Ku Klux Klan and the neo-Nazi groups across this state. Acts of racial violence became the common issue every day. It was like, oh, what part of the state are they doing it this day? We, we had to focus on what we could do as a state to go after these racist hate groups that was perpetrating violence on people of color. One incident out in west Georgia where a black man who was married to a white woman, the Klan went to their home, beat the black man, drug the woman out of the house, beat her, and threatened to kill both of them if they didn't separate. Well, they didn't separate. The law enforcement agency went out there and busted them and put the Klan in jail and prosecuted them. In 1983, Ms. Johndell Johnson, who was the Executive Director of the Atlanta Branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], came to me here at the Capitol. And she, she called me "son." I was like one of her sons. She said, "Son, we want you to sponsor legislation that would set up an Anti-Terrorism Statute in this state. And it would call for the creation of a special squad within the Georgia Bureau of Investigation to go after these racist hate groups. We want you to sponsor it," and I did. We, I sponsored it. We got the votes. It passed and became law in 1983. That squad is still working within the GBI today to go after the groups who, who foster violence and hatred and attack people based on the color of their skin or their religion, their political persuasion, their gender, or whatever, their sexual preference. It's the Anti-Terrorism Task Force within the GBI. That's a law that we passed. I had to sponsor that in 1983. Story_ID: 16880 Speaker 1: In 1984, we get into the issue of whether [Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.'s birthday shall become a state legal holiday, as it is on the federal level. And so under the administration of Governor Joe Frank Harris, legislation is introduced. Hosea Williams is still in the [Georgia state] House of Representatives with us. And Hosea had been introducing these bills in the House. Julian Bond had been introducing them in the [Georgia state] Senate. And because Hosea had convinced Ronald Reagan to sign the federal law, believe me, Hosea Williams was the man. There was a lot of pressure on Reagan. I mean the King family was lobbying Reagan and members of Congress, business community and national, national leadership, religious leadership, but Hosea Williams went and confronted Ronald Reagan 'cause he had endorsed Reagan in 1980. He confronted him. Hosea told me, one day he was raising so much hell in the White House that Michael Deaver, who was Reagan's chief of staff, threatened to have him evicted. He was going to call the Secret Service on him and Hosea finally got to Reagan and said, "Your chief of staff is going to have me evicted, kick me out of the White House because I'm up here arguing to save Martin Luther King, Jr.'s birthday, holiday from being vetoed." And he said Reagan told Deaver to leave Hosea alone. He said, "This man endorsed me in 1980, helped me get elected President." I don't think Hosea made one bit of difference in getting Reagan elected in 1980, but Reagan needed some black faces around him. And he received the support from Hosea. Well, anyway, Hosea leaned on Reagan. Reagan finally signed the King Federal Holiday bill. Now, there are a lot of people who would take credit for this. But I give credit to Hosea Williams because I really believe that had not he been there agitating and cutting up, as we say in the [Civil Rights] Movement, Hosea Williams, I think, deserves more credit than anybody in getting Reagan to put that ink on, on the bill, to sign it, rather than veto it. Well, we were dealing with that issue in, in the legislature here. Governor Harris had his floor leader, Representative Calvin Smyre from Columbus, to introduce the bill. Hosea signed it. I think I signed the bill too. A lot of us signed the bill, but it came from the Harris administration. The bill passes, and the Governor signs it. Story_ID: 16881 Speaker 1: Hosea [Williams] decided to leave the legislature and run for Congress against Wyche Fowler. Hosea didn't make it. So he left the legislature, didn't win [U.S.] Congress, but he turns around and runs for the Atlanta [Georgia] city council, and wins a seat on the Atlanta city council. Then he serves a term on the Atlanta city council. He turns around and run for a seat on the DeKalb County Commission, and wins. So he served in the legislature. He served in Atlanta City Council and his County Commission, while at the same time, he was continuing to do his Hosea Feed the Hungry Program. Okay, so he leaves me in the legislature. I'm the only civil rights activist left up here now. I'm the only one that comes out of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] as one of the staff members. I'm the only one up here. It's kind of lonely. But 1985, we continued to work toward what we called Positive Welfare Reform. And I introduced legislation to, to change the way the welfare system was working in Georgia, got a lot of support from my colleagues, a lot of support from the community. So we changed the law, and we created a program called PEACH [Positive Employment and Community Help]--there used to be a program before we passed the law that I sponsored, and it was called Workfare, where you punish the poor for being poor. You make poor people work free in order to get their checks. We changed that law, and we created a PEACH Program which is entirely different, a program that guarantees a person a job, a job that pays above the minimum wage, once they complete a training program. If you go into the training program, you're guaranteed employment. You're guaranteed workmen's compensation while you, while you're going through your training program. And you're guaranteed childcare for your children while you're in the program. So if you're, if you're a mother, you're a single mother, and you're out there working, you got to have childcare for your babies. The state was guaranteeing that. And so that was positive for us to pass this PEACH Program, Positive Employment and Community Help. They, very, very big victory for us. We got that done. Story_ID: 16882 Speaker 1: But at the same time, now, while we're doing all these other things in the early '80s [1980s] and the mid-80's, in the early '80s [1980s], we had a delegation of African American legislators, right across the border in Alabama to decide one day that they were going to remove the Confederate battle flag from the capital dome in Montgomery, these lawmakers. Alvin Holmes and Thomas Reed and all of them, they decided they were going to take that Confederate battle flag off that dome in Montgomery, off the capital. Speaker 2: How was this decided? They just had a discussion about it (unclear)-- Speaker 1: These, these lawmakers decided--well, somebody saw it flying. They said, "We need to get that Confederate battle flag off of our capital because the legislature never voted to put that thing up. George Wallace just decided to raise that thing up there, put it up there one day." So these lawmakers, now--these are black legislators, they had held a news conference. They said, "We're going to climb up on the dome and take it down. So they went out one day, and they attempted to get up there. They couldn't climb up on the dome, but they went out. They were all arrested, placed in jail. They made their point, headlines across the nation. We read the headlines over here in Georgia the next day, and I said to myself, we need to do something in this state because on our flag we have the Confederate battle emblem. We have the cross of St. Andrew on the Georgia flag. So I called my colleagues at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], Reverend Fred Taylor, who was working for Dr. Joseph Lowery. I called my colleague, Joe Beasley, who was Reverend Jesse Jackson's Regional Director of the Rainbow-PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] Coalition. I called my late colleague, Earl Shinhoster, who was the regional director of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Earl was killed in the year 2000, June of 2000 in a tragic accident over near Tuskegee, Alabama while riding in a Ford Explorer with bad Firestone tires. And the tire blows out and the vehicle flips over--he's a passenger, flips over, goes down this embankment, wraps around a tree, and it crushes Earl to death. He died young, my colleague, my brother in the struggle, dead. But in the early 80's [1980s], I called Earl Shinhoster, called Fred Taylor, called Joe Beasley. And I said, "Let's meet. We need to start a movement in Georgia to remove this racist Confederate flag, which we call the 'Georgia Swastika'." So we began this educational campaign to educate legislators because most legislators didn't know that the flag was changed in 1956 for all the wrong reasons. It was a protest against school desegregation, integration of public accommodations and voting rights for black people. Story_ID: 16883 Speaker 1: Well, we had to work on the legislature because many of the black legislators simply weren't interested. White legislators were very critical. We had to travel the state, holding forums, seminars, speaking in churches and fraternities, sororities, business groups, wherever we could find an audience, on the campuses, using the media, whatever chance we got, try to generate some coverage in the media to educate Georgians as to what happened to that flag in 1956, 'cause the flag was changed in '56 [1956]. Never, ever did Georgia have the Confederate battle emblem with the St. Andrew's cross as an official flag until 1956. Most people did not know that. They assumed that that Confederate flag had always flown. That's not true. So we had to articulate that message over and over in the schools, everywhere, in the churches, in the media, everywhere. In the early days of this movement, I had one colleague, Representative Frank Redding from DeKalb County to introduce a bill to change the flag. Then he left the legislature. Then I had another colleague from DeKalb County, Representative Vernon Jones to introduce a bill to change the flag. Then he left the legislature. Then the black caucus came to me. And they said, "Well, Tyrone, you and [Earl] Shinhoster and Beasley and Taylor and others are working the state, you all have this coalition, the coalition to change the flag, and you all are out there on the firing lines." He said, "You need"--they said, "You need to carry the legislation." I said, "Well, it doesn't matter who carries it." I said, "The movement out there across the state is going to force the State of Georgia to change this flag one day." And my colleagues in the [Georgia] Legislative Black Caucus said, "We want you to carry it because you are there, you're doing the movement and you're agitating, you're articulating the message. And we think you ought to carry it." I said, "Okay." They said, "You're the one from the Civil Rights Movement up here anyway, and we think it's appropriate that you do it." I said, "All right, I'll do it." So I started carrying the flag bill. I started introducing bills every two years. And the movement continued to grow. I mean the movement across the state from the people, from the ground up, continued to grow. And we had so much support, we began to convince editorial writers and publishers across the state to do editorials, do news stories and columns, and they began to do that, coming out of Atlanta and going around the state. People were beginning to do that. Once we educated the Georgia citizens as to what happened to their flag, the Movement really began to gel, civil rights organizations, the clergy, fraternities, sororities, Chamber of Commerce, you name it, just everybody coming aboard, morticians and housewives and farmers. So the movement just grew and grew and grew. In 1996, one of my colleagues in the House of Representatives, his name is Roy Barnes, who later became governor, he told me in '96 [1996], he said, "Whenever you need my help on this flag bill that you're carrying, let me know, and I'm gonna try to help you." 1997, he came to me one night, I was up here late, working in the office, and he said, "Let's talk a little bit." And we started talking, and he said, "I got an idea that if I ran for governor, I might could win." He had served in the Senate, served in the House. In 1990, he ran for governor, but didn't make it. In 1990, Zell Miller ran, Norman Underwood ran, Andrew Young ran, and all of us basically, lined up and supported Andy. Andy ended up in a run-off with Zell Miller. Roy Barnes endorses Andy Young in the run-off, sends a lot of resources to Andy. But Zell Miller wins, so Roy's out of the legislature. And he comes over to the House and serves--he, he ran for re--ran for the House and won in '92 [1992]. Well, in '97 [1997], I told him, I said, "Well, you should run for governor because I think you can win." And I said, "At the proper time, after you are elected, at the proper time, I will come to you, and I will tell you what role you can play in helping us change the flag." I said, "But until that time, I want you to lay back, take no position. When the media asks you about the flag, you say, "That's a legislative matter or black caucus matter," or "Representative Brooks is handling that. You need to talk to him." I said, "You just stay back until we give you the right signal because if you move prematurely, we might not be able to bring the coalition of legislators together to get the votes." I said, "You remember in 1993, Governor Miller joined our movement briefly and urged the legislature to change the flag. But he didn't talk to the black caucus. He didn't talk to the leadership of the black community. He didn't really build the coalition to get the votes, and therefore, his message did not produce the desired results." So we finally come down to a Super Bowl coming here in 2000. And Joe Beasley from the Rainbow-PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] Coalition basically said, "The Super Bowl is coming, and we've been working on this flag for a long time. We might as well just call a boycott against the Super Bowl and tell them not to come, tell the NFL [National Football League] don't come." Well, it made big headlines. And it scared a lot of folks. And everybody came to me, and said, "Well, what you going to do, what you going to do, Brooks?" And I said, "Well, let me talk to Beasley and let's see what we can work out." And I said, "If y'all would make a commitment to me that if I can get Beasley to drop this idea of a boycott, and we can put it off to say 2001, then maybe I can get him to really back off the boycott call," because the media was all over this boycott thing. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was calling a boycott on South Carolina over the same issue, and so everybody knew that when that movement ended in South Carolina, it's coming to Georgia for sure. So I said, "Give me one more year. If, if I can get them to hold off on the boycott, you make a commitment to me that we'll move on the flag in 2001, then we might can hold it off on this, on this Super Bowl boycott." And everybody agreed. All my colleagues in the legislature who were nervous, the governor, everybody else. Okay, we'll wait till 2001. So well, we get close to 2001, we go through, we go through this, this whole--we go through this election of 2000 first of all. And we see what happens in Florida with Al Gore and George [W.] Bush. And we come out of that election and everybody's fired up. You know, Joe Beasley suggested we go to Fitzgerald, Georgia to the Bryant Theological Seminary to have a strategy meeting. Story_ID: 16884 Speaker 1: After we, of course, go through the 2000 elections and all of the activists had to regroup following the U.S. Supreme Court's decision to crown President [George W.] Bush with the White House, we said, well, we got to move on. And we have some unfinished business because the word had already been delivered to the state that 2001 would be the final year that we would wait on changing the [Georgia state] flag. So in November, the first Saturday following the general election in the year 2000, Joe Beasley, Fred Taylor and many of us activists in the coalition to change the flag, met in Fitzgerald, Georgia at the Bryant Theological Seminary, which is owned by the General Missionary Baptist Convention of Georgia. And we strategized that whole Saturday in terms of what we could do to be prepared to bring the leverage on the state in January of 2001 to get the votes in the [Georgia state] house and the senate to change this flag. So after meeting all day long in this little small town in south Georgia, where Union and Confederate soldiers gathered in 1865 when the Confederate States of America dissolved and the Confederates signed the Articles of Surrender when General [Ulysses S.] Grant brought them to the table to negotiate this surrender, we met in this little town where Confederate and Union soldiers met to plan for reconciliation and rebuilding. So we spent a whole day strategizing, strategizing, what can we do? What do we--who do we talk to? My job was to bring the legislation. My job was to get key legislators committed. So I made calls the majority leader of the house, Representative Larry Walker from Perry. I made calls to Represent--Senator Charles Walker, who was the senate majority leader and told them that the coalition had voted, the coalition to change the flag had voted in Fitzgerald, that they would carry the bills in both chambers. Representative Walker said that he was not prepared to carry the bill because he was a Democratic majority leader in the house and the Democratic Party had not voted as a caucus to introduce that legislation. When I called Senator Charles Walker in the senate, who was the first African American to become senate majority leader, he said to me, he said, "Tyrone, you've been our point man on the flag for the [Georgia Legislative] Black Caucus. You've been out there on the firing line for years," and he said, "Whatever you want me to do, no matter what it is, whatever you want me to do, I'll do it." I said, "Well, I want you to carry the bill in the senate." I said, "I'm gonna have to carry it in the house because the majority leader in the House, my dear friend, Larry Walker, indicates that he can't do it because the Democratic Party has not decided this would be one of its issues." Then I went to Governor [Roy] Barnes, and I said, "Roy, we've just met in Fitzgerald, Georgia. And we've made a decision that we have to move forward on our commitment to change the flag in 2001, said this is the, this is the session. If we don't do it in the session of 2001, then the economic sanctions and boycotts are coming." And he said to me, he said, "Well, I gave you my word a few years ago that whenever you were ready to move on the flag, I'd be with you." And he said, "My word is there," and so he kept his word. So we met, and we met, and God knows we met. We had so many meetings in the capital, at the Governor's mansion, all around the state. And finally, in January of 2001, we had a ceremonial legislative session at the old capital in Milledgeville, Georgia. Milledgeville used to be the capital of the state. We went down to Milledgeville. We used the old Capitol building and the old Governor's mansion to conduct ceremonies. That night, as we were leaving Milledgeville, Governor Barnes and his wife flew back on a state plane, but his floor leader, Charlie Smith, the majority leader of the House, Larry Walker, the chairman of the rules committee where my bill was, was assigned, Calvin Smyre from Columbus and myself, we flew back on a state helicopter from Milledgeville. And the helicopter landed right on the lawn of the Capitol--I mean of the Governor's mansion, right on the lawn, the front door. And we exited the helicopter, went inside of the mansion and walked in, and the Governor was presiding over a group of business people and one or two other legislators was in the room, but primarily, it was business leaders. I mean the giants of the business community of this state were in that mansion that night. You, you name the corporation, big corporation, they were in there. And the Governor was telling them how important it was to get this deal done, to get the ninety-one votes in the House. Twenty-nine votes in the senate and telling them where to go get the votes, and telling them where key legislators lived, how to find them, where they ate, where they drank, where they slept, wherever they were. He said, "This is where you go, this is where you can find them." So he was giving instructions. He was kind of presiding over this meeting as, as Lyndon Baines Johnson would preside over his Cabinet during the days of trying to find votes to pass the Civil Rights Act [1964] or the Voting Rights Act [1965] or the Open Housing Act [1968]. And-- Speaker 2: He was kind of leaning on them. Speaker 1: He was leaning on them. He was, he was leaning hard. He was twisting arms and legs and everything else he could twist. Story_ID: 16885 Speaker 1: And I walked in with my colleagues, and I asked one question. I said, "Where is Representative Denmark Groover?" Because I had asked [Governor] Roy [Barnes] to bring Denmark Groover up from Macon [Georgia]. Denmark Groover was the man who served in the legislature in 1956, and who was Marvin Griffin's floor leader. He was the man that carried the flag bill to its victory in 1956. He sponsored the legislation in the House [of Representatives]. He carried it, and the bill passed. When I came to the legislature twenty-three years ago, Denmark Groover was here, and he began to help me. He was one of those old timers. He began to help me on a lot of legislation, like the Anti-Terrorism law and the Welfare Reform law and a lot of things that I've had to do. Well, he had told me years ago what happened in '56 [1956], and how embarrassed he was that he carried the legislation in the House. And he said to me, he said that flag bill never would have passed in '56 [1956] had not he been for it. And he talked about the atmosphere. He talked about the all-white legislature, the all-male legislature. He talked about the racist atmosphere where it would have been dangerous for a black person to even come near the Capitol [Atlanta, Georgia] unless they were cleaning the buildings, sweeping the floors, mowing the lawn or washing windows, taking out garbage. He said that was the atmosphere. It was mean and it was ugly. So I wanted Denmark in that meeting that night because I wanted him to, first of all, read the legislation if he hadn't. It was House Bill 16, sponsored by me and every member of the [Georgia] Legislative Black Caucus. And when I found him in the corner, he was reading the bill. And I asked him, "What is your opinion?" He said, he said, "Well, it's a good bill. I like it, and it does what I want to see done. It's takes us back to the pre-'56 [1956] flag." And he said, "What do you want me to do, Tyrone?" I said, "Well, Denmark, I need you to come to the Rules Committee tomorrow morning because I'm gonna introduce the bill in committee. Committee is gonna take the bill. Larry Walker is gonna come with an amendment to help me get the bill passed. And, and when we finish speaking, we want you to bring the closing comments." And I said, "You know what I want you to do, Denmark?" He said, "No, what is it?" He--I said, "Denmark, what I want you to do is, I want you to walk the Rules Committee through what happened in 1956. I want you to talk to them like you've talked to me. I want you to tell them what it was like, what you did, and how you did it, why you did it, in 1956." And I said, "That's what I want you to do." Now, Mr. Groover was in his eighties and very feeble, ill, but he had enough stamina and energy to go to bed that night and come up here and meet me at the Capitol. He was sitting in the Rules Committee at 8:30 [a.m.] that morning. I had asked him to be there at 8:30. The Committee started at 9:00 [a.m.], and so we followed the script. I bring the bill to, you know, introduce it to Committee. The Chairman of the Committee called me. I introduced the bill. I speak. Representative Larry Walker, the majority leader follows me. Then Denmark Groover closes it out. So the bill passes out of committee with only two dissenting votes. It goes down to the floor of the house. The Governor had been put on notice to be prepared to come and address the House if the bill made it out of committee. We had made arrangements with the speaker of the house to have the Governor to come in because the Governor can't just walk in our chambers. He has to be invited in. So he was invited in to speak, and he spoke, and he called on the legislature to do the right thing. And he spoke to white legislatures, and he said to them, he said, "You know, there's nobody in the Capitol more Southern than I am." He said, "I'm a product of the South. I'm a product of Georgia," said "I can trace my ancestry back through the Confederacy." He said, "But you all know in your hearts the flag that flies over this state doesn't represent heritage; it represents hate. It represents hate." And he said, "You need to be on the right side of history." He said, "Don't make the mistake I made as a young senator." He said, "When the Martin Luther King, Jr. birthday bill came up," he said, "I made the right decision the first time. I voted for the bill in the senate. The bill comes to the House, gets amended. It carries over to the next week, and when I go home, I'm, I'm deluged with criticism from just about every group out there in Cobb County." He said, "But when I came back to vote on the bill the following week, I voted the wrong way. I voted no on final passage." And he said, "There's not a day that goes by that I don't regret that vote." He said, "I," he said, "I'm ashamed of that vote." He said, "Don't make the mistake I made." He said, "Don't be on the wrong side of history on this one." When he finished speaking, we took a, a lunch break and came back in, and we passed the bill. Story_ID: 16886 Speaker 1: The bill goes to the Senate, and it stays in the Senate for about a week for whatever reason. And the Senate takes it up and passes it. It goes to the Governor [Roy Barnes]. I had told the Governor that if we win this, this victory in getting the votes through the legislature, that I just simply wanted him to sign the bill without a big ceremony. I said, "We don't need a big ceremony." I said, "We have won the battle. We don't need to gloat in our victory. We need to be humble in victory," said, "just sign it quietly, and that'll be it. No big ceremony in the rotunda as we normally do." So he followed my advice. And he did it that way. He signed the bill the next day after the Senate had passed it early in the morning very quietly. The next morning when I came down, he sent Calvin Smyre to the chamber to get me. And Calvin said, "It's an emergency. The Governor say he need you right away." And I said, "What in the world can he want now?" Well, I go down there in, in his office, and the Governor says well, he said, "I've done, I've done what you asked me to do. I've signed the bill very quietly. You didn't want a big ceremony." He said, "But I just have one favor to ask of you." I said, "What is it?" He said, "I need you to go outside of the Capitol and watch the old flag come down, and watch your new flag go up." And I said, "Sure, no problem." I went outside on January 31st of 2001, stood in front of the Capitol and I watched that old Confederate flag--we called it the 'Georgia Swastika', come down. And then we watched the new flag go up. That was a very proud day for me and very proud for the people of Georgia who had supported us, watching that new flag go up. And the media asked me, "How do you feel, how do you feel? What do you think?" I said, "Well, I feel like we are seeing the birth of the new Georgia now, a Georgia that all of us can embrace because we have a symbol that should unite us as a people, one, one Georgia." So we won that battle. Governor signs it January 31st, 2001. And that's it. Well, we go through elections in 2002. The Governor that we have in office now, on the campaign trail, kept telling voters, particularly in certain regions, I would support a referendum on the flag. "I would support a referendum on the flag. I would support a referendum." Well, those in opposition to changing the flag, the Ku Klux Klan, the neo-Nazis, the racists, racists skinhead groups, the white bigots, they basically bought into this thing from the Governor. "Well, he says he will support a referendum," so when the Governor gets elected, he got elected because the teachers of this state worked against Roy Barnes. And the teachers provided the margin of victory for the new Governor. So Roy Barnes is defeated. The flaggers, those who wanted the Confederate flag, they take all the credit. They get credit for it, but the teachers actually defeated Roy Barnes for other reasons, educational reform and the loss of fair dismissal rights and many other parts of his Education Reform Bill that he had adopt--got the legislature to adopt. So anyway, we come into this particular session in 2003 and this Governor says, "I'm gonna introduce legislation to give the people a chance to vote in the referendum." He does and his referendum is flawed. So we had other input from other legislators. And we finally reached a point where the legislature decided that we were not going to have the Confederate battle emblem on any referendum. And the [Georgia Legislative] Black Caucus was united a hundred percent, community was supporting us. We received support from Democrats and Republicans, and we won. We stripped the Confederate battle flag off the referendum as an option. So on March 2nd of 2004, the citizens of this state will go to their precincts and they will see the pre-1956 flag, the one that we always wanted, the one that we put in our legislation every year. And they will see the current flag. And they'll have a chance to chose between those two, but they will not be voting on the Confederate battle flag with the cross of St. Andrew. That will not be on the ballot. When the Governor signs the legislation that we've adopted, the 19--the pre-1956 flag, the pre-1956 flag that flew from 1879 to 1956, with no complaints, it will go up. The current flag will come down. The current flag has all of the previous Georgia flags at the bottom of the seal, with the caption above saying 'Georgia's history.' So on the current flag, you will see the cross of St. Andrew on the post-'56 flag because it was one of those flags that was adopted by the legislature. And there are many of us who still have a problem with that. That is a compromise flag, two years ago. It was a compromise flag. I wrote those words, 'Georgia's history' across those flags to put those flags in the proper context. But the new flag that's gonna go up is the one that we really prefer. It's the one that I'm gonna vote for. It's the one that we included in our legislation for almost twenty years, the one that we promoted in our movement to change the flag. Now, this is a great victory because the people of Georgia will not be offended and will not be disgusted, and will not have to sit and ponder over how they're gonna have to deal with a racist Confederate battle flag on their ballot. It won't be there. So we call it the Georgia Swastika. The Georgia Swastika has been eliminated. It's gone. It will not be voted on. And this puts Georgia in, in a very positive light now. After going through this re-debate over the flag issues and taking the Confederate battle emblem out of the equation, it is a very positive move for our state. And I think the people are very proud of what we've done. But they are angry that the Governor reopened this debate. The people did not want this debate reopened. And all of the polling that I have seen from the 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution' and other media, tells me that the people of this state were very upset that we were even debating the flag. They said, "Leave the flag alone. What about the economy? What about education? What about Medicaid? What about health care? What about jobs?" And so the people are relieved that the debate over this flag is over. But come March 2nd, during the Presidential Preface Primary in Georgia, the people will have a chance to vote yes or no on the current flag that's flying now or the pre-1956 flag. And that's it. Story_ID: 16887 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Some of my hopes and concerns is that the African American community will begin to grow and prosper so that we can reduce the poverty and hunger, so that we can reduce the homelessness, so that we can begin to revive and rebuild the desolate spots throughout the African American community and the minority community. Black folks, brown folks, white folks, yellow folks, red folks, all of us want the same thing in life. I want to see our community rise above the poverty and homelessness and the helplessness and the diseases and the malnutrition, the poverty that wrecks a tremendous toll on us as a people, people of color. I want to see more investment in our community so that we can have more jobs and businesses and employ more people. I want to see less crime. I want to see African American leadership begin to focus on how we can prevent our children from ending up as statistics in the criminal justice system. There are too many people locked up in this country, but particularly, there are too many young, black, Latino, minority children going into the criminal justice system by way of juvenile detention and getting caught up in the criminal justice system and living lives of misery. And we want to put the brakes on incarceration and put the pedal down on education. We want to stop the rising tide of teen births, children--babies having babies which leads to a breakdown in our family structure and leads to the incarceration of our children. It does. There's a direct correlation between teen births and prison incarceration. There's no doubt about it. There's a direct correlation between the two. We've, we as a people have began--have got to focus more on teenage prevention of, of early pregnancies. And I would love to see black, particularly black men--and all men, but particularly, black men, begin to stand up and meet their responsibilities, meet the challenges of, of being a father or challenges of being a, a leader of a family and begin to take more responsibility for what we, as men, should be doing for our people, for our community, for our families. That was the call that Minister Louis Farrakhan in 1995 on Million Man March. Black men, stand up and be men. Do what you know you ought to be doing. Don't abandon your babies. You make the baby, raise the baby. You make the baby, take care of the baby. Then I want to see more black people, particularly black folks, spending more money with black-owned businesses. Subscribe to black media, but particularly, black newspapers. And I want to see us, as a people, begin to work to reduce the crime and the carnage across the landscape of the African American community. I want to see members of the clergy, in every denomination, preach these messages in their sermons, articulate them to their congregations. Those of us in the body politic, we should do the same. We should do the same in our political settings. We should lead by setting the example of leadership. We are leaders. The people have elected us, and we should demonstrate leadership by setting examples, raising the bar and challenging our communities to do what we ought to be doing collectively together. And then finally, I would hope that we as a people will begin to reach across North America and touch our people on other continents, particularly, our mother continent. Mother Africa needs us. We have enormous talent here in North America. We have great brain power. We, with all of this expertise, and all of the abilities that we have, we need to do more to focus on our continent by dealing with, not only AIDS and malaria and guinea worm and other things, but we need to begin to build bridges for North America to--throughout the continent of Africa in terms of economic development. We need to build these bridges. We need to break down these barriers and these walls, these cultural differences, these language gaps. We need to fill them, and we need to begin the process of reconnecting and rebuilding. And if we do it as African American leaders, then we can challenge the President of the United States, the Congress, the United Nations, International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, you name it. But until we begin to exert our leadership and set the example by investing and reconnecting and revisiting and embracing our brothers and sisters from around the globe, then it's gonna be hard for us to challenge anybody else to do it. We, we need to, we need to, we need to speak with more than just words. We need to speak with our monies, our education, our expertise in every way we possibly can. We've got to find a way to do more to assist each other, not only here in North America, but particularly, on the continent of Africa. Our brothers and sisters who come to visit me from all across our continent, tell me all the time, black people living in the United States of America, you can help us. You can do more to help us than you have been doing. And we have to do that. We're all in this together. The world is getting smaller every day, and the new technologies, the Internet, media communications, supersonic airlines, wherever you look, the world is getting smaller. If we want to leave this world a better place for our children and unborn generations, if we really do, we need to begin to do the things that we were told to do by our foreparents. And if we do those things and do them well, then we can make this a better place for all of God's children. Story_ID: 16888 Speaker 1: Sir, what would you see at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: Now, it's hard for me to define my legacy. Others will have to do that, historians, contemporaries, journalists, but there are two things that I have to relate to when people talk about legacy. And that is my work in the Civil Rights Movement, my collective work in the Civil Rights Movement and my service in the body politic. Those are the two things when you talk about legacies. And then people would have to sort that out, the historians and others would have to sort it out, but, but certainly the Civil Rights Movement and my service in the body politic. Now, I know that the journalists and the historians will certainly look at the flag issue, and they will say, this was certainly a defining kind of a challenge for me personally because I was the point man for the community, for the coalition to change the flag, the point man for the legislative black caucus. I do understand that, but it was a collective struggle. So it was not a lone ranger movement. It was a collective movement, and, and so I don't want to take any special credit for it. But my colleagues always say, "Well, somebody had to do it." And I understand that many people will look at the flag movement and they will define me around that. I understand how it works. I understand how people view things in certain little capsules, and they look at the flag, and it's bam, that's one of them. But I think some people will look at the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, SCLC, the Movement that really molded me into what I am from my family, my mother [Ruby Cody Brooks], my father [Mose Brooks Jr.], my grandparents [Ada Myrick Cody, Ronie Cody Sr., Josephine Swain, Mose Brooks Sr.] and others who helped shape me and the community where I grew up in Warrenton, Georgia, who helped shape me and make me what I am. And then coming into SCLC, the Hosea Williams, the Dorothy Cottons, the Carl Farrises, the Willie Boldens, the James Oranges, Jimmy Wells, Leon Halls, the Ben Clarks, the Claudette Matthews, the Rita Samuels and just so many others. Dr. Joseph Lowery who's still here and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy was certainly a very important part of my life, promoted me and gave me opportunities to serve in SCLC in a way in which I never dreamed. And Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] being the global leader, the inspiration for all of us. Jesse Jackson, Fred Shuttlesworth, C.T. Vivian, Andrew Young, you know, just so many, so many great warriors. Cynthia McKinney and Richard Turner and all my colleagues in the legislature, you know, all my colleagues in the legislature, collectively. Charles Walker and Calvin Smyre, Charles serving as the senate majority leader. Calvin serving as chairman of the rules committee and chairman of the Democratic Caucus, those two guys were kind of like my anchors in both chambers. They were helping me in both chambers. And the family of the [Georgia] Legislative Black Caucus certainly, but I think when you talk about the legacy, it's gonna boil down to the Civil Rights Movement and the legislature where I have served for twelve terms. I think that's the way people are going to view me. And that's the way it's going to be. That's the way it's going to be, and I, I can accept that. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is slightly different. But it is different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, if the good Lord called me home tonight, tomorrow morning people have to reflect over my years of service and reflect over my work, and their knowledge of me, their relationships with me, their knowing me, their friendship with me, family and everything else. I would like for people to say, "Here is a man who tried to serve us. He always tried to serve us, the people. Serving us was his number one goal, not serving himself, but serving us, the people." That's how I'd like to be remembered, a, a person who tried to serve the people, help the people, particularly those who couldn't help themselves, the least of the--our society, particularly, but the people in general. I would like for the people to just view me as someone who was trying to help them, trying to serve them. That's what I would like for people to remember about me whenever I leave this planet. Story_ID: 16889 Speaker 1: Me and [Rev.] Jesse Jackson. Speaker 2: The year? Do you remember the year? Speaker 1: Oh, that was, that was about three years ago. It was at Antioch Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia. We were just having a forum about three years ago. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (left) with Rev. Jesse Jackson, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 2000. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16890 Speaker 1: That's me. I'm about six going on seven years old. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks, ca. 1951. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16891 Speaker 1: That's a ceremony in the [Georgia] State Capitol [Atlanta, Georgia] in 2000, January 15th, actually, January the 14th 'cause that was a Friday, and that Saturday was the next day when the picture ran. This was a ceremony honoring and saluting Reverend Hosea Williams in the Capitol. That's Hosea Williams in the center. Speaker 2: That's 2000? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's 2000 during the celebration of Dr. [Martin Luther] King's birthday. Speaker 2: [Hosea Williams (far right) at the Georgia State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia, January 14, 2000. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16892 Speaker 1: That's a rally here the [Georgia State] Capitol [Atlanta, Georgia] about, I don't know, almost ten years ago against the death penalty. And that's me standing there at the podium speaking to this delegation. And Dr. Joseph Lowery and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] warriors and other civil rights activists. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks at the podium at the Georgia State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 1993; Brooks with Dr. Joseph Lowery and members of the SCLC are protesting the death penalty. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16893 Speaker 1: That's a shot where in 1984 when I chaired the Jesse Jackson campaign for [U.S.] President, this is kind of like a news conference to talk about some of the issues in the Jackson campaign, 1984. I was the Chairman, and that's Hosea Williams at the table with me, Joe Beasley, Donzella James, who later became a state senator. On the end to my extreme left, maybe your right is Mr. J. Lowell Ware, the former publisher of the 'Atlanta Voice' newspaper. And the white guy is Bill Bellamy, who was one of our volunteers. And those were just volunteers standing in the back. That was at the headquarters here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (front row, third from right) and others on the Jesse Jackson campaign for President, Atlanta, Georgia, 1984. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16894 Speaker 1: Left to right, R. B. (unclear), SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] staffer with the cigarette in his mouth. In the center is [U.S.] Congressman John Conyers from Detroit [Michigan] and that's me on the right with the big afro and we are marching in Washington [D.C.] to protest the imbalanced priorities of the [Ronald] Reagan administration. So this was probably in the mid-80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (right) with John Conyers (center) and an unidentified man, Washington, D.C., ca. 1985. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16895 Speaker 1: This is me outside of this church here in Atlanta [Georgia] speaking at a Men's Day program on a Sunday morning, the pastor of the church and, and some of the deacons. And Rev. Arthur Langford, my colleague and I, were guest speakers on this particular Sunday. Arthur Langford has now passed on. He became a state senator. That Afro tells you that that was several years ago. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (second from left) with pastor and deacons, Atlanta, Georgia. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16896 Speaker 1: That's me with Rommie Loudd. Rommie Loud became very famous when he played professional football for the New England Patriots and the Houston [Texas] Oilers. He was granted an NFL [National Football League] franchise to bring a--bring professional football to Orlando, Florida, but personal things happened in his life. And he ended up losing the franchise and Tampa [Florida], Tampa got it. And now it's the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. This had to be 1978 and--in seventy--somewhere around '78 [1978]. And that picture was taken at the jail in Orlando, Florida. Rommie was, at that point, incarcerated for other, other unfortunate things that was happening in his life. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (right) with Rommie Loudd, Orlando, Florida, 1978. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16897 Speaker 1: This is a, a photograph taken at the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] Headquarters in Atlanta [Georgia] where a lot of us activists came together to deal with the civil rights issues. I was probably focusing on racism in the military at that time, as a project at SCLC. Reverend Hosea Williams is standing immediately behind me with those dark glasses. To, to the extreme left is Professor Mack Jones from Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University], and next to him is former state Representative, Lorenzo Benn. To the extreme right with the--the gentleman with the cap, hat on, is former SCLC staffer Lester Hankerson, who's passed on. The gentleman on the extreme left standing is Eddie Lee Brewster, who was a volunteer at SCLC at that time. And the gentleman on the extreme right is Arthur, Arthur Langford's brother, Michael Langford. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks with activists at the Southern Christian Leadership Conference Headquarters, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 1970-1980; (Front row, L. to R.): Mack Jones, Georgia State Representative, Lorenzo Benn, Tyrone Brooks, and Lester Hankerson; (Back row, L. to R.): Eddie Lee Brewster, unidentified woman, Rev. Hosea Williams and Michael Langford. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16898 Speaker 1: That's me presenting an award to Rev. Hosea Williams in the [Georgia State] Capitol under the portrait of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. The Georgia Association of Black Elected Officials had bestowed upon Hosea the President's Award that year at our annual convention. And we decided to take the historic photo and the presentation under Dr. King's portrait in the State Capitol here in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (right) with Rev. Hosea Williams, Altanta, Georgia. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16899 Speaker 1: That's me, standing in the center, holding a news conference in front of the Atlanta [Georgia] City Hall as one representative of the legislature focusing on the missing and murdered children controversy in 1981 in my first year in the legislature when I had to introduce the Charitable Solicitations Law to focus on all of the illegal things that were going on regarding fundraising around the tragedies that these families were enduring. And a lot of legislators are standing with me. Some city council members are standing with me, but that must have been taken in 1981. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (center) with members of the Georgia legislature giving a press conference in front of the Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia, 1981. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16900 Speaker 1: Here I am standing with the bowtie receiving the President's Award from SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Dr. Joseph Lowery, our President, was bestowing upon me, the President's Award at the SCLC National Convention that was being held in Atlanta [Georgia] at the [Georgia] World Congress Center. He is presenting me this award because of the work that we were conducting around the issue of forcing the state to appoint more African American judges. And that was what this award was all about, the fight that we were waging to get more black folks on the benches of justice across the State of Georgia. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (left) being presented an award by Dr. Joseph Lowery at an SCLC function, Atlanta, Georgia. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16901 Speaker 1: That's me in the center with my sister, my friend, my long-time colleague, [U.S.] Congressman--Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney and that's President [Bill] Clinton, of course, on the right. This was a fundraiser that President Clinton had come to, to host and come to raise funds for my colleague, Cynthia McKinney in the year--this was actually 1999. That's when that was. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (center) with Cynthia McKinney and President Bill Clinton, 1999. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16902 Speaker 1: This is around 1984. I was chairing the Jesse Jackson Campaign for President. And this was a photo taken in the [Georgia State] Capitol with legislators, along with Reverend Jasper Williams, the Reverend Cameron Alexander. That's me standing there with my hand on Reverend Alexander with the big Afro. I had the biggest Afro in that photograph. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (fourth from left) with members of Jesse Jackson's Presidential campaign, Atlanta, Georgia, 1984. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16903 Speaker 1: That's me again with Mrs. Juanita Jones Abernathy and Dr. Ralph David Abernathy on a day in which I brought him to the Capitol [Atlanta, Georgia] to preach to the House of Representatives. And that was just before he passed away. He died in 1990. This photograph was taken shortly before he passed away, so it had to be in the late '80s [1980s]--1989, actually. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (left) with Mrs. Juanita Abernathy and Dr. Ralph Abernathy, Atlanta, Georgia, 1989. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16904 Speaker 1: That's me leading a march in Jacksonville, Florida. This had to have been in the late '70s [1970s], and that was the president of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] marching with me. That's me with the big Afro and the dark sunglasses. That's 1970s in Jacksonville. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (front left) leading a march in Jacksonville, Florida, ca. late 1970s. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16905 Speaker 1: That's me and--with the big Afro, and that's Tyrone [Brooks] Jr. with the little afro. And we're sitting in the [Georgia State] House [of Representatives] chamber on this particular day, just taking pictures. Tyrone was probably four or five years old. And now he's real tall and real skinny with so much hair he doesn't know what to do with it, but that's my son, Tyrone Jr., with me. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks with his son, Tyrone Brooks, Jr., Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16906 Speaker 1: This is in front of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] Headquarters on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia], actually, when we were kicking off our campaign to run for the Georgia House of Representatives, 1980. And all of these are just my colleagues from the Movement. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks and colleagues at the SCLC headquarters, Atlanta, Georgia, 1980. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16907 Speaker 1: This photo was taken in Keysville, Georgia. I'm standing here in Keysville, in southeast Georgia, in Burke County with the, the mayor of the city, Ms--Mayor Emma Gresham, council members, family members and children were working--who asked me to come to help them react--help them reactivate their community. One of them in that photo is Commissioner Herman Lodge, Burke County Commissioner. But this was in, in the mid-80s, probably around '87 [1987], '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (far left) with residents of Keysville, Georgia, ca. 1987-1988. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16908 Speaker 1: This is a march, me and [U.S.] Congressman John Lewis. That's me with the big afro and that's John Lewis with the bald head, marching in downtown Atlanta [Georgia], talking about many issues, particularly, racism and discrimination and the challenges facing us as a people. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks (second from right) with John Lewis (right) and others, Atlanta, Georgia, n.d. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16909 Speaker 1: That's just me standing in the well of the House of Representatives, holding up the new Georgia flag that we were about to pass in January of 2001. Speaker 2: [Tyrone Brooks, Atlanta, Georgia, January 2001. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16910 Speaker 1: That's me in the center with the Honorable Governor and Mrs. Marie Barnes. Governor Roy Barnes and I were--we were hosting a delegation at the Mansion that particular evening and we had the new Georgia flag there in the background. And he wanted to take a photograph. And we took it. And the three of us was just having a lot of fun that night at the Governor's Mansion here in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 2: That was 2001. Speaker 1: [Tyrone Brooks with Governor Roy Barnes and his wife Marie Barnes, Atlanta, Georgia, 2001. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.] Story_ID: 16911 Speaker 1: This is an evening here when Jesse Jackson hosted his Peachtree Street Project. In other cities he--some cities he called it the Wall Street Project or whatever, but this is his economic development project to focus on more investment in the African American community. And that's--the lady in the center is Ms. Rita Samuels, who came out of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. She worked there before I did. She was there in the early '60s [1960s], and we just happened to be there at this Rainbow-PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] gathering downtown at the, I believe it was at the Atlanta Hilton or one of the major hotels in downtown Atlanta [Georgia]. This was taken probably just two years ago, probably 2001. Speaker 2: [Jesse Jackson (left) with Rita Samuels, Atlanta, Georgia, ca. 2001. From the collection of Tyrone Brooks.]..