 Story_ID: 358242 Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers and this is Neculai Burghelea with The HistoryMakers and your daughter, Paula, is observing today (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paula, she's named Schjelderup the same as me, Paula Schjelderup. Speaker 1: And, I will ask Paula to--can you spell that last name for me? Speaker 2: S-C-H-J-E-L-D-E-R-U-P. Speaker 1: And to some people you're still known as [HistoryMaker] Anne Brown. Is that your professional name? Speaker 2: Oh ever- I'm known simply as that, I mean I am not known by any other name except Anne Brown, well I mean technically I get letters and all Anne Brown Schjelderup because I married a Schjelderup [Thorleif Schjelderup] but I had a couple of other husbands on the way too so (laughter), but the Schjelderup is the name which stuck and he's the man who stuck too (laughter). Speaker 1: So is it true that your birthday is August 9, 1912? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 358243 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, a bright strong blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Chicken (laughter). Speaker 1: Chicken (laughter). What about a favorite time of year? Do you have a favorite time of year here in Oslo [Norway] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well living in Norway one had better just take them as they come you know. Favorite time of the year, I don't know, when I was young I went skiing all the time in the winter so I was very happy when the snow came. And, as a child, too in Baltimore [Maryland] when it snowed I was very happy. Those days I hadn't learned to use skis, but the snow was magical in a way. And, what did he ask me? Speaker 1: That was it, just your favorite time of year. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the snow. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation spot, a favorite place that you've been or a place you've always wanted to go? Speaker 2: Well, I had an apartment in Italy for a number of years and I loved going down there when it began to get cold and muddy in Oslo, because I was living in Oslo at that time. And, I had my apartment and I went there, I think places in Italy would be the answer to that question. Speaker 1: Now the last of these questions. Do you have a favorite saying? Is there something that you like to repeat often, is there something, a favorite phrase, maybe something you've always said to your students or something you've always said to the children? Speaker 2: I can't think of it. Favorite phrase, well I like to see that my children are doing things honestly I mean you know really going in, not sort of slipping over but going in for whatever they are doing because that's what I always did and I thought my children should do that, too. Story_ID: 358244 Speaker 1: Talking about your children we will start by talking about you as a child and your parents. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So I will let you choose which one you'd like to speak of first your mother or your father and then we will talk about their parents. So which of your parents would you like to speak of first? Speaker 2: Well my father was what we called very strict. He was a doctor and he took his profession and, in Norway you would call it (speaking Norwegian) holdning, very seriously so--is that the right word (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) Attitude. Speaker 2: Yes his attitude. He demanded certain things of his children and he was angry if you didn't do what he thought you should do. Speaker 1: Do you know who your father was named after? His name Harry Francis Brown [Harry Brown]. Was he named after someone in the family? Speaker 2: No, the Francis was a doctor. That's his middle name Harry Francis Brown. I have forgotten the rest of his--you mustn't ask me questions like that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: When you're over ninety you don't remember things--well you remember things better that happened long ago you know, but don't ask me about yesterday or the day before, please. Speaker 1: So your father, Harry Francis Brown, was a prominent doctor? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Where did he go to school to become a doctor? Speaker 2: Howard University in Washington [D.C.], he was born in Washington and he married my mother and then they established a home in Baltimore [Maryland]. I don't know why. Speaker 1: What was your mother's name, your mother's maiden name? Speaker 2: Mary Wiggins [Mary Wiggins Brown]. Speaker 1: Do you know where--is there any history to the name? Speaker 2: Well, Wiggins, her father [William Wiggins], was a Cherokee Indian [Native American]. My mother's father--and that's probably where the name Wiggins came from, of course. Speaker 1: Now was your mother born in Washington also? Speaker 2: No, in Wilmington, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Well, how did she get to Washington to meet your father? Speaker 2: With a train I suppose (laughter). Speaker 1: I mean did she go there to go to school, to Washington? Speaker 2: No, she--I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She went to school in New York, in New York City [New York, New York] and then later she lived with a family in Albany, New York. Story_ID: 358245 Speaker 1: So when you were a little girl when you were in Baltimore [Maryland], what do you remember most about your mother [Mary Wiggins Brown] and father [Harry Brown]? That your father was strict you told me and that he had a lot of demands on you. What was he like at home when he came home from work, from the office, from being a doctor all day? Speaker 2: From the hospital or from the office, yes. Well, he wanted a nice hot dinner and not too much jumping around of the children and loud noises because he often sat at the table after having his dinner and nodded, went to sleep a little bit until my mother said, "Harry you can't sleep at the table go in the bedroom and go to bed," which he did. Speaker 1: Do you know if your father was the first doctor in the family? Speaker 2: No, I don't know. Speaker 1: You don't know. Okay. Can you describe to me what he looked like physically? Was he tall, light skinned? Speaker 2: He was between Paula [Paula Schjelderup] and me as a far skin color was concerned. He was big man and he had played basketball, yes basketball (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So he played basketball, he was an athlete then? Speaker 2: Well you might call it that, yes. He did some athletic, athletes, no that's not the word. Speaker 1: He played sports. Speaker 2: Yeah he was sports (unclear). Speaker 1: Do you remember any sort of games that he may have played with you as a child? Did you play ball on the street (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: I have that you lived at 1501 Presstman Street. Speaker 2: Yeah that's right. That's where I was born. Story_ID: 358246 Speaker 1: Do you remember what Baltimore [Maryland] may have looked like to you as a child? Were there row houses? Where, was the neighborhood all black? Speaker 2: How far are we from my apartment? It's downstairs isn't it? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah. Do you want me to get something for you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Those pictures? Speaker 2: Yeah on the top of the radio. Speaker 1: Because the pictures may help (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the left, yeah. Speaker 1: --you remember things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Very much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On the left hand, as you go in there is a-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We will, we will this is our first time but not our last. Speaker 1: So just continuing to just talk to you about your memories of your childhood. Are there, can you talk about maybe dinner time, what was dinnertime like at the house? You said your father [Harry Brown] nodded off. What did your mother [Mary Wiggins Brown] cook? Speaker 2: Well we generally had somebody who helped in the house and they cooked or my mother cooked and well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember, go ahead. Speaker 2: I don't know what, I know my father liked certain foods, turkey we always had turkey at Thanksgiving you know and Christmas. I don't know. I-- Speaker 1: That's okay. So when you think about just your whole childhood are there certain things that you remember now vividly? Speaker 2: Vividly, I remember, not sharply but spread out, for example, that as I told you before I loved it when it snowed. I didn't ski or anything like that so early, later on I did in Norway particularly. And-- Speaker 1: Well, did you love music as a child? Speaker 2: Oh yes, of course, and my mother was a musician you know and she played and sang for us that we, we did--she taught us everything about music. She really was the basis for the career, my career and all. She taught me--and she had studied music in New York [New York] as well as when she was still younger before she left North Carolina, Wilmington but, which was very little. But when she went to New York she studied seriously with a teacher, piano and singing and then she passed that on to particularly me but to the others, too. But I was the one that really was fascinated by it and took it with both hands, the singing and the music. Oh God she looks like she brought the whole library. Story_ID: 358247 Speaker 1: Part of the building was built after I was grown up, when I was born it was like (displays photograph), the other part was built afterwards, but if you want this you can have it. Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. So you were right there on the corner. Speaker 1: Oh yes, my father's [Harry Brown] office, his office was in the beginning here down here and then when they built on to the house. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you show that show that the camera can see it? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Put it up against your, up, up against your breast, Mommy, because then it won't shake. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes and now can you tell us where this-- Speaker 2: Your father's office was in the building? Speaker 1: My father's office first was these two windows on the basement (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) You have, you have to turn that around or else they can't-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We'll do them at the end, after the interview-- Speaker 2: In the basement. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well I mean that wasn't a basement because it went out on the first floor, but later he built on to this house, I remember it was when my twin sisters [Mayme Brown-Wheatley and Harriet Brown] were very small girls and--where you see that stairway going up on the outside (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is where he built on to the house? Speaker 2: --that's where he built on. Speaker 1: So he, you, he owned the entire building? Speaker 2: Oh yes, of course. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And he worked hard and paid for it. So he owned-- Speaker 1: So you grew up in a very upper middle class family? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Definitely. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Here he is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let's see which picture that is. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In the chair. Speaker 2: Oh yeah and my mother's mother and my mother [Mary Wiggins Brown]. Story_ID: 358248 Speaker 1: Who were you named after? Speaker 2: My father's [Harry Brown] mother, Annie. Annie E. Brown an evangelist. I forgot that book was there. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah well, I remembered that the pictures were there you see, so but you can get into that tomorrow. Speaker 2: So, she was an evangelist your grandmother? Speaker 1: My father's mother, Annie E. Brown, was known throughout the southern states because she traveled as an evangelist and had, what would you call it? Speaker 2: Revivals? Speaker 1: Revivals, that's the word. Speaker 2: Did they do it in tents then? Speaker 1: Many Negro churches there, so. Speaker 2: So it was pretty uncommon for a woman to travel around doing revivals. Speaker 1: Yes that's right, that's right she was one of the few but she was (gesture). I didn't get enough of her (unclear). I got some of it (laughter). Speaker 2: Now was the family a very religious family? Do you remember going to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no they weren't. They were moderately religious. I mean they believed in doing right and they believed in helping other people and they believed in God. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You did sing in church with your mother [Mary Wiggins Brown], your mother took you to church. Speaker 1: Oh yes, my mother sang in the church choir and I later on sang in that same church choir. Speaker 2: Was it a Baptist church or Methodist church? Speaker 1: My mother went to a Methodist church but across the street from that house was a Baptist church and I went to the BYPU, you know what that is, Baptist Young People's Union [Baptist Young People's Union of America], every Sunday at six o'clock and they soon got to know that I could sing and so about every third Sunday I stood up and sang. I sang. Speaker 2: What would you sing? Speaker 1: Some of the hymns or something I had learned from, my mother took a, when you take a book, a magazine every month, what do you call that, subscribe. My mother subscribed to a magazine [The Etude], a music magazine and I learned many songs from that. Story_ID: 358249 Speaker 1: Did you learn to play the piano? Did your mother [Mary Wiggins Brown] teach you piano lessons? Speaker 2: Well I had to go to a teacher, a private piano teacher outside the home but my mother sponsored it, no, no that's not the word. I mean she listened to me play and she told me when I made mistakes and you mustn't do this and it is better if you do that and so on. Speaker 1: Do you consider your mother to have been a good musician? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes and a good teacher. Paula [Paula Schjelderup], I like that scarf you have on. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Thank you. You keep getting distracted (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my favorite color blue. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's the blue she likes. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So you were telling me that your mother was your very first influence. She's the first person to influence you as far as music. Speaker 2: Yes, I guess she sang lullabies to me when I was first born so I had it from the very beginning. Are you taking pictures of this? He's going to tell me please put my leg down. Speaker 1: Oh no, you're good. Now, did your mother sing any classical music? Speaker 2: Of course, my mother subscribed to a magazine called The Etude, and every month there were different classical both known and unknown songs and she learned those and many of those she taught to us, taught to me. And, my other sisters, my other three sisters, they were not terribly interested in singing, not as solos. They left it all to me, "Let Annie [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] sing it." Speaker 1: Maybe you had the better voice of the family. Speaker 2: They didn't try this, their voices were just as good, but they were interested in others things. Speaker 1: Now did you like classical music as well as contemporary music as a child (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes, I liked, I liked classical music overall. I like jazz, too, but I put that too on it. But with classical music that was, that was the music I liked the best. Speaker 1: Why do you think you liked classical music the best? Speaker 2: I guess I was inspired by my mother. Speaker 1: You can have a drink. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Now what's he saying, what's he saying? Speaker 2: No, we were just talking about your training, your classical music training, can you remember the first classical piece of music you learned? Can you remember the first one you heard that excited you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 2: Well what's your favorite today? Speaker 1: My favorite today? Speaker 2: Piece of classical music? Speaker 1: Of classical music? Well it could be an opera, or it could be Brahms [Johannes Brahms], or it could be Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You love it all, that's where your heart is. Speaker 1: Yeah, Brahms or Mozart or, mostly the Germans and the Italians. Story_ID: 358250 Speaker 1: But going back to your, your childhood and you- and your love for music. Can you remember in grammar school, when you started grammar school? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: At P.S. 112 [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did they have a good music department? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: What did you learn there? Speaker 2: Oh I learned to stand up and sing and the other kids, "Let Annie [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] sing it." (Gesture) "Come you sing it." They, they just gave up you know. They-- Speaker 1: Well how did that make you feel? Speaker 2: As I should. I can sing. And I can sing better than these others. Although it wasn't a sickly feeling of I'm so much better. But I mean I sing. So I just stood up and sing, I like to sing, sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) She likes to be the center of attention. Speaker 2: Not only that, I like the feeling of giving out something that I can do. You know, not, showing it off, but not showing it off in a bad way but saying here I am, I can do this, listen to me. You know. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at P.S. 112 that may have really inspired you? Speaker 2: Yes, but I can't remember their names now. Speaker 1: Can you remember some of the lessons they taught you, some of the things that you carried with you? Speaker 2: There was one named Miss Ireland [ph.]. I don't know where I got that name from, but-- Speaker 1: Miss Ireland. Speaker 2: Miss Ireland. Speaker 1: So I read that your parents [Mary Wiggins Brown and Harry Brown] tried then to enroll you into a Catholic school but they were unsuccessful because Baltimore [Maryland] was segregated and you couldn't, they couldn't get you into a Catholic school. So then you went to Frederick Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Frederick Douglass High School was always the school I went to after I finished with grade school. What, they might have tried to get me into a Catholic movie school, music school but I don't remember, I don't remember that. Speaker 1: What do you remember about Frederick Douglass High School? There you were taught by Mr. Llewellyn Wilson [William Llewellyn Wilson]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Oh yes, Mr. Llewellyn Wilson was one of my heroes because he was such a good musician and he was so strict and he, and at the same time he was so joyful. Oh he was okay. But I wonder what happened to him. Well he died, of course, everybody does eventually (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eventually. Story_ID: 358251 Speaker 1: Did your parents [Mary Wiggins Brown and Harry Brown] continue to encourage you during this time to pursue music? Speaker 2: If they encouraged me? Speaker 1: Did they encourage you to pursue music as a profession, to become a professional musician? Speaker 2: No, I don't think they had anything to do, I think that they inspired me to sing and to play the piano and to learn music but they didn't have much work to do because I was already in a sense tuned into that. Speaker 1: Well your father was a doctor and you would, people would assume that most little girls would look up to their fathers and him being a doctor and perhaps want to become one themselves. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had those ideas once in a while. I mean, floating, floating, but no, he had to work too hard and had to go out at night and the day. No, I didn't want that kind of life. I wanted a life where I could sing and be with other people who made music and so on. If I thought about it at all. Because who knows? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It was a different era for a woman in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah that's true. Story_ID: 358252 Speaker 1: So your mother [Mary Wiggins Brown] subscribed to a magazine [The Etude], a music magazine. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What records did she play at home? What did she like to listen to when she listened to music? Speaker 2: Oh we bought records because there were a lot of records made in that time, but I don't remember exactly, but they were the master records that were on sale at that time. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Popular music maybe. Speaker 2: Some popular music, yeah. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Popular music was beautiful music. Speaker 2: Jazz music (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) No, no I am thinking of popular music, the songs that people sang then. Speaker 2: Yeah that's true but also jazz, my father [Harry Brown] liked jazz. He had such fine taste as my mother and I had, you see, and he liked-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's the microphone. Microphone, yeah. Speaker 2: I was just wondering what it was. What is that? (Unclear). Story_ID: 358253 Speaker 1: So at Frederick Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland], Mr. Llewellyn Wilson [William Llewellyn Wilson] was one of your favorite teachers. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. Mr. Llewellyn Wilson had a tremendous sense of humor. So he sprinkled all of his teachings with expressions and with suggestions and all that were also amusing which, of course, made it easier to take and so on. He was quite a character. Speaker 1: Was it because of him and the school that you got the scholarship to go to Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I didn't get a scholarship to go to Juilliard. My father [Harry Brown] paid for my lessons and for my lessons at the Juilliard. Speaker 1: So did you receive any kind of award, the Margaret McGill award [Margaret McGill scholarship] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, of course, but I sang for it. I earned it in the school and I graduated with honor. Where is that diploma? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That picture is in your living room. We'll look at that later. Speaker 2: So that was a very prestigious award to sing and win for (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes, yes, but I worked hard and I was very interested and-- Story_ID: 358254 Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And Henrietta [Brown's sister, Henrietta Brown] was going on and you came into the room and you pinched Henrietta on the arm. "Eh." And she's a whiner. "Eh." And make her stop playing the piano. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What did I do? I didn't get that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) You pinched her arm, you pinched her arm. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Because you wanted her to stop playing, stop playing the piano. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Because you were the one with the music. Speaker 1: Oh no. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh Mayme [Mayme Brown-Wheatley] says this with great love. Mayme says this with great love (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I cannot imagine, but I wanted them all-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But you were, I believe that from the age of twelve or thirteen you already knew where you were going. Speaker 1: Yeah but I wanted them all to play and to take part in music. There's no doubt about that. I can remember that. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But I think you must have known at an early stage. Speaker 1: That I would go further, you mean. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, and that you were determined, that you, it was singing you were meant to do. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And when you hear some of the tapes that we have, records of her voice you can understand that. Because it's such a beautiful voice. Speaker 1: I've heard it, I've heard it. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You have (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes ma'am. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): What have you heard? Speaker 2: Well not all, but I've heard-- Story_ID: 358255 Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were talking about being at Frederick Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland] and we were talking about the Margaret McGill award [Margaret McGill scholarship] that you'd won. So, we should move on-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What did she sing for that award? Speaker 2: Was there a particular song that you sang to win the Margaret McGill award? Speaker 1: No that was for, the Margaret McGill award was given to a student who had made the most progress within a certain time and that was me. And you must remember that I was the only Negro. No. There were two others but they didn't have the same kind of talent I had. Do you remember the name Ruby Elzy? Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. Speaker 1: She died not too long ago and then there was another student. Speaker 2: Who was a gentleman? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: The other student was a boy or girl? Speaker 1: No, there was a boy there, but he didn't come into that, until much later. There was another girl. I have forgotten her name. But Ruby Elzy and I were good friends. And she was a bit jealous because I was the one who always came out a little bit ahead. Speaker 2: So we're going to talk about your time, the time we spent at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York], the school, and I have name, to see if you, Ms. Dunham. Speaker 1: Yeah, Lucia Dunham, Lucia. She was my main teacher and the main singing teacher in the whole time I was at Juilliard. And then before I left, I met Lotte Lehmann and I said to Mrs. Dunham that I have met Lotte Lehmann and I would like to take some lessons from her because she was very famous singing all kinds of operas. And I'd like to have some lessons with her and I remember that Lucia Dunham she stiffened and she said, "Well if you go to her, take lessons, you can never come back to me again." And I was shocked that I'd never heard of such a thing. She should say, she should say, I thought, "Yes take some lessons from her and we'll go on." No, I really was shocked, I can feel the shock even now. And then I said to myself, "I am not going to let anybody tell me where to go and when to go and that I can't come back to them. Okay if that is the way you want it (gesture)." So I waited a little while, a couple of weeks maybe, and then I took some lessons from Lotte Lehmann. And, strangely enough she lived in the same hotel that I lived in New York [New York]. Silly because then I was--I can't go into those details. But I worked with her awhile and I saw how good she was and understood. And then after-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I've always had the feeling that she meant so much to you, more than just a singing teacher. Speaker 1: Who, you mean Lotte Lehmann? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That she became somewhat close to you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. We became good friends which Lucia Dunham never did because she was another type but she was a good teacher and basically I got my training of my voice and all from Lucia Dunham. But then when I went, when I studied for awhile with Lotte Lehmann I went to see Lucia Dunham and said, "Can't I come back now and go on with you?" She said, "No." So I said, "Okay if that's the way you want it." So I continued on with Lotte Lehmann. I didn't lose anything by it except a kind of close friendship but she was determined that she wasn't going to let anybody leave her for somebody else and then think that they could come back whenever they wanted to--that was that. And that was the last time I saw her. Story_ID: 358256 Speaker 1: We were just thinking about Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and how, how did you come to know about Juilliard as a school. Speaker 2: Well everybody knew about that. Juilliard was the most famous music school in America and certainly in the North. There might have been something in California or Chicago [Illinois] or something but Juilliard was top. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It is today. Speaker 2: As it is today. And when I said to my father [Harry Brown], "I want to go to Juilliard but of course I have to pay." "That's okay we'll manage it. You go to Juilliard." I did. Speaker 1: Where did the, what were the other sisters doing at the time. Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: Your other sisters, where did they go to school? Speaker 2: Well my sister Harriet [Harriet Brown] who is Mayme's [Mayme Brown-Wheatley] twin, five years younger than I am, she went to Teachers High School [ph.] where she studied to be a teacher, and Mayme went to Howard University in Washington [D.C.]. Harriet and Mayme, and Henrietta [Henrietta Brown], the one who is next to me in age, where did she go? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Laughter) I wasn't there. I can't help you mommy. Speaker 2: But none the less, they all, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She took, she-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): They all were academics. Speaker 1: She didn't, she didn't go to college, she became, I cannot explain. She took lessons to teach, she became a teacher and on the side she had physical education. I can't remember all those details. Story_ID: 358257 Speaker 1: Well, I also read that you said about Mr. Wilson [William Llewellyn Wilson], I'm jumping back a little, Mr. Llewellyn Wilson. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That his productions, those high school [Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland] productions were almost professional in the way he executed them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, they were, oh yes, they were. He was such a good teacher and he had such a sense of humor. It was fantastic. Speaker 1: One of the other students I think at that time was Avon Long? Speaker 2: He was a student at that time, yeah. We went to some of the same classes. Had some of the same teachers. And then, always parted and then we came back again in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]. Speaker 1: And you helped get him in that role. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. Yeah. Speaker 1: So you were always singing and vo- taking vocal lessons and playing the piano. During high school can you remember some of the high school productions that you were in? Speaker 2: (Cough) I can't remember the names of them (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. But you were the lead. Speaker 2: In many cases, most cases, yes. (Cough) He's tired now (gesture). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Was Avon, were there any other black students? Speaker 2: Ruby Elzy and another, one other student, and Avon Long, and me. Speaker 1: The four of you. Story_ID: 358258 Speaker 1: We're just talking about like race, racial, race relations was there any racial animosity (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York]. They were much above that. They were musicians. Many of them were not from the United States at all. They were from Germany, or from Italy, or so on. There was no problem there and I won the highest honors, so that was that. Speaker 1: Were the other students, were they as fair skinned as you or were they dark skinned or none of that mattered at Juilliard? Speaker 2: If they were what? Speaker 1: If they were dark skinned or fair skinned or that simply never mattered in-- Speaker 2: Only that Ruby Elzy- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Avon Long. Speaker 2: Avon Long didn't go to the Juilliard, but there was another girl student who was there who was, had a mezzo soprano, had a contralto voice. She was good, but she wasn't as free. She came from a very conservative family, you know. Well, I can't remember her name. Story_ID: 358259 Speaker 1: So when you were performing at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York] did your parents ever have the opportunity to come up and see you? Speaker 2: Oh yes, of course. My father [Harry Brown] and mother [Mary Wiggins Brown], my mother and father both came to as many plays as they could. Yes. Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about how proud of you they were? Speaker 2: Oh, no. That would have been a disgrace. No, they just said, "Do your work now and so when you get up there to sing you would be doing it right." (Laughter) No foolishness. Speaker 1: So they were very serious people. Speaker 2: Very? What did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Serious people. Speaker 2: Oh yes, they were very serious, absolutely, much too serious now, when I think about it and think back over it. Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about what it meant to be black at home? Did they say, "Okay now you're black and there are certain people that are going to treat you a certain way because you are and you have to--." Speaker 2: Well, they might have mentioned it, but it was never an issue. They might have mentioned it. They didn't say black- Speaker 1: Negro. Speaker 2: Yeah, or colored. Speaker 1: Colored. Speaker 2: One or the other. Story_ID: 358260 Speaker 1: As a child were there ever any incidents where people may have made you aware of the fact that you were colored or Negro in Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): When you were not admitted at, was it the Peabody [Peabody Conservatory of Music; Peabody Institute, Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 1: That wasn't why I wasn't admitted. Well, you see, first (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) You, you won a contest and when they realized that you were Dr. Brown's [Harry Brown] daughter, they realized that you were a colored person. Speaker 1: You know I don't remember that. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You had to step down and when we went back to Baltimore five, six years ago and they gave you an honorary-- Speaker 1: Key to the city, citizenship- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, no, no, of the school, and you gave a fantastic speech. Speaker 1: What did she say in the speech? Speaker 2: I've forgotten myself. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, so, it was, it was wonderful because you had worked so hard on the speech. I don't think I've ever been so impressed with you and I've been impressed a lot up through the years with your singing, but not that kind, it was a completely different situation, Mommy. You and I went to Baltimore, don't you remember? Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't remember the details of it. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But the thing of it was in such a fine way you ended by saying, "That once upon a time I was not admitted, but I'm here now." And everybody roared, the students got up and clapped, applauded. And they thought it was wonderful. The way you turned that around was genius. Very good. Speaker 2: I am a genius. I can't help it (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Aye, aye, aye. Speaker 1: Well, we'll let you go. Speaker 2: Yeah, I have to go down and eat. Speaker 1: But can I just ask you, do you, do you sing to yourself at all anymore, do you sing now to yourself? Speaker 2: No, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. Never. Well before-- Speaker 2: Not when you're ninety-four years old. Speaker 1: But even at ninety-four, when I, before I leave you have to sing me something. Speaker 2: Oh, you are crazy. I'll put on a record for you. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 358261 Speaker 1: (Playing piano). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (Applause). Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Come again, one more, once again. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One more. One more please. Can we move the microphone very close to her? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): One more. How about 'The Man I Love'? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (Playing 'The Man I Love') Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Singing) "And he'll be big and strong, the man I love. And when he comes my way, I'll do my best to make him stay. He'll look at me and smile. I'll understand, and in a little while. He'll hold my hand. Ba dum, ba dum," come on mommy, help me with the lyrics. I've forgotten them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've forgotten them too. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Singing) "Maybe I shall meet him--." Speaker 2: I can't, I can't, my fingers don't work anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. We'll try next time. Speaker 2: I love playing that, but I can't do it. I'll try to practice overnight so tomorrow I can play. Story_ID: 358262 Speaker 1: Today is November 17th [2006], continuing the interview with Mrs. Anne Brown [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] in Norway, and we will talk about as much as you can remember today about your adult life, your career. And Paula [Paula Schjelderup] is here to help us also. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I will try. Speaker 1: To guide us through. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a lot I have- I can't remember though. You must understand that. Speaker 1: Oh, perfectly, we understand so that's what, we'll accept whatever, whatever you have. Story_ID: 358263 Speaker 1: But going, continuing with Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York], because that's where we left off yesterday, at, when you were at Juilliard. You, there you read in the newspaper while you were at Juilliard that Gershwin [George Gershwin] was writing 'Porgy' ['Porgy and Bess']. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So tell me about, tell me the story of reading it in the paper and what you thought about being a part of it. Speaker 2: Well, I read it in the paper that George Gershwin was writing this opera based on, who wrote the story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dubose Heyward. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Dubose Heyward. Speaker 2: Dubose Heyward wrote the story? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: I'm glad you told me. (Laughter) I'm glad you reminded me and I telephoned and got his secretary on the phone and said I would like to come and sing for him and get a part in the opera. She said, "Yes, come the next day or the day after," which I did. And I found him a charming and knowing man, music, and with a sense of humor. So, he said, "Can you come tomorrow and sing for my brother?" Speaker 1: So you met Ira [Ira Gershwin] as well? Speaker 2: I met Ira, of course, Ira was his right hand. And then two days later, I had to sing for someone else, don't ask me who the other person was, but it was one of those who-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Then you sang something acappella to show him that you were trained in the classic condition. Speaker 2: Oh, I sang classical music the whole time. I had a pianist and I sang opera and so on. And very little jazz, because I didn't sing jazz (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) But I mean, I think when you sang for Gershwin-- Speaker 2: That's what I'm talking about. Speaker 1: I read also that towards the end, he asked you to sing a Negro spiritual, a gospel song to see how you handled gospel music. Speaker 2: Yes. Well, I must have done it (laughter). And then, it was very strange because every time I visit, Gershwin would say, George would say, "Come back in two days, or tomorrow can you sing for this person, that one?" Well, I sang for all of New York [New York] individually, you know. Speaker 1: And then he-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And then you asked to sing 'Summertime' although that was Clara's song (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, that wasn't written yet. I mean after all he hasn't written the opera yet. He just has a outline and those days, it was very, very early in the picture of his writing, and doing that, but oh yes, he asked me to sing Negro spirituals, and, I don't know about gospel music. I've forgotten how to use those terms now, gospel and Negro spiritual-- Speaker 2: I think there are about the same. Speaker 1: Everything goes together. Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: So, if you say, "Yes, ma'am," anymore you are going to make me feel like an old, old, old (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: --lady. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. I will simply say, "Yes." Speaker 1: Not just ninety, not just ninety, but ninety-eight. Speaker 2: I only do that because I'm from the South, you must understand (laughter). Speaker 1: I know you are and it is so charming (laughter). I'm just teasing you now, I hope you understand that. Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Story_ID: 358264 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it was at this point, he, the opera was only referred to as 'Porgy' and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --it wasn't 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]. Speaker 2: Yes, he hadn't-- Speaker 1: So, you would go once a week to sing for him in his home. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's right. Speaker 1: Now did you have any input about what he was writing? Would you say to him, "I think this is great or it isn't so great?" What was your role in the making of the opera? Speaker 2: Well, you must remember that I was very young and I was a--school student and so on, and I didn't dare to say too much, but I had my opinions and I said for the most part what I meant and of course I was very enthusiastic, because I had admired Gershwin's [George Gershwin] music from long back when I was even younger. Well, I don't know where should I go from here? Speaker 1: Well, I'll ask you this, what did the other students at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York] think about what you had done by contacting Gershwin and getting an audition and now going weekly to sing for him. What did the teachers and students think? Speaker 2: Well, there were two particular students, one was Ruby Elzy, who had a major part in 'Porgy and Bess,' and the other was another Harlem [New York, New York] girl, a little bit older than I was, I think. She also came and sang, but she never had an important part in the opera. I think she sang in the chorus. And I can't-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): How did the other students react? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know how they reacted. I don't know that they knew what I was doing. I mean, they had their little business. Gershwin was not as famous then as he was later. You must remember that George Gershwin, okay, he writes music. Does this make sense? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Yes, it does. Speaker 2: Because I mean I see that I'm stumbling along and I've forgotten lots of things (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no. It's making sense. So as he is writing the opera and it-- Speaker 2: And his brother, of course, was brought in on every occasion, and he said yes or no, or whatever he thought. Ira [Ira Gershwin] was George's, what do you call your phantom. I mean someone who is with you all the time? Speaker 1: Muse? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Second nature. Second nature. Speaker 1: No, I don't call it that, but I mean Ira, George depended completely on Ira. I mean they would toss ideas back and forth, but he listened to whatever Ira had to say and so on. Speaker 2: Do you know how much, how much time you spent going back to him before the opera really started to take shape? Was it several months? Speaker 1: No, how can I remember that? How can anybody who is over ninety years old remember such details? I suppose people can, but I can't in any case. But I came very often. His secretary would call me and say, "Miss Brown [HistoryMaker Anne Brown], can you come tomorrow at two o'clock?" or come on and so on. Speaker 2: So when you heard 'Summertime,' when you sang that for him for the first time, you must have really thought it was a beautiful piece of music? Speaker 1: Well, remember, 'Summertime' was not Bess' music. I mean Bess, that was a lullaby and it was sung by-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Clara. Speaker 1: --Ruby Elzy [sic. Abbie Mitchell], I think, but of course it was a lovely tune and I took it on very soon. And-- Speaker 2: So the day he called you and asked you to come in and said that he was actually giving that song to you to sing as opposed to Clara. Do you remember how that made you feel? Were you-- Speaker 1: Oh well, I must have been very proud that he was going to have me in the opera at all. Story_ID: 358265 Speaker 1: I have a few notes about the original cast members [of 'Porgy and Bess,' George Gershwin], some of the names of the people that you worked with. And we'll see if, just talk about some of those people that were in the original cast with you. Yesterday we saw some of the, I saw some of the photographs. So you worked with Todd Duncan? Speaker 2: Oh yes, of course. As a matter of simple fact, I was one of the first people who mentioned Todd Duncan to George Gershwin. I probably came and sang for George first and said, "You know there is a baritone who is a fine voice, and a great, and a musician and so on who teaches at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]." "Oh yes," said George Gershwin, "I know about him, I'm getting in contact or he is coming tomorrow or the day after." So I mean I mentioned Todd's name at the same time that I talked about myself. Speaker 1: And then there was John Bubbles, he played, he played Sportin' [Sportin' Life] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't know him. He was a completely different kind of music, I mean he sang jazz that was really jazz you know and-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Was that one of the Nichols brothers [sic.]? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Bubbles, isn't that one of the Nichols brothers [sic. HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas] that went to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] later on? Two dancers? Speaker 2: I know the Nichols brothers, but I'm not sure-- Speaker 1: He might have gone to Hollywood. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Bubbles and-- Speaker 1: Buck and Bubbles. Buck [Ford L. "Buck" Washington] was his partner, but they were not related. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, I see. Speaker 1: And they had a little team called Buck and Bubbles. And Bubbles was a-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And they were tap dancers. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): They were tap dancers. Speaker 1: Tap dancers. Yeah, yeah, exactly. You've got a good memory Paula [Paula Schjelderup]. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It's not so much the memory as it is the old Hollywood films that help me. Speaker 2: Oh really? Oh, I ought to see some of them. Speaker 1: Abbie Mitchell. Speaker 2: Abbie Mitchell, sang 'Summertime.' She was the one who introduced 'Summertime,' because she was the matron, I mean the mother figure, an older woman, of course. Speaker 1: She was playing the role of Clara. Speaker 2: She? Speaker 1: Abbie Mitchell was Clara. Speaker 2: Clara, yes. Story_ID: 358266 Speaker 1: Now did you have any opinions about the way the African American characters in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] were portrayed? Did you have any feelings about it? Speaker 2: About what it would be a success? Speaker 1: Whether or not that, whether or not they were stereotypes, or whether or not they were portraying African Americans in a negative light? Speaker 2: Oh, no. No, no. Some people criticized Bubbles [John Bubbles] and said that was really taking it down to the lowest ebb, but no, no, no and I certainly, well, of course, you must understand if I want to be extremely exact, I would say that before I went into 'Porgy and Bess' I was a little bit snotty when it came to that kind of music, not Gershwin's [George Gershwin] music, but I mean Buck and Bubbles dancing and doing (unclear), that sort of thing. A little arrogant, that which I did was a much higher caliber of art than these other people, which of course it was. I don't know what else to say about that. Story_ID: 358267 Speaker 1: What did your father [Harry Brown], how did your mother [Mary Wiggins Brown] and father feel about the role? Speaker 2: My father thought it was a disgrace for me to get up there and perform with Bubbles [John Bubbles] and those others, but of course he accepted it too and realized that it was genuine, it was, I don't know if I can use the word negroid in a good way. He thought it was okay since it, but he was a little snotty and that his daughter was on the stage with these other-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It just struck me that maybe he didn't like the fact that you were portraying this woman, Bess, who after all was not a Sunday school teacher. Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. He didn't. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Exactly. That's what I thought (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That sort of thing, that's what I mean that he was a little snotty when it came to portraying Bess. I mean Bess, didn't Bess take a (gesture)-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That too, yes. I mean she was a streetwalker. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Bess was not a streetwalker. Not even in the play. I mean, this is so far back. My God, I can't remember, much of that I cannot remember. I remember that my father [Harry Brown] said, "Bess was a character on the stage," he, "wished his daughter had another role." That's the way he's put it. Story_ID: 358268 Speaker 1: So when, when Gershwin [George Gershwin] also told you that he was adding Bess to the title, so that you would share top billing with Todd Duncan, did that make you feel great? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I was delighted with that. 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], yes surely. Speaker 1: Did he say to you why he was doing that? Speaker 2: No. I don't, yes, he said, "Well there's 'Romeo and Juliet' ['Romeo et Juliette,' Charles Gounod] and 'Tristan and Isolde' ['Tristan und Isolde,' Richard Wagner], and the others, so why not 'Porgy and Bess'?" "That's just wonderful," I said. That's why he said it. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: He meant that he was putting it in the class with the greatest of the operas, 'Tristan and Isolde.' Story_ID: 358269 Speaker 1: On October 10, 1935 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] opened at the Alvin Theatre [Neil Simon Theatre] in New York [New York]. And opening night was your mother [Mary Wiggins Brown] and father [Harry Brown] in the audience? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Was your father delighted to see the entire production and what it was? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. That's going back a long way, but being an intelligent man, he couldn't think anything else. Speaker 1: So during, like in 1936, the show went to Washington, D.C., the National Theatre, that theater was segregated. Do you remember protesting having to perform before a segregated audience (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, I protested. Absolutely. Something happened, but I can't remember what it was. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): One of the reasons that you protested so fiercely, was that they would not allow your parents in. Isn't that right? Speaker 2: No, they allowed them in, but they wanted them to sit in a certain section. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I see. Speaker 2: But even still, segregating them, they wanted them in the balcony. Speaker 1: Yes, something like that. Speaker 2: How did you resolve, what, protesting, did that make them change the seating arrangements? Speaker 1: No [sic.]. Speaker 2: No. So you decided to go on with the show and the protest was enough to show that you were not satisfied. Speaker 1: Yes, I should say that. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I thought you said, this may have been something that I have dreamt, but I thought that you said you wouldn't perform. Speaker 1: That was later. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Okay. Speaker 1: That was something that came later, I don't remember exactly, but you put your finger on it. It was something that I said I would not perform. You're right, I had forgotten that. Speaker 2: Well, during the research what I found was that you said that you wouldn't perform until they made certain accommodations within the theater and those accommodations were made which allowed you to then go on with the show. Speaker 1: If I remember correctly, now and I think it is coming back to me, I said unless my parents and friends have the same rights to the seats that all the rest of the people have, I won't perform, and it was changed. They got what they wanted. Oh, I protested quite a bit in those days. Your time is running out? Speaker 2: What other things did you protest during those day? You said you protested quite a bit (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, that mostly and seating arrangements. Speaker 2: That mostly, and seating arrangements. Speaker 1: It wasn't exactly, I wouldn't call it seating arrangements, but-- Speaker 2: Segregation. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Segregation. Speaker 1: Yes, exactly, I'd forgotten the word. I didn't want any segregation when I was performing and I finally got my way because of course the intelligent people said, "Well, of course she's right, it's a tradition, and it's dangerous what she's doing, but she's right of course and we'll do it." Story_ID: 358270 Speaker 1: So during, this must have started, this 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] was one of the, was the start of your professional career on Broadway. You went on to do a play 'Pins and Needles.' Speaker 2: 'Pins and Needles?' I don't remember that. Speaker 1: Do you remember it Paula [Paula Schjelderup]? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): How could I? Speaker 1: Do you remember stories about it? Speaker 2: She wasn't born. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No she hasn't spoken of it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): She hasn't told me so much about that. Speaker 2: She wasn't born. Speaker 1: Yeah, because this was 1937. Speaker 2: When were you born Paula? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I was born in 1939. October. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, because you were born while 'Porgy and Bess' was going on, weren't you? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. Speaker 2: I think she was born while 'Pins and Needles' was going on, because it went on until June 22, 19-- Speaker 1: I didn't do anything in 'Pins and Needles' [sic.]. Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I had no connection with that at all. I don't even remember the title. Speaker 2: Do you remember 'Mamba's Daughters?' [Dubose Heyward and Dorothy Heyward] Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939]. Speaker 1: Yes, 'Mamba's Daughters'. That's probably about the time, when were you born? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939]. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Nineteen thirty-nine [1939], October. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. That's 'Mamba's Daughters' I was playing in and I remember I told Ethel Waters, I said, "I must have a leave of absence." She said, "What are you going to do, are you going go in another play, do another opera?" I said, "No, I'm going to have a baby." "Oh," she said, and that was in 1939. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I never knew that you knew Ethel Waters. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You never told me that. Speaker 2: Well, it just didn't come up. Well, she--but it wasn't 'Porgy and Bess.' Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, I realize that, it was 'Mamba's Daughters.' Speaker 2: It was 'Mamba's Daughters,' yes. Speaker 1: And the role you played in that was Gardenia. Speaker 2: Oh, it was a small role, but it was okay. It was, I can't remember. You know-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Who wrote the music? Speaker 2: I don't know. I've forgotten (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have it written some place. I'll find it and I'll tell you. Speaker 2: Well, you know, who wrote the music-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): 'Mamba's Daughters.' Speaker 2: No one man or woman wrote it. Speaker 1: It was a team. Speaker 2: It was, it was taken from different things, you know. Speaker 1: I see. Story_ID: 358271 Speaker 1: So during the time that you were doing 'Mamba's Daughters' [Dubose Heyward and Dorothy Heyward] you said that Paula [Paula Schjelderup] was born, but prior to that you had to meet Jack [Jacob Pettit], her father (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Father. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I had to what? Speaker 1: You met Jack, what did you do, can you, you met him? Speaker 2: Yeah. I probably married him while I was, we were married maybe just before 'Mamba's Daughters.' Speaker 1: So then, go ahead, were you going to-- Speaker 2: I mean it wasn't one of those things where I had to hurry up and marry, or anything like that. I just, we started going together and being sweethearts and what not and then, and then-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You were married. Speaker 2: And then we were married. Speaker 1: How did you meet him? Speaker 2: How did I leave him? Speaker 1: How did you meet him? Speaker 2: I had a friend with whom I shared an apartment. I don't remember whether it was before or after--Mary Richardson. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You sure you're not mixing up the husbands now, Mommy? Please don't be insulted but that's Florid [Florid Howard] you're talking about. Speaker 2: Ethel Waters? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, Flo. Speaker 2: Oh, no, he didn't come in at all. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But isn't that who--Mary Richardson. Speaker 2: Oh, no, much later. No, no, no, no. Flo came much later. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Flo is before Jack. Speaker 2: (Sigh) She knows my life better than I do. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Florid. Speaker 1: Yes, Florid was the first boyfriend I ever had. And that was just a boyfriend [sic.], you know. No affair. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That was through, and that was through Mary Richardson. You met him through Mary Richardson. Speaker 1: I met Jack through Mary Richardson. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Okay. Speaker 1: Flo I knew from school. He was studying medicine at, in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I never knew that it was due to Mary Richardson that you met my father, because I knew Mary Richardson also. Old friend of mommy's. Speaker 1: Yes, she (laughter), I met him through Mary Richardson and after I married him, and we began to have difficulties, I said to her one day, "Well, you introduced me to him." She said, "Well, I didn't intend for you to marry him." (Laughter) I'll never forget those words and her tone of voice. Isn't that strange? "I never intended for you to marry him." She meant just have an affair with him. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Have fun. Speaker 1: Have fun. Don't marry. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Well, he did a good job. Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: He really did a good job. Speaker 2: He did. So then Paula was born in 1939 and once she was born, I'm assuming it was time for you to go back to work after she was born. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: So in 1941 you did a solo performance with Beethoven's [Ludwig van Beethoven] 'Ninth Symphony' ['Symphony No. 9 in D minor'] at the NBC Symphony Orchestra. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Did I? Yeah, exactly. Story_ID: 358272 Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): And then the NRK [Norsk rikskringkasting], the Norwegian, Norwegian, Norwegian Broadcasting Company, of course, does have some tape but not, not as much as you would, one would hope and think. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): And then mommy, we have what I think, eh, 'Warum sind denn die Rosen so blass' [Heinrich Heine and Fanny Mendelssohn-Hensel]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): Let me hear it. Speaker 2: (Singing in German) "Warum sind den die Rosen so blass." Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): (Singing). Speaker 2: It's fifty years. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): (Singing). It is a very dramatic piece of music. Speaker 2: (Singing). Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): And then you have "Pleurez, Pleurez mes yeux" [from 'Le Cid,' Jules Massenet]. Speaker 2: Is that on there? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): Yeah. Speaker 2: My God. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): But you-- Speaker 2: Where's that been? Oh, Fin [ph.] gave it to you. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): We've had it on tape. I've had it recorded from the Norwegian Broadcasting Company that had these. But they still have, they have, they have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They probably still have them. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): They have, what they have on file is very, very little. And nothing of yourself and Robert Levin. No one seems to have thought that this would be important to keep. So there are some from your concerts with, with Olav Kielland in Bergen [Norway], the conductor. You have Greta Hagen [ph.]. And you have one, there's one sequence of you with Sir Malcolm Sargent as conductor. Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Yes, I remember it but I haven't got a copy of it. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): No, I don't think anyone has. But that would of course, it's possible to have that. Speaker 2: Would you like to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): (Simultaneous) Maybe we should, maybe we could, maybe we could play this beautiful 'Warum sind denn die Rosen so blass'? Speaker 2: Shall we play one of those? Speaker 1: (Whispering) If you want to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): (Simultaneous) Mommy? Speaker 1: If you want to, yes. Speaker 2: Let's play one. Story_ID: 358273 Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): Put the 'Nightingale' on first. And that will give you time, and you will hear the one that-- Speaker 2: (Recording of 'Nightingale') Speaker 1: Who's playing? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): Robert Levin. Speaker 1: Oh, I wonder if he's got that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I was a good singer. Speaker 2: You were a fabu- great singer. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: You see how I changed the voices. First I-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): What's so interesting is that you have the same voice. It's your voice. It's the voice that you have when you speak also. You don't go into some-- Speaker 2: (Recording of 'Nightingale') Speaker 1: She was a good singer. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): Yeah. Speaker 1: I'd forgotten. Speaker 2: (Recording of 'Nightingale') Speaker 1: See how the voice changes to illustrate--take these away. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISUCSSION) Speaker 1: (Recording of 'Nightingale') Speaker 2: (Singing) "Hear the mockingbird sing." Story_ID: 358274 Speaker 1: (Recording of 'Warum sind den die Rosen so blass') Speaker 2: 'Warum sind denn die Rosen so blass' [Heinrich Heine and Fanny Mendelssohn-Hensel]. (Singing in German). God, I haven't sung that in forty years. It's in there (gesture) somewhere, but a lot of it is gone. Speaker 1: (Recording of 'Warum sind denn die Rosen so blass') Speaker 2: I must get Robert Levin up here sometime. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): Robert's dead. Speaker 2: When? It's amazing that I'm still alive. So, so many of those people are gone. But everyday now when I get up in the morning and walk across the floor I feel oh God, I don't, I won't make it. I'm going to fall on my face. Speaker 1: (Recording of 'Warum sind denn die Rosen so blass') Speaker 2: (Singing). Story_ID: 358275 Speaker 1: (Recording of "Pleurez, Pleurez mes yeux") Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): There's more. Speaker 1: What was that? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): Don't you remember this one? Speaker 1: No, I didn't hear the words. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): It's French. Speaker 1: My French was good too. Speaker 2: (Recording of "Pleurez, Pleurez mes yeux") Speaker 1: Well, I can be proud of myself. I did some good work. I'd forgotten. What was the name of it, Vadal- no. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): This is from 'Le Cid' [Jules Massenet]. This is from 'Le Cid.' "Pleurez, Pleurez mes yeux!" Speaker 1: 'Le Cid,' yeah. (Singing in French) "Pleurez, pleurez mes yeux. Pleurez mes yeux. Tombez triste--." Oh God. The voice is so good, it moves up and down without any effort and it expresses what the thought is. Speaker 2: (Recording of "Pleurez, Pleurez mes yeux") Speaker 1: I must get, where did you get that record? You told me. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): I had this from an ordinary cassette tape, put it on the CD [compact disc]. Speaker 1: I must get them, I must get them to broadcast it. Can you make it a little bit louder? Just a tiny bit so I hear the words. Can you stand it? Speaker 2: (Recording of "Pleurez, Pleurez mes yeux") Speaker 1: I even remember the French now. Fantastic. (Singing in French) "Pleurez, pleurez mes yeux. Tombez--." I must get them to play this on the radio. Speaker 2: (Recording of "Pleurez, Pleurez mes yeux") Speaker 1: A little too spread. Toss it off, toss it off girl (laughter). Pleurez, you know what pleurez means? Cry. Weep, weep, weep my love. (Speaking in French) Pleurez, pleurez, mes yeux. Weep, weep, my eyes. Story_ID: 358276 Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You were a hell of a singer. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You were a hell of a singer. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was good. Speaker 1: She was great. You are great. Speaker 2: She was good. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's why I was saying that your, the span of your career was so short. It's such a tragedy. Speaker 2: Why was it so short? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, because of your, because of your lack of air, because you had asthmatic tendencies without it being asthma itself, but then who knows what is what. And the pressure of trying to be a, have a career, and be so self-centered as that, as you need to be when you are that type of an artist with your work and your music and to have a child, and a house and a husband and what not, maybe just was too much. Speaker 2: It was too much. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well anyway, you stopped singing and you started teaching instead. And I don't know of a single of your students who don't adore you, they're crazy about you. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): All your students. Speaker 2: Oh, students. Speaker 1: Students. Do you remember Mary Lucinda Dawson and the National Negro Opera Company? Speaker 2: Mary? Speaker 1: Lucinda Dawson. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): What year are we speaking of (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty-one [1941]. When-- Speaker 2: Paula [Paula Schjelderup] was only two years old. Speaker 1: Just wondering if you remember the National Negro Opera Company. Speaker 2: Very little. Speaker 1: Very little, very little. But your career went on for a number of years after, after the '40s [1940s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, remember that after I married Thorleif [Thorleif Schjelderup] and settled in Norway I had travel, traveled around a lot of the world, south and west, all the way to the coast and all the way to the south. I regret so much that I didn't travel to China and Japan or to Russia. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But you were in Finland-- Speaker 2: Oh, Finland. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And eastward Cairo [Egypt], you sang in Indonesia, you were in Bali [Indonesia]-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Paula. That's true. Speaker 1: Speaking of Thorleif, your, meeting him in Europe in Oslo [Norway] at one of your performances. Do you remember him sitting out in the audience? Catching your eye. Speaker 2: I don't know about that (laughter)? Where did you read that? Speaker 1: One of the bits of research, but did he come backstage after that performance? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was a concert. Yes, he came backstage and I almost remember the words he used. They're just on the tip of my brain, my tongue, let's see. (Pause) I had some good pictures of Thorleif. Speaker 1: Were you taken with him right away? Did you know that, did the romance start immediately? Speaker 2: Fairly immediately, yes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Whispering. (Singing) Whispering, while I scuttle near you-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Had you ever met anyone like that? Speaker 2: Like Thorleif? No, because he was an athlete and he was an intellectual. Thorleif gave some wonderful speeches and wrote very learned articles, Paula was Thorleif, besides being a ski jumper he was a, what do you call it? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): An intelligent person. Speaker 2: Very, very intelligent. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But he was a lawyer by profession (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was an educated lawyer. Story_ID: 358277 Speaker 1: So where was Paula [Paula Schjelderup] when you met Thorleif [Thorlief Schjelderup]? Speaker 2: I guess she was just a gleam in her mother's eye. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Not when you met Thorleif, Mommy, when you met Thorleif, I was in Switzerland. Speaker 2: Yeah, Paula went to school in Switzerland. Speaker 1: That was an amazing thing, I mean-- Speaker 2: You know, excuse me. Speaker 1: No, go ahead. Speaker 2: I had forgotten to say it, it was an amazing thing-- Speaker 1: To send an African American daughter to Switzerland to a boarding school was a very prestigious thing. Speaker 2: Well, I knew the people, the man and the woman who ran the school, I had met them before. Speaker 1: How did you know them? Speaker 2: Not so long. Didn't I? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, you had heard of them through your work with Wilhelm Reich. Speaker 2: Ah, ha. My God, you should write my biography. Speaker 1: How had you heard of them? Speaker 2: Through, what was he? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): He was a psychologist. Speaker 2: A psychologist, named Wilhelm Reich, world famous, and I don't know how I met him, but I met him and he told me there was a school in Switzerland and the only one he could recommend because the people were intelligent and so on. They wouldn't do any harm to children, like some schools you know. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It was a very progressive school for that day and age. Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): The name of the school is, I don't remember if it had any name (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait, wait, wait, stop a minute, stop. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, it was situated at a small, small village in Switzerland. Maybe that's the name you remember. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): The name is Plans-sur-Bex [Switzerland]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, that was the name of the place. The school didn't have any official name. Speaker 1: Plans-sur-Bex. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In the district-in the district of Bex, canton of Bex [sic.], B-E-X, in Switzerland. Story_ID: 358278 Speaker 1: So when, the concert that you were performing where you actually met Thorleif [Thorleif Schjelderup]. Was your first concert in Oslo [Norway]? You were performing for, wasn't it the king? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Now that I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. She was performing for- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No not performing for, she went to see the king. Speaker 1: She went to see the king. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You were invited to, you met Kong Haakon VII. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. He even came to one of my concerts. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Maybe that was the following year in the University Aula [University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway]. Was that then? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: So you meet Thorleif and the two of you decide to marry. And you, so at that point you decide that you are going to leave America and live in Oslo? Speaker 1: Well, not just exactly at that point, but I mean-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJEDLERUP): He means as time went by. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and-- Speaker 2: Were there any other particular reasons you were leaving the United States or that you wanted to leave? Speaker 1: No, wait. Let me go back a bit. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Paula [Paul Schjelderup] was in school in Switzerland and I decided that I would live in Norway even before I decided to marry Thorleif, at least I think so. And then I decided to bring Paula, of course. If I was going to live in a place-after all when you were in school in Switzerland I was traveling all over, South America, North America- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You had two large European, you had two large European tours. Particularly, that first year. You toured all over Europe. Speaker 1: And then when I came to decide to live in Norway, of course, I decided to take my daughter, Paula with me. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But don't you think you also chose Switzerland for me maybe out of a consideration for the racial difficulties that existed in the United States back then? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. Okay. I always thought so. Speaker 1: The difficulties that existed in the United States at that moment, hardly touched you. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But they would have eventually, as I-- Speaker 1: Well eventually, we don't know. Speaker 2: Why are you saying that they didn't touch her? They didn't touch her because you sheltered her from them? Speaker 1: Well, she went to an advanced type of school where there was no prejudice, no Negro prejudice. I don't know that there was another Negro student there or not, but I know that she was, it was a very good school, there was no racial prejudice there. I investigated that long before I sent her. You see, I found out where the school was, what kind of school it was, and what the traditions were and who else had been there, all that. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, but-- Speaker 1: And then Paula went there and (laughter) I'll never forget it was so funny, I can't remember now. Do you remember any of the teachers? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In Hessian Hills [Hessian Hills School, Croton-on-Hudson, New York]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. Speaker 1: Neither do I. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I remember that I was not allowed candy like the other children. Speaker 1: No, because your mother told them that we were not the sugar eating type. We didn't eat candy. I think one of the students stole some of your candy one time. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, no, I was the one that stole the candy. Speaker 1: Oh, you stole it from somebody (laughter) from one of the other students. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And then I remember being a-- Speaker 1: Punished. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Punished for that, but I cannot remember if that was because I had small pox or because I had stole. I know that I was grounded, as they call it today. I know that, I remember that. Speaker 1: That you were what? Speaker 2: Grounded. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Speaking Norwegian). Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Not allowed to-- Speaker 2: Grounded. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah, that's what they called it. Speaker 2: I thought you said drowned. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh no. Story_ID: 358279 Speaker 1: I mean 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], you went back and played the role of Bess several times throughout your professional career, and one time it was at the royal opera [Royal Danish Theatre] in Copenhagen [Denmark]. Speaker 2: Oh yes, that was a big performance, several performances there. Speaker 1: So do you feel you got better with the role of Bess over time? Because you started it when you were so young and you had the opportunity to play it for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, of course. Speaker 1: Did you bring a certain maturity to the role do you think later on? Speaker 2: Of course, I developed all the time. Speaker 1: How did your relationship with Gershwin [George Gershwin] progress? Did you continue to see him as you would play the role of Bess in these performances? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, whenever he came where we were playing. Although he died early, you know. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): He died in '43 [sic. 1937]. Speaker 2: He died in? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In '43 [1943], or '42 [1942]. Was it '43 [1943]? Speaker 2: It was, he died I think in '42 [1942] after the, yeah 1942, but actually you played the role of Bess again in '42 [1942]. Speaker 1: Yes, after he died. Of course, several times. Story_ID: 358280 Speaker 1: Once you started in Norway, you, your career started as a classical, doing classical recitals and touring. Your European tours-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and more opera. Speaker 1: And more opera. Do you, I read once that you said you perhaps didn't consider yourself an opera singer. Did you perhaps change your mind about that after listening to yourself, do you consider yourself an opera singer? Speaker 2: That's one of those crazy expressions. Opera singer. Well, if you think of the all-time opera singers, you know. I probably said something like that. I don't remember, or perhaps I meant that I sang more than just opera. I sang opera, and I sang recitals, and I sang Negro spirituals, and that's, what do you call that kind of music, what do you call that kind of music, Negro spirituals? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Just that, Negro spirituals. Speaker 2: Or gospel. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, Negro spirituals I would not call gospel. Speaker 2: Well some Negro spirituals are. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): All right, the way they were presented and the way people use them in concerts, they're certainly not gospel. Completely lack syncopation. Story_ID: 357712 Speaker 1: So, you performed operas, Gian Carl- the Gian Carlo M (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Menotti [Gian Carlo Menotti]. Speaker 1: Menotti. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In 'The Medium' [Gian Carlo Menotti], 'The Telephone' [Gian Carlo Menotti], 'The Consul' [Gian Carlo Menotti]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I've done a lot of operas. I had forgotten all these things. Not only did I do grand opera, scenes against small operas and so--but I did these small operas, too. Speaker 1: And, I read that you were one of the main reasons too, that attracted larger audiences to operas, in Norway, because it was failing at the time. And, in the 1950s, when you started to perform the Min- Menotti-- Speaker 2: Menotti- Speaker 1: The Menotti operas that you started to attract larger crowds again, to the opera. Speaker 2: Who told you that? Speaker 1: I read it. Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: I read it in, during, in my research. Speaker 2: Ah-ha. Speaker 1: Do you remember those operas? Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, definitely. I enjoyed doing them very much 'cause they were small, it wasn't grand opera. It was more personal opera. I mean, I don't know how to say that. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Intimate. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Intimate. Speaker 2: Instrument? Speaker 1: No, intimate, small. Speaker 2: Intimate. Yes, they were more intimate. Exactly. Speaker 1: And, your performance in 'The Consul' won you a prize, the Music-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The Music Critics Prize. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Best performance. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You remember receiving that honor? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: How did that make you feel? Speaker 2: Okay. As if I deserved it (laughter). Story_ID: 357713 Speaker 1: During the 1950s, a lot of racial turmoil was brewing in the United States. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: To what extent- extent did you know what was going on? Speaker 2: Of course, I followed the papers and the articles in Time magazine and so on; even though I was not there, at the time. But, I don't know, I cannot remember that there was anything I could do at the moment. Speaker 1: Well, certainly, did you ever travel back to America to where, as you had to live under these segregated laws like there were certain restaurants you couldn't go in or, did you ever experience that personally? Speaker 2: I remember one or two things. I was traveling on the train, in one of the southern states. I don't know if it was Alabama or New Orleans [Louisiana] or where. And, I was on the train, and a Negro waiter came into the car. Because you see what, the thing, the funny thing was that being the color that I am, I was able to slip by. Nobody noticed me and they didn't see that I was colored or Chinese or anything else. So, I just bought a ticket and went and sat in the car. But, I had visited a Negro college [HBCU] where I got on the train and there were a lot of students who had come down to the train to see me off. And the conductors and the waiters saw and realized who and what I was, or, maybe they asked some of the students. So, I went in, I bought an ordinary ticket because actually I hadn't traveled in the South, and, certainly, not alone. And, so, I ordered coffee or tea, maybe it was dinner and then a waiter came in and said, "I'm sorry but you can't eat in here." "Why not?" I said. I didn't think about it. "Well, aren't you, weren't you visiting those pupils at the school, college?" "Yes." "You are one of them?" He was very careful how he worded it. "Yes." "But, I'm so sorry. It's against the law for you to sit in here." And, I said, "The hell with the law, bring me a cup of tea or coffee or whatever it was." And he said, "I may get fired." "No, you're not going to get fired. Bring me a cup of coffee." So he brought a cup of tea and some crackers, not a dinner, but a cup of tea or something. And, I ate it and I said, "Thank you." I gave him the money and a tip and so on. That was one of the few times that I suffered pred- from prejudice in a public place. And, I was ready, I was so mad because I had just come back from Finland and Norway. I wasn't used to being treated like that and I wasn't going to take it. Somebody said to me, afterwards, "You did a very dangerous thing. You could have been lynched." And, I said, "Well, I took a chance on it (laughter)." They gave me my cup of tea and that was all. And then he never came back to my place again. I think he even sent in another one to take out the cup. And, when I got to the next, wherever it was I was going, I don't even remember where it was South Carolina, North Carolina, Kentucky, or, it was one of those states there. And, because they, I was with the Negro students from this college, in that way, they identified me because otherwise, I'm sorry to say, not glad to say this, I could just pass. I didn't ask for anything to eat. I just bought a ticket and sat in the car and went on where I was going and that was that. And, sometimes, black people met me at the train and some of the others looked at me like that, "Well, I'll be damned. I didn't know that she was also a Negro." Yeah, that was that. I got off and went to the next place but then I went back, came back to Norway afterwards and there was no prejudice. Story_ID: 357714 Speaker 1: I'm assuming your life was quite different, in Norway, as far as, as far as race. Speaker 2: As far as? Speaker 1: Race. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Of course (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Being a Negro. Speaker 2: Of course. I was just a person, like everybody else. And, I never had any feeling about it at all, about myself being this or that or the other. I just got mad when somebody tried to push me in the face, you know. Or, I'm trying to think of a word, because I wasn't ashamed, not the least bit. As a matter of fact, I was even proud that I had the money to travel, in first class, like everybody else. Like everybody else. And-- Speaker 1: Well, maybe not like everybody else, but like the white people that were traveling first class. Speaker 2: Yes, that's what I mean. Yeah. (Pause) Who's that? Paula [Paula Schjelderup]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: What are you doing? Speaker 1: So, when you were, you came back to Norway after that, I'm sure you saw or read in the papers or saw on TV what was happening in the United States as far as the fire hoses, the dogs-- Speaker 2: I can't, I can't remember the--say that again, when I came back to Norway after having suffered-- Speaker 1: That experience (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That experience, in America, and then what? Speaker 1: Then I mean things became more heated, in America. I mean after, you know, things, people started to, black people started to fight-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In a sense. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: For equal rights. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Being so far away from home, you being so far away and being so far removed, did you have any feelings about what they were doing? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Of course. I was furious half the time or all the time and, but what could I do? Here I am, thousands of miles away from that. I think I even wrote some articles or certainly gave some interviews to Time magazine or something like that. Story_ID: 357715 Speaker 1: Did you keep in touch with Todd Duncan? Did you have a relationship with, I mean as far as a friendship with him (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. Yes. I had a friendship with him and his wife [Gladys Duncan] and his son [HistoryMaker Charles T. Duncan]. Speaker 1: Did you know other Negroes who were opera singers or classical, into classical music, as well? Speaker 2: A few. Speaker 1: Who were they? Can you remember-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Some of their names, that you may have been friendly with. Did anyone ever come over to visit you, in Norway? Any of your American friends? Speaker 2: I don't know. Mary Richardson came once. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, that was fun. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): She was a fun person. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): She was much older than you, but, then, of course, I know that Felicia Weathers and you became friends when she came to perform. Speaker 2: Sing-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, here, in Oslo [Norway]. I don't know if you ever knew and met Leontyne Price. Speaker 2: Did you know Leontyne Price (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Leontyne Price. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: Because she also took up the role of [Bess in 'Porgy and Bess,' George Gershwin]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Yes. Sure, I knew Leontyne Price. Of course. I don't know where, we knew each other very well. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You might have met when you went back, to the United States, in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: I don't remember. Sorry. Story_ID: 357716 Speaker 1: Let's talk about you decide to, I mean you retire from, or you become a teacher, a voc- a music teacher. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Was there a particular reason? Was asthma the reason that you stopped touring and performing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No. Speaker 1: Why did you stop touring? You were so young. Speaker 2: How young was I? Speaker 1: Well, in your mid-forties? Speaker 2: When I started teaching? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah. In Norway, you must have started around '56 [1956], '57 [1957], when were back from Italy and when you were back from your South America, Argentine tour. I remember-- Speaker 2: Who was the conductor? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. When you started teaching, singing. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, can you remember who the conductor was? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In Argentina? No, I cannot, but, I remember whom your first singing pupils were here, in Oslo [Norway]. Speaker 2: Who was that? Speaker 1: Liv-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): One of the actresses. Mona Hofland. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Liv Ullmann. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Liv-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. Liv Ullmann, a little later. Speaker 2: Liv Ullmann. Speaker 1: Do you remember her as a pupil? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Sure. Seeing her up to, she's still alive, isn't she? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, yes. She's my age. Speaker 2: Did you know Ingmar [Ingmar Bergman], did you know her film work? When she was a student with you, was she also, an actress and working? Speaker 1: Yes. Oh, yes. She was an actress all along. Speaker 2: Did you ever have any other pupils that were famous actresses that-- Speaker 1: Yes, several. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Norwegian-- Speaker 1: Norwegian. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): --actresses, that is. Speaker 1: I can't remember their names. Story_ID: 357717 Speaker 1: Is it true that you also directed a Norwegian performance of 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], in the '60s [1960s]? Did you direct one? Speaker 2: Several. Speaker 1: Several. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, I just found an article in an old magazine and it's right on the tip of my tongue but I can't get it out of my head. (Pause) Forget it. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But was that in Norway, that production? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I can only remember the one you toured with an all-black cast. And you toured in France. You went to Toulouse [France]. Speaker 2: Yeah, but this is something that happened in Norway. I was looking at the writing about it, today. Damn it, if (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, you stay. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You stay. I'll get it. Speaker 1: We'll get it for you. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I'll get your book. I'll get your bag. Speaker 1: Yeah, give me that. (Looks through purse) I saw it a few days ago or yesterday or something. An article, 'Anne Brown Does the Regis Tour' [ph.], one of the big operas, I've forgotten. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, yes, but you did 'Butterfly' ['Madama Butterfly,' Giacomo Puccini]. You had the production of 'Butterfly,' 'Madame Butterfly'-- Speaker 1: 'Madame Butterfly.' Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): With a Norwegian cast and you toured in Norway with that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That I remember. Speaker 1: Was it 'Butterfly'? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. I can't remember because I mean Gershwin Foundation [sic. Gershwin Enterprises] doesn't allow anything but an all-black cast of 'Porgy and Bess.' Isn't that right? Isn't that correct? Speaker 1: Well, what I read is that, I mean it wasn't all-black but it was a Norwegian performance. Speaker 2: No. No, it wasn't an all-black cast. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Where you gonna get an all-black cast in Norway? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, that's why I never thought-- Speaker 2: Well, maybe that's just something that was a misprint. Speaker 1: I had this thing-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Concert-version that you did just four or five years ago, in Sognefjord, here in Norway. Speaker 1: It was a concert? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That was a concert-version. And, you told me that the Gershwin Foundation permitted it since you were doing the production. Speaker 1: Damn it, I-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Because it consisted of only Norwegian singers. Speaker 1: Well, that's okay. We can find it later. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We don't have to find it now. Speaker 2: Well, when I get an idea, I like to go right on, right on it, you know. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Opera (unclear) aria. That's in-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's an invitation. Speaker 2: That's in Oslo [Norway]. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Invitation. Let me take your bag. Speaker 2: I just had this-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, let me take your bag. Speaker 2: Oh, no. I'm still looking at it. No, I had this, 'Anne Brown Does the Regis for 'Tosca' [Giacomo Puccini].' It was either 'Tosca' or-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): 'Madame Butterfly.' Speaker 2: 'Madame Butterfly.' Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): 'Madame Butterfly.' Speaker 2: I had it this morning. Speaker 1: What were you doing with it this morning? Just looking-- Speaker 2: Looking at it (laughter) in this bag. Speaker 1: So, do you do that often? Do you often-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Look over things you've done. Speaker 2: No, once in a while, I'd say, but not often. It's strange. I had it this morning. I look like a dog going through a-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): But apart from the production at the Regis [ph.] of operas, your lieder repertoire and so on in Europe was very interesting. Story_ID: 357718 Speaker 1: You worked a lot with Robert Levin. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He was your main, he was your right arm, for a while, right? He was to you what Ira [Ira Gershwin] was to [George Gershwin]-- Speaker 2: (Hands photograph to Paula Schjelderup). It's just such a beautiful picture of Thorleif [Thorleif Schjelderup]. Speaker 1: That's his passport? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. That's his (speaking French) accreditives [accreditations] for being Italian, an Italian ski trainer. He trained the Italian ski-jumping crew in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Show it to Jordan [ph.]. Speaker 2: So, we'll move on. And, if you want to come back to looking for that, we will. So, that we can continue before you have to go off for dinner. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Those are my children. Speaker 2: Nice. We don't have much to go through before we actually record photographs, some of the photographs. So, in 1979, your autobiography was published and-- Speaker 1: Was It? Good (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Probably give Paula [Paula Schjelderup] the bag if you don't mind. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Because it's in the way, of his filming. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. I'm awfully sorry. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you. Very good. Thank you. Speaker 1: Better if I button this? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You don't have to. Speaker 1: 'Sung Frun Fransen Gran' [sic.]. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: The title of your autobiography. Maybe Paula will help me with pronunciation. Speaker 2: What is it? Speaker 1: It looks like, 'Song Free Frasen Gran.' 'Song Free Frasen Gran.' Right here. Speaker 2: Autobiography, 'Sung Fear--.' Speaker 1: We'll let Paula help us-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's a book I've written. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My autobiography, but, it's wrong there. They've made a mistake. Speaker 1: What's the title of it? Speaker 2: The title is 'Sang Fra Frossen Gren' [Anne Brown], which means a song from a cold section. Speaker 1: And, how did you come up with that title? Speaker 2: Maybe, I'll ask Paula. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I don't think so. I doubt it, Mommy. But, maybe you felt as if you were sitting on a frozen branch. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What does it translate to? What does it mean? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): The direct translation would be, song from a frozen branch. Speaker 1: A branch from a tree. And that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) So, maybe that's what you felt like? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Maybe that's what you felt like? Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Story_ID: 357719 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You are there with-- Speaker 2: Todd Duncan (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Todd Duncan. Speaker 2: Can you-- Speaker 1: And Smallens, conductor. Speaker 2: Can you just look at some of these photographs and-- Speaker 1: Alexander Smallens. This is a chorus that sang. This is Todd Duncan and me. This is a chorus. The mad shadows on the wall. And, that's Alexander Smallens. Yeah. Speaker 2: And, down in the corner. Speaker 1: Todd Duncan. That's Todd Duncan. And here's Todd Duncan and me and Smallens. Speaker 2: Now, it looks like you were making this recording at that time. Speaker 1: I guess I was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a big microphone. Speaker 1: Yes, I was. Speaker 2: And, you were in a studio. Speaker 1: And, this is a scene, you mean this is many, many years old? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. That's from, this was made-- Speaker 1: That's one of the early ones. Speaker 2: One of the early ones. Speaker 1: There were some later ones. It looked the same but I can tell the difference. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: I've got some better copies. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Wasn't there something else on there? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. This is what we had yesterday and the day before (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Looking Back, Looking Forward: Juilliard at 100 Years' [ph.]. Oh, yeah, that has very little to do with me. Oslo [Norway]. I didn't know all these things were on the piano? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah. Speaker 1: So, while you're looking through those, can I talk to you a little? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's me. Speaker 1: Ah, this is great-- Speaker 2: Painting. You see I painted, too. Speaker 1: Which apartment was this taken at? Where were you? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): This is Oslo, in the '70s [1970s]. She lived not far from where we are today. Oh, that's from '56 [1956], '57 [1957], that last picture. Speaker 2: So, what we will do is after we finish our conversation we will record all of these photographs and we'll have Paula [Paula Schjelderup] tell us what they are. Speaker 1: That's one of my best friends. Her name is Barbara [ph.] but I have two friends named Barbara. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And, they're both American. Speaker 1: And, they're both American and my friends say, I say, "I'm going out with Barbara tonight." "The black Barbara or the white Barbara?" One is your complexion and the other one is my complexion. Well, there's a picture of her. So, I say, "I'm with the black Barbara tonight." And they don't call it anything but that when they want to know. They just say the black Barbara or the white Barbara. I'm getting a little bit tired of it. Speaker 2: Of them asking? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Using that expression. Speaker 1: Oh, using that expression. Speaker 2: Yeah, using that expression. Her name is Barbara Erdegord [ph.] and the other is, here's the house I was born in. Speaker 1: My father [Harry Brown] added this front, the steps are extra. Speaker 2: Here is my dear, Thorleif [Thorleif Schjelderup], the poor dope. Speaker 1: So, do you remember doing a concert for Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] after he was assassinated? Speaker 2: If I remember doing a concert? Speaker 1: In honor of Dr. Martin Luther King, after his assassination? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember but if you say I did it, I did it. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You were in a musical festival in Bergen [Norway], which I believe is internationally-known. She did a spoken part. Speaker 2: Spoken word piece? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah by two Norwegian composers (unclear). That was in honor of Dr. Martin Luther King. That's just ten, twelve years ago. Speaker 2: My sister who died, Jacqueline [ph.], in California-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you remember the name? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Estes [HistoryMaker Simon Estes]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What do you remember about him? Speaker 1: Just that he was a good singer. One of the good singers. I didn't know that all of this was on top of the piano. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And Thorleif didn't come from Italy 'cause she was working so much (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know why I was broke. I was working. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): We'll you hadn't been paid. We had stayed in, we had stayed at (unclear) hotel first. Speaker 1: That's Paula's son. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah. He's good looking. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 357720 Speaker 1: So, I, you received some awards that I'm going to mention and have you just comment on them. In 1999, you were elected an honorary citizen of Baltimore [Maryland], the town where seventy years earlier you were refused a music education because you were colored. When they invited you back, to Baltimore, to give you an honorary citizenship-- Speaker 2: Yeah? Speaker 1: You remember that event? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What can you tell me about it? There's a picture of it. Speaker 2: I think that's a picture of it. I'm pretty sure. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It is. I was there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They gave me a medal. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I was there. Speaker 2: You remember writing an amazing speech for that event in which you ended-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the speech by saying-- Story_ID: 357721 Speaker 1: But, looking at the monitor, what do you think that is a picture of? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Don't you think it's a, one of those phony stage, you know, not from the production itself but when they take pictures just on the set. That it's one of that type of picture. Speaker 1: Yes, it from one those small operas. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, I see. Speaker 1: I mean, you know, the op- the different, the little operas I did. Speaker 2: Maybe, Mineto? What is it? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, no. Menotti [Gian Carlo Menotti] is years later. Speaker 2: It could be Menotti. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In New York [New York]? You see, here you are, you're a very young person. You are just a twenty-year old woman here. Speaker 2: My God, you all should have come ten years ago. Sorry. Speaker 1: Are you rolling? Speaker 2: It must be one of the early things, one of the early operas. Your memory is better than mine, pull out something. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, I don't know any operas, you know, except 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]. Speaker 2: Oh, just-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, that you did in New York at that age because here-- Speaker 2: Why must that have been New York? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Because this is the age of New York. You haven't been to Europe here. You haven't had me. So, it's got to be some early production. It might your last years at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York], maybe. Speaker 2: I thought I'd get a clue from this. That is a Spanish opera. It has something to do with a Spanish opera when I put that comb in my hair. Which operas did I do that were Spanish? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): None that I know of, in those days. We're talking about before 1940. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: He had a telephone call on his cell. Speaker 2: Oh, he did? He didn't just leave us. Speaker 1: No (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous). No. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, I'm here. I'm just-- Speaker 2: Okay, good, good. Do you sing? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I sing from time to time. Speaker 2: What did he say? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, he sings from time to time. Most people do, you know. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us who it is. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, this is you, Mommy, as you can see with that beautiful smile. And, you have told me that you are six months pregnant, with me, and this is some event that you and my father, Jack Pettit [Jacob Pettit], have attended. Speaker 1: Can you spell his name for me Paula [Paula Schjelderup]? Speaker 2: No, I-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I can spell his name for you, yes. Jack, of course, J-A-C-K. Speaker 2: His name is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) But, Petit, is P-E-T-T-I-T. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: What's his real name? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Repeat that. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: I said the Peabody Institute [Peabody Conservatory of Music; Peabody Institute], in Baltimore [Maryland], was one of America's best music schools, but when I applied for admittance, at first, I was denied admittance because of race. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah. And then they invited you back and you gave the honorary-- Speaker 2: Oh that was many-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And then this picture that we're looking at now is during the honorary-- Speaker 2: Many years later. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, in 1999, Mommy. This picture, where you have received the medal here and you gave this fabulous speech, thanking them for the honors. Speaker 2: (Whispering) I'm glad you remember (laughter). Speaker 1: I've given them away. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you repeat that? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): This is you. Can you repeat what you said (unclear) you're painting? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Repeat this, what you said about this picture when you see a picture. You remember where this is? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In your apartment, in Sondera [ph.], not far from here, at Montebello [Oslo, Norway], when you still painted. That's in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: I painted all the years when I didn't have anything else to do. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's Thorleif [Thorleif Schjelderup]. Speaker 2: You think that I don't know? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, I don't know-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Go ahead. Who is that? Speaker 1: That's my husband, the best husband I had, of the husbands I had and, very intelligent. And, what else can I say about him? He was a champion ski-jumper and he held many speeches, very intellectual. His father [Ferdinand Schjelderup] was a [Norwegian] supreme court judge and he turned his nose up that. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah, but he did take his law-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes, he had. He went through law school. That's true, but he had no intention ever of-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Practicing law-- Speaker 1: Practicing law. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. Speaker 1: But, his father was one of the, what did you, I call it, at first? Speaker 2: Supreme court. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Supreme court judges, one of the supreme court judges. Speaker 1: Yes, supreme court judge. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) With the old album, with 78 records, from the original-- Speaker 2: Okay, can you repeat, start again. Where, when was it taken? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, at the last apartment before she moved here, but, this picture was taken about ten years ago, in the apartment, in  skar Skalter [ph.]. And, you know, the old album when this 78 records--the breakable ones. Speaker 2: You know, I've got some of them here. Aren't they in there? Speaker 1: We got to keep going. Speaker 2: (Laughter) [HistoryMaker] Anne Brown with the king [Harald V of Norway] and queen [Queen Sonja of Norway]. When was it taken? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): This was taken in the VIP room in the Norwegian opera [Oslo Opera House], the last time there was a 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] production, here, in Oslo [Norway]. And, it was the Harlem Choir or Harlem-- Speaker 2: Boys Choir [Boys Choir of Harlem]? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, not Boys Choir but the Harlem something or other. Their production of 'Porgy and Bess' and the king and queen were there. And of course, they invited Anne Brown into the VIP room and had their picture taken. Speaker 2: How can you remember all these things? When, in the most-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Because when you were sixty-seven, you would have remembered them also just as I do today. It's as simple as that. What on earth is this, Mommy? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Unclear). Nothing these pictures. That's Mommy from the left there, anyway. Her younger twin sister, in the back, Harriet [Harriet Brown], and then there's Henrietta [Henrietta Brown], on the right. Speaker 2: I hope you're right. I need my glasses. Henrietta? I don't know who that is. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): You. Speaker 2: Don't tell me. That is not me. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Can we go to the next picture? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm just going in closer. Speaker 1: That is not me. I never had a cheek like that. Who is that? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Harriet. Speaker 1: Harriet, my younger sister. And, who is that? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's you. Speaker 1: That's not me. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Can you identify people by their position the picture, left, right, center. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Left, Anne Brown left. Harriet Brown, in the back-- Speaker 2: In the middle-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And, then, Henrietta, on the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you. Speaker 1: But, I deny that that is Anne Brown to the right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What are we going to do with that? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): There are the two of them, then Henrietta, on the left, and Mommy, to the right, Anne Brown, to the right. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And, here we have Henrietta, to the left, her husband, George [ph.], or Goofy, as he was called, and little sister Hen- Harriet, on the right. Speaker 2: Who died not so long ago. Speaker 1: That's Harriet's husband? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, Henrietta's husband. Here we have the four Brown girls, the Brown sisters, with Henrietta, from the left, Mayme [Mayme Brown-Wheatley], and Harriet, the twins, and Anne, on the far right Speaker 1: That's right. How can you remember all this? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Now, this is another little family gathering. We have from the left, a picture of myself, Paula. Then there is Andres Wheatley, my uncle married to Mayme Wheatley, my aunt and Mommy's sister, and Anne Brown, to the right. This picture was taken in the Wheatley residence, in Paris, France. Speaker 1: We do get around, don't we? Story_ID: 357722 Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): This is, can you remember my age, in this picture? Well, I happened to know because Mayme [Mayme Brown-Wheatley] has written on the back that it's taken in June of 1944. So, I'm going on five, here. Speaker 2: You sure are grown-up looking, and determined, and all. Speaker 1: Okay, Neculai [Neculai Burghelea], I'm changing. Speaker 2: I must say we didn't like your father, Jack [Jacob Pettit], but he did a good job when it comes to you (laughter). Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Who do you mean when you say we? Speaker 2: I. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, Mayme told you to have fun but don't marry him. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Me and her, you can see that that's that same period, when I'm three, and if you have the picture of me on the set there. Where I'm sitting-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, this is? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): This is a stage picture, I suppose from 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): One of those, not during the performance but, you know, when they do stills from 'Porgy and Bess.' Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you it was taken in 1943. And it says launching SS Frederick Douglass, Fairfield, Maryland. Speaker 1: That is my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) You were christening, you were christening a boat here. Speaker 1: I know that's my father [Harry Brown]. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's in 19- 19-- Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-three [1943]. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Nineteen forty-three [1943]. Speaker 1: And, what is that picture underneath that, beneath that? Oh you can't see it, it's behind it actually. It looks like my navel there. Launching of the Frederick Douglass. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Isn't that the first boat to be named after a black person (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Black man. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah. Speaker 1: And this is Ruby Elzy who died not so long ago. And, she was the first to sing 'Summertime.' It was in her role that-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And, that's Todd Duncan, in the middle, and yours truly, on the right side there, about three years old or something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They look so fond of you. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yep. It feels good to look at the picture. Speaker 2: Yeah. Ruby Elzy died, about, what, ten years ago, I guess. She introduced you to-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Is that of any interest really. Speaker 2: Yeah, you as a child. Speaker 1: Paula [Paula Schjelderup]? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Was it, the woman in the photograph. Was what? Was the first to-- Speaker 1: Ruby Elzy. Wasn't she the first to sing 'Summertime'? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I don't really know what you're asking. Speaker 1: If Ruby Elzy was the first-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, if Ruby Elzy, was the first to sing 'Summertime,' in what context? Speaker 1: In the opera? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, does Bess sing 'Summertime' after the, Clara has sung it? Speaker 1: Yes, long after. Bess didn't introduce 'Summertime.' Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, she sings it later on after she's been sick and she's been allowed to hold the baby. Speaker 1: I'm glad you remember that because I don't. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Your truly and first dog, which was given to me, as a present, by your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): By your impresario, Frederick Dietrichsen [ph.], and the dog's name was Pluto [ph.]. Speaker 1: Pluto, that's right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): This must be taken in 1948, in the winter of '48 [1948]. The little family. Speaker 2: What's her talking about uniform? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yours truly, to the left; Anne [HistoryMaker Anne Brown], in the background, and my father, Thorleif Schjelderup, on the right. And, that's in our small apartment in the first house we lived in Vata Koln [ph.], outside of Oslo [Norway]. Speaker 2: God, how can you remember all these details? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: It's fabulous. She must have had a mother, a very smart mother. Hi, Paula. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Hi Mommy. Speaker 2: This is the only-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yes, well, I knew that he worked in the Amer- Norwegian embassy-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): In Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: But, I didn't know it was in Washington. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, in Washington, D.C. Now, here we have Thorleif Schjelderup in one of his ski jumps, very daring for that day and age (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No one jumped exactly like that. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): How about the (unclear)? Speaker 1: Where were you born? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In (unclear). Speaker 1: In (Unclear)? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Mrs. Brown, do you mind, do you mind looking at the monitor? Speaker 1: Yeah, I've looked at it many times. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And please do it one more time? And, who are we looking at? What-- Speaker 2: Thorleif Schjelderup in the famous (speaking Norwegian) skihopp [ski jump]. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And, it says here, on the picture- Speaker 2: One of his- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It says, Thorleif Schjelderup, number two in jumping and a new record, new hill record. Very daring-- Speaker 2: How can he be number two then, if it's a new record? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Because, in those days, they didn't give you points for length, extra meters, as they do today. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: What did you say? Speaker 2: That was my true love, Thorleif. And, he died on the same day as my very best friend, in life, Koren. What's his last name? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): His first name was Clausen. His last name was Koren. Speaker 2: No, that wasn't his last name. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, you only knew him for the last years of your life, Mommy. So, it's not so strange that you've forgotten his last name-- Speaker 2: His daughter was here yesterday, two days ago. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It was Claus Koren [ph.]. And, who are these people? You recognize any of them? Speaker 2: That's my daughter, Paula, and, isn't that Per Thunnis [ph.]? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's where I married. Speaker 2: Her first husband. That's at the wedding. He was a swell guy, too. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Now, who's this good looking fellow? Speaker 2: That's your husband. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Exactly. Speaker 2: That's the father of your-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): My two children. Speaker 2: Your two children. Speaker 1: Can you tell us when it was taken (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And a very, very nice man. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, yes. That picture was taken in 1960. Speaker 2: A very nice man and a good ski jumper. Speaker 1: That's your son. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, it is. Speaker 1: But, I've never seen that hair before. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, well he lets it grow and then he cuts it all off. Speaker 1: My grandson who lives, where does he live now? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): He lives in Hemsedal [Norway]. That's north of Oslo. Speaker 1: Is that me? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, it's me and Heide [ph.]. Speaker 1: I know its Heide. I know it's Heide. Heide is her daughter and my favorite grandchild. Well, all are favorites but she is very close to me. Speaker 2: It's a handsome guy. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, who is this? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): This is my father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her father-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Jack Pettit. Speaker 1: Her (speaking Norwegian) ekte father. Do you know what ekte is? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Biological father. Speaker 1: Her genuine father (laughter). You don't look much like him, as a matter of fact, but he was a handsome man. Story_ID: 357723 Speaker 1: I didn't have so much gray hair then. Speaker 2: Do you know about, can you remember taking that picture? Speaker 1: If I can remember what? Speaker 2: Do you remember that dress that you're wearing, in this picture? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: The 1940s, maybe. Speaker 1: No, I had so many clothes. Speaker 2: Many clothes. A closet full. Speaker 1: Yes and I still have, I don't wear them. Speaker 2: So, we're going to do the very last-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Reflections Jazz at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Okay, we're ready for the monitor. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Okay, let's talk about the celebrity couple who married in May of this year. Why don't you comment on the picture, Mommy? Can you, do you care to comment on the picture that they have on the screen now, Mommy, in Thorleif's [Thorleif Schjelderup] father's [Ferdinand Schjelderup] house? You and Thorleif there and you at the grand piano. You were on the front page of the magazine, Aktuell, which now of course doesn't exist anymore. But, you were the celebrity-- Speaker 2: Of the moment. Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Of the moment with that marriage in May '48 [1948]. It's a beautiful picture. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to end with the very best one. Chelsea [New York, New York], 6th Avenue and 20th Street. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go, ahead. What are we looking at, please? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, you are looking at [HistoryMaker] Anne Brown and her daughter, Paula [Paula Schjelderup]. And, this picture must be taken when I'm about two and a half, so, we're taking 1941, 1942 and-- Speaker 1: Is that Riverside Park [New York, New York] or Central Park [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I don't know. There are some flowers blooming on the side there. Looks like a magnolia. It must be summertime and we look like we're having a great time. Don't you think? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, Paula hasn't got on much. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And, that's your beloved teach, Lotte Lehmann, here. I have some pictures at home actually of you with her and when you visited her in California. Speaker 1: Yes, I remember that. Lotte Lehmann, but she was not my main teacher. I ought to have a picture of the other but I don't-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): The main teacher was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Lucia Dunham. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, but, she was at Juilliard School Music, wasn't she? Speaker 1: Yes, but what's that to say? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And, that's not so strange that you don't have a photo of her. That's not so strange. Speaker 1: Yes, it is because she was my main teacher. She taught me how to sing and she polished it up and all, if you know what I mean. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I do know what you mean, but it's not so often that you have pictures, you know, photos-- Speaker 1: So, Ms. Brown, I have a question for you. Speaker 2: Yes? Speaker 1: Do you think one has to be taught to sing or is that just a talent you were born with? Speaker 2: A combination. You're born with a talent, but you must learn to use your voice. First, of all, so that you don't wear it down by misusing it and, uh, well that's the story. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Take this picture. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's also Lotte Lehmann, but a much younger picture of her. Speaker 1: Yes, that's Lotte Lehmann. I don't know that it's much younger, but it looked younger-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, it's much younger than the previous picture that we saw of her, a much younger picture of Lotte Lehmann. Story_ID: 357724 Speaker 1: (Plays 'I Got Rhythm'). That should be enough. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh. Speaker 1: (Plays 'Love Walked In'). My fingers are very stiff. I can't play. I itch whenever they touch the keys, so excuse all mistakes. (Resumes playing). (Singing) "Love walked right in--." Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Applause) Thank you. Speaker 1: Bravo. Speaker 2: (Plays 'I Got Rhythm'). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is there any voice? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Singing) "I've got starlight, I've got my gal. Who could ask for anything more? Old man trouble, I don't mind him. You won't find him 'round my doorstep. I've got rhythm, I got my gal. Who could ask for anything more? Who could ask for anything more?" How about let's do for them one of the real oldies, Mommy. One you and Mayme [Mayme Brown-Wheatley] always used to sing, when Mayme would come up from Paris [France], for Christmas. Speaker 1: What would we sing? What would we sing? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Singing) "Miss Oda regrets she's unable to lunch today, Madam." Take it low, so that I can follow you. Speaker 1: (Playing piano) I don't remember the key. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah, there we've got it. (Singing). Speaker 1: No, madam. I can't. I have no notes. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Singing). All I can remember now is the dramatic part. Speaker 1: (Singing) "She's sorry to be delayed." Speaker 2: (Paula Schjelderup and Anne Brown singing). Speaker 1: You see, I forget and my fingers are not working. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That's very good for fingers not working. Speaker 1: 'I Got Rhythm.' (Plays 'I Got Rhythm') (Singing) "Who could ask for anything--." Story_ID: 357725 Speaker 1: So, Paula [Paula Schjelderup], I will have you, well, you know Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] and I. So, I won't reintroduce ourselves, but I will have you state your name and spell it out for me, your full name. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): My full name. My Norwegian name or my American name? Speaker 1: The one that you want to go on record. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, I think I'll use both my last names, both my birth name, which is Paula Anne Pettit. That's P-E-T-T-I-T; and then, of course, my Norwegian adopted name, which is Schjelderup, after my stepfather [Thorleif Schjelderup]. And, that's spelled S-C-H-J-E-L-D-E-R-U-P. Story_ID: 357726 Speaker 1: I will start, as we start with The HistoryMakers. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Probably lilac, like I'm wearing today. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Everything, lots of it. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Early fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Italy and then Crete [Greece]. Speaker 1: And, your favorite phrase? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It's a phrase from one of Henrik Ibsen's plays ['Peer Gynt']. And it means, more or less, all or nothing at all. (Speaking Norwegian) And to give you a translation that was, whatever you do, do it to full and not part. Speaker 1: Where did that come from? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I can't remember. Speaker 1: I meant was it something you chose to, something you live by? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It is definitely something that I live by and it has to do with honesty, which is very important for me. Story_ID: 357727 Speaker 1: So, we're going to start by talking about some of your fondest memories of [HistoryMaker] Anne Brown and some of your fondest memories of your mother (laughter). You decide who you'd like to talk about first. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, this is mixture. This is complex because I heard Anne Brown's voice before I saw the light of day. And, today, we realize and we know that the child in mother's womb hears music and registers beat. So I knew her voice before I was born and, I'm her oldest fan, living fan, I should say. And, probably my fondest memory, of her, is her voice. I think so. Yes. Speaker 1: Any particular aria or song of hers that really moves you or speaks to you in a way? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well to choose from the firsts, her first would be from 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]. And, probably 'Porgy, I's Your Woman Now' ['Bess, You Is My Woman Now']. And, after that, would be from her classical repertoire, the German lieder, preferably, 'An die Musik.' That would be Schubert [Franz Schubert]. There would be Schumann [Robert Schumann]. Those beautiful songs. Story_ID: 357728 Speaker 1: When, as a child, do, did you realize that she was a singer, that she was important to other people, that she was important to the world, that her music was important to the world? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Very late in my life. Very late because [HistoryMaker] Anne Brown was one thing and Mommy, that's something else. Now, as a child, I would focus on Mommy and Mommy wasn't Anne Brown. Mommy was Mommy. So, this is, this is, I don't think that I really understood the--until I was a teenager, say 17, 18, 19, 20 years old. And, that's late. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): But, you'd heard her sing? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, yes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, you know that she was professional singer? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, yes and I was very proud of her. I was proud of Anne Brown. Speaker 1: Did you understand that she was making any sacrifices or contributions or her being African American, she was a pioneer? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, I did not. Speaker 1: When did you, when did that register with you? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Extremely late in my life. I really didn't understand it until people started registering her for archives just as you, The HistoryMakers, the enormous focus on the fact that, as a black artist, she had made it. And, we're talking of the last twenty years of my life. Speaker 1: Well, what did you think of her as a teenager, as a young child? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, as I said, as a young child I admired Anne Brown with these extremely elegant dresses. Going away, coming back. The coming back, when she would come back, the smell, the commotion, the furs, the hats. She was an extremely elegant woman, good dresser. I was in my middle ages before I realized what had been going on. Speaker 1: What made you realize what had happened? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): As I mentioned, the interest-- Speaker 1: That other people had taken? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. When they came here to Norway. You have to realize that I've been outside, apart from the racial, whatever racial difficulties black people have had. I've not felt them. I've not experienced them. So, I've sort of been, I haven't taken part. I looked at, I've registered what has happened. My heart has bled, has gone out to people who have suffered, of course. But, it was not part of my life, growing up in Europe was, I'm a very fortunate person who's not had any of these and lived through any of these conflicts whatsoever. Story_ID: 357729 Speaker 1: Do you remember when you left America to go off to Europe to live? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. I remember very well. I was terribly sick on the airplane, terribly. I believe Mommy [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] let me have some champagne, to say that, that'll set her right. And, I was very sick landing and we landed in Paris [France] first and then, I believe we took the train, from Paris to this tiny, tiny little village, in the southeast part of Switzerland called Gryon [Switzerland]. That's in the canton of Bex [sic.], B-E-X. And, I thought everything was just great, just great. Outdoor living. Lots of walking in the mountains and I had, of course, already been away to boarding school before I left the United States. Hessian Hills School [Croton-on-Hudson, New York]. I believe it was two years. So-- Speaker 1: Where is Hessian Hills? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): New York. And, I think that I was very adaptable child. So for me, this was just another adventure. Story_ID: 357730 Speaker 1: So, did it feel like just the two of you, you and your mom [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] at the time? Did it, the world that you, like the immediate family. Did it feel like just the two of you? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, there was a third person very, very active in my life, my mother's young sister, Mayme [Mayme Brown-Wheatley]. Speaker 1: Now, was Mayme in New York [New York] at the time or was she already in Europe already? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I can't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Because I believe they came to, no, I believe they came to Paris, France, in 1947 the year after, so they came and lived, to live in Paris and they still are but Mayme and her husband, Andres Wheatley. They are my immediate family. Speaker 1: And what role did Mayme play in your life? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): An enormous role. Speaker 1: How would you describe the role? She was your-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): My extra mother. I'm her big baby-doll. Speaker 1: Who else helped to take care of you? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, there was the nurse, Willie [ph.], who I remember as a firm and warm and loving person. And, she was with us, I believe it was for only two years and then, I didn't see her again until 1961 when I went back to visit my father [Jacob Pettit], in 1961, yes. Speaker 1: What type of relationship did you have with your father? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): There was none, a combination of communications not being the best between my mother and him and, my concentrating on becoming a Norwegian, which sort of left him in a sort of vacuum. Speaker 1: Well that's-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I never went back to visit him as a child because there was this, as we know today the, I suppose, I don't know this but I believe that Mommy might have been afraid of, have been afraid of him keeping me there if I had gone back as a child to visit. And, in those days, going over the Atlantic Ocean, either by plane or by ocean liner was no little thing. So, I never went back and I was more interested in learning Norwegian, speaking Norwegian. And, he lost out. We both lost out on that. So, that there was no really contact and of course it was a shock for the both of us to meet again in 1961. When I was twenty-one years old and he hadn't seen me since I was a child of seven. And, he had remained in that, how shall I put it? Well, he didn't realize that I was a grown woman. At least, he didn't treat me as one and there was a bit of conflict there. Story_ID: 357731 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your other father. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Thorleif [Thorleif Schjelderup]. Speaker 1: Thorleif. Your first meeting. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, Thorleif had met Mommy [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] at her first concert and, of course, at her second concert, here in Oslo [Norway]. The first concert was in '46 [1946]. He must have been on one of the first rows. And, of course, he went back stage and he had flowers. And, he told her what a marvelous singer he thought she was. And, she was. Now, Thorleif Schjelderup came from a family of music lovers, a very intellectual family. And he, himself, loved singers. Not particularly sopranos but the tenors. He always played through my whole upbringing. He would play Enrico Caruso, Beniamino Gigli, and of course, his favorite, Jussi Bjorling. So, he loved singers and after he had met Mommy, after they had decided to get married, it just so happened that the Olympic Games [1948 Winter Olympics] in St. Moritz, Switzerland, was the same year that they were, had planned to get married but he had to do this Olympic thing, first. So, he did his Olympic thing. He won the bronze medal, in ski jumping. The other two medals, also, went to two Norwegians; both the gold [Petter Hugsted] and the silver [Birger Ruud]. He was the bronze. And, so, while he was in Switzerland, he decided to come and visit me. As he told me years later, "I couldn't marry your mother without you having met me first." Now, that tells something about that person. So, we met in Switzerland. We couldn't communicate because I had almost forgotten my English, in that one year, 'cause I then spoke French. He did not speak French. He spoke English and German, fluently. But, we had a great time that one day that visit. And then, I left Switzerland, in August and when I landed in Oslo, Norway that August to join the two of them after they had been married in May. There he was again, this nice fellow who had visited me. And, he is the father I know. He is the one who actively was a father and, was a wonderful person, a thinker, a movie-maker, a photographer. Held great speeches in Norway, toured Norway with his speeches. And, in those days, he wasn't showing films. He was showing stills. And, people would travel for hours to listen to him speak and he would talk about the philosophy of nature. And, he would talk about how we must look after our environment. He actually was an environmentalist before that was a household word, in Norway, at least. This is, this is the early '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 357732 Speaker 1: So, when you, when they [HistoryMaker Anne Brown and Thorleif Schjelderup] married in '48 [1948] and you moved over, to Oslo [Norway], then you had the opportunity to be in the house with them as she continued her career. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. That's correct. Speaker 1: So, she at that time, she continued to travel and sing. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, yes. She was gone all the time (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, then, you were old enough to know where she was going and what she was doing. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yeah, but, it was a lot of Scandinavia. It wasn't so far. It wasn't so very far. But, you know a child of ten, food, clothes, ma- and then out and play with the others. Speaker 1: When did you hear her music? I mean, you heard it as she sang in her belly. When did you hear it when you were old enough to register a record? This is my mom on this record. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, not so much that, but I know all about how sopranos practice because that I've heard. And, I've learned a lot about vocal training, as such through listening to that and I can go to sleep listening to sopranos do their scales. (Singing). That's just music to me. Speaker 1: So, she practiced in the house? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): She practiced in the house. Speaker 1: Well then, that's a great memory. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, it was. I'd come home from school and she'd be there practicing. Door closed. "Shush, Paula [Paula Schjelderup]." "Okay." Speaker 1: Did she practice for hours? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes, they would practice. They had sessions with practicing. Speaker 1: Who would come over to the sessions (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) Her, she had two. She had one rehearsal man whose name was Kare Siem. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for me? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That is K, and an A, with a ring over it, which is the Norwegian O. K- -R-E. And, then, his last name was Siem, which is S-I-E-M. But then, of course, her main (speaking French) accompagnateur [accompanist], main pianist was Robert Levin. And, he also came to the house. And, she was at his house and they practiced. Speaker 1: And did she have her own, there--was there a rehearsal room that she considered-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. We had a grand piano in the living room. We always have had. And, she always has had a grand piano. Story_ID: 357733 Speaker 1: Now, at that time, did you see her [HistoryMaker Anne Brown], I mean did you look up to her? Did you worship her? Did you idolize her? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, I just wanted her to give me a sister or a brother, in those years. Speaker 1: Well, who did you idolize? Who did you look up to in those years? Who did you want to be like? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I think I had so many other issues that there wasn't room for that. Speaker 1: Well, what did you want to be at that time when you grew up? Did you think about-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Actress. Speaker 1: Well, what actress or actresses did you like? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Laughter) This is so funny because my favorite in those days was Doris Day. And, then, a good number two was Esther Williams. I used to lay in the bathtub, with a flower behind my ear, go like this (gesture). I'd try to make waves like Esther Williams did. Of course, I wanted to be a movie star. And, of course, Elizabeth Taylor was great, too, in those days. Speaker 1: Did you understand, then, that your mother was at least a celebrity, on some level, a star that those women were (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) No, I do not think that I registered that. As I said, I had other issues. You must remember I was a novelty, in Norway. There were no other colored children. And, I had to hurry up and learn all the codes, the language, skiing, whatever. And, I was busy doing that and busy being a child. Speaker 1: Now, did you feel, not feel different, but did you, did it register that you were black. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, not black. Speaker 1: Okay, but what did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) But registered very much that my parents were totally different from everyone else's. And, that was a drag. I wanted ordinary parents, the kind where mom was home and father went to work and then he would come back in the afternoon and we'd all sit down to dinner and they'd always be there. That was what I wanted. 'Cause that's what everyone else had. Speaker 1: Had you forgotten that you had a father [Jacob Pettit] in America that was-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, but he was not, her was not in my-- Speaker 1: No, I know he wasn't but, he was gone from your memory. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. No, he wasn't gone from memory. Yes, I had him but he, I don't know how to explain this. I knew I had a father, in the United States, yes. Period. New chapter. Story_ID: 357734 Speaker 1: Moving on about your mother's [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] career, when she'd go off and come back, was it the same big event when she came back this time as it had been-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, because now my life was full. We're talking about a child of nine, ten, very free. We used to play out in the streets, we'd ski, all that. Speaker 1: Teenage years. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, before teenage years. Speaker 1: No, I'm just saying as we move forward to your teenage years-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. Speaker 1: What was your life like and what was your mother doing? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, when I was thirteen, we all moved to Italy where she wanted to take lessons from Italian teachers and perfection her opera repertoire and we lived in Italy for two years. And, those two years, I didn't see any other teenagers. This is a fact, but I did learn Italian. So, some good came out of it. We were there for two years. My little sister [Vaar Schjelderup] was only three and I had a lot of responsibility looking after her. Of course, we also had some help in the house. Speaker 1: So, she had been born three years earlier. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. Speaker 1: You had said, at one point that was one of your fondest memories of your mother. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, yes. It was. Speaker 1: Because? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I wished her into this world. I'm quoting my mother, now. I wanted, now that we were established, a little family, a mother, a father. I knew that sisters and brothers, that happens. So, I wanted that and one day, I was told that there will be a little sister or brother. And, in that period, my father, Thorleif [Thorleif Schjelderup], had to do a military service. He was twenty, in 1940, during the war [World War II, WWII]. And, he and his family, had to escape to Sweden so as not to be arrested by the Nazis because my father, Thorleif's father, supreme court judge, Ferdinand Schjelderup, was very high up in the resistance movement, in Norway. So, they had to get out. So, in Norway, you have mandatory military service. So, they caught up with him, so to say. And, that was while Mommy was pregnant and she was not touring. I had her all for myself and this beautiful belly growing. And, we used to go to the movies every Saturday. And, I thought she was the most beautiful person on Earth with this lovely tummy and her short Persian lamb coat. That's one of the fondest ones, when we'd walk arm-and-arm and I had her all for myself; plus the fact that she was carrying this brother or sister. I loved it, absolutely wonderful period. Story_ID: 357735 Speaker 1: So, you moved back from Italy after those two years. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. Speaker 1: And, what happened next in your life with your mother [HistoryMaker Anne Brown]? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, that's when she realized that her breathing and her asthmatic condition were ruining, not ruining her life but she was not capable of singing. Without air, you cannot sing. And, since, she also has such high standards, she chose to quit, and, started teaching singing, instead. Speaker 1: Did she teach at home? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. Speaker 1: So, do you remember different students coming to, who do you remember coming to the house? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Coming to the house. Mona Hofland. Liv Ullmann who then was very young because Liv was born in '39 [sic. 1938] just as I am. Liv Dommersnes also very well-known, Norwegian actress and then there were several, but, you must remember that I was seventeen, going on eighteen, and I really didn't care (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you share with your mother, at any point, that you wanted to be an actress? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No. Speaker 1: What did you tell her you wanted to be? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, Norwegian, Scandinavian design was born in those years. And, I figured that if I could become someone who had a career at home, that that would be where I wanted to do. And, so, I chose to become a textile designer. And, I wanted to have a workshop in the house, so that when my children, if I had any, could come home and say, "Mommy?" And, I would answer, "Yes?" and be there. Of course, this, you have this difficulty, you want for your children what you did not have yourself, because there was no one there when I came home. I mean later, when we're talking about coming back in my teens, yes than they were there. But, in the earlier years, she was always on the go. Story_ID: 357736 Speaker 1: You said to me, yesterday, that your companions were Oscar Peterson, Etta James-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, no. Not Etta, Ella Fitzgerald (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it Ella Fitzgerald? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And, Mr. Armstrong [Louis Armstrong]. Speaker 1: Mr. Armstrong. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): They were there and I played them and they kept me company. Speaker 1: Where did you get that music from? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I don't know. Speaker 1: Did Mayme [Mayme Brown-Wheatley]-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Oh, Mayme sent me my very first Oscar Peterson record. It's a 45 [45 rpm record]. Speaker 1: What did the note say? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): He's a great pianist or learn to love him or something like that. Story_ID: 357737 Speaker 1: So you went on to marry. What year did you marry? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I married, in 1961, in the middle of school. And, everyone thought that it was one of those things, that I had to get married but wasn't so. Speaker 1: So, '61 [1961]. Did you ever look to what was happening in the states? Did you keep up with the race riots? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. Speaker 1: The racial turmoil? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Yes. Yes, of course. Speaker 1: Did you identify with it at all? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, but I'm not a political person. I'm interested now, more than I was, but, I was never politically active. Speaker 1: Did you ever think about why your mother [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] had taken you away during that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Oh, yes. As a grown woman, I've, I'm deeply grateful for that. Speaker 1: So, but, as a teen, but as a young adult, when you were married you didn't think about your mother having removed you from what was happening in the states? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): No, but in later years, she's removed me both from that, but, also from some other things that maybe I should have had like the connection with the rest of my family. Speaker 1: So, you-- Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): That was also taken away from me. You can't have your cake and eat it too. Speaker 1: So, when you look back over her life, and your life, your lives together, what it is she taught you about who you are today. Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I think the person that taught me the most of who I am today was my Norwegian father, Thorleif [Thorleif Schjelderup]. Speaker 1: But, before we get to him, what is it she brought to the table? What is it she taught you about yourself? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): (Speaking French) Esthetique [aesthetic]. Speaker 1: What does that mean? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Elegance, elegance, and, of course, to cook. Story_ID: 358281 Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Cooking. I love to cook. And, I suppose that's due to Mom [HistoryMaker Anne Brown], the fact that Mommy was a very good cook and she taught me to cook. And, the first thing that she taught me is as American as it gets, macaroni and cheese. The white sauce, for macaroni and cheese, we did it the old-fashioned way. Cook the pasta, put that apart, and then the white sauce and let that cook. And the cheese and so-on and so-on. She would sit there, "You have to stir it all the time, Paula [Paula Schjelderup]. Or else, it'll become full of lumps," you know. She would put thyme, and a lot of pepper, and a little Tabasco, and so-on. That's the first thing that she taught me how to cook. And her dinner parties were very well-known, here, in Oslo [Norway]. Now, she was used to giving dinner parties in a country that was not at war and when she came over here, in '48 [1948], they were, we were still suffering from the war [World War II, WWII] where there was nothing to be had. And, people would meet, in the afternoon and evening, and there would be open-faced sandwiches and coffee or tea. Speaker 2: Did someone knock on the door? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): I think so. Speaker 2: Shall I get the door? Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Mommy was used to having dinner parties and, in Norway, there wasn't so much of anything and people weren't used to that, but, she was known as a very good cook. And, of course, her dinner parties were very, very popular. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): And then, the teenage years, in Italy. I must mention that because that's where I learned about cooking, how to prepare, how to take care of the wonderful products, the fruits, the vegetables, the fish, the meat. Story_ID: 358282 Speaker 1: We were talking about Jane Fonda earlier. What does it mean to be the child of a celebrity, to grow up? Do you grow up in the shadows of that person? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, I have felt that. Yes. Speaker 1: But, I'm asking you, what does it mean? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): It means to live in the shadow, yes. It means that meeting someone and until they know who you are, you are just anyone. But the moment they hear who you are, the son or daughter of, then you're interesting, but not until then. And, there's a sort of pressure in that. It's unfair. Why can't they accept me for just me, who I am? And, of course, there are periods in your life where you don't consider these things at all and then it's an issue in your life. And later on, it's not an issue anymore because then you have your own, hopefully you have matured as an individual and you think of other things, but, there are periods and there have, at least, been periods in my life where I've felt the pressure. And, as I mentioned earlier, I wanted to be as ordinary as everyone else was. Speaker 1: As you watched the Jane Fonda interview, what did you share in common with her? What registered with you about her experience and yours? Speaker 2: (PAULA SCHJELDERUP): Well, first of all, she showed such great affection for her father [Henry Fonda], but, simultaneously, she explained the trauma of having this icon as a father and living up to these heights. And, it must have been, I don't know, I can't really understand how these Hollywood actor-children why they choose to do precisely the same as their parents because they can never be exactly the same. And that's what the child in them wants to be. I'm not speaking of the grown person but the child within. And, in my life, I chose completely contrary. I chose to do something completely different because as I've said, in later years there's not room for two singers in one family or rather, yeah, well, two prima donnas is the expression but that's when I'm with friends. And, of course, I shouldn't say that but, maybe there's something in that. There isn't room, I don't think there's room for two singers in the family. So, I chose different. I chose to be a designer. And, of course, Mommy [HistoryMaker Anne Brown] at an early stage made me understand the importance of having a beautiful environment and how important color and all these things were. Composition, et cetera...