 Story_ID: 100895 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Cheryl Butler. I'm the interviewer today. We're also joined by videographer, Scott Stearns. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Denise Gines will be observing us today. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So start by telling us your full name; first, middle, and last, and please spell your name. Speaker 2: All right. Jacqueline Finney Brown. And Jacqueline is J-a-c-q-u-e-l-i-n-e; and Finney is F-i-n-n-e-y; and Brown is B-r-o-w-n. Speaker 1: Thank you. And tell me your date of birth and where you were born. Speaker 2: September 4th, 1944 in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April the 26th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we holding this interview today? Speaker 2: And we're holding it in the office of the Chief Administrative Officer for Prince George's County in Upper Marlboro, Maryland. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. What is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the Chief Administrative Officer for Prince George's County Government. Story_ID: 100896 Speaker 1: We're gonna start with some "People Magazine" style questions. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? My favorite food. Wow, now that--yeah, I'm trying to stay away from food right now, so it's difficult to hone in on that one. My favorite food? Actually, it's a strange combination--tuna fish, and I love chocolate. Is chocolate considered a food? Food. All right. Not together. Not together. Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color is actually, chocolate brown. Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year or season? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination point? Speaker 2: Urbanna, Virginia. Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No problem is solved at the same level of consciousness that created it. And that's from [Albert] Einstein. Story_ID: 100897 Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna get started talking a little-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --bit about your family background. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother; what is her name? Speaker 2: Well, this is gonna be fun. My mother's name is James Henry Amos Finney LaForest. Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for me? Speaker 2: Okay. James as in J-a-m-e-s. Henry as in Henry. Amos is her maiden name. Finney was the name with my father and LaForest is my stepfather's name, okay? Speaker 1: Do you know her date of birth? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. She was born June the 3rd, 1921. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your mother's background. Has she told you stories about her childhood? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Mom is one of seven children--no, she is the seventh child of either nine or ten, I'm not sure. But her name always raises issues because she has a male's name, and there's a history to that. Because my grandmother, Ethel Amos, her mother, had a brother and his name was James, James Henry, but he was sent over to Normandy in World War I. And in those days, they call it "Over to the Normandy." The belief was that to bring her brother home, she would name the child in her womb after him, regardless of what the gender was, in order to bring her brother back. As it turned out, Uncle James came back, and was very instrumental in having her being the first to go to college. Speaker 1: Your mom? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about her family life; did she come from an educated family? Speaker 2: Actually, she came from a family of wonderful, beautiful, hardworking folks with an understanding--my, my grandmother and everybody has--Big Mama, that's what we called her, Big Mama. My grandmother was very active in the community, both in Gloucester, Virginia; Hayes, Virginia; as well as in Baltimore [Maryland]. And in Baltimore, the family was raised on Barclay Street in Baltimore. And the--my grandmother worked hard. She did a variety of jobs within the home because there were a lot of kids, and my grandfather was a--not a handyman, but he, he was able to do--he was a tradesman. He did a lot of different work, different types of work, and he was a devout Seventh-Day Adventist. And the Amos name comes from his side. My grandmother's name is--maiden name is Smith. And they--she exposed them to music. They had a little golf that they played in the backyard. It was just amazing, and that all of that was going on while people were working. They were cleaning people's houses, they were doing laundry, doing hair, all of the things that were tough in those times for black folks. And, yet, my grandmother wanted those elements of, those elements of exposure for her children and, and she provided that, and it, it was absolutely amazing. And when mom would tell me that, you know, saying--and she said it so casually, about three years ago, I said, "What?" You know, you never told me. But--so I'm, I'm blessed because my mother is with me and has been living with me for the last seven years, so I just eat every piece of story I can out of her. So it, it, it was wonderful. Story_ID: 100898 Speaker 1: And did they live in a segregated neighborhood? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, you know--well, Baltimore [Maryland]'s a funny city because it has pots of ethnic groups and you could visit the world in Baltimore. I remember going to high school and actually going to school with, with kids where Gaelic was spoken in the home; that's, I mean, that's how deeply rooted the ethnic cultures are in Baltimore. You know, we have our Little Italy and all of that and, and so it's strong groups. But there out in the Barclay Street area, you had a lot of the--at that time, they called them the colored community. I'm not sure whether the Jewish community was out there or not. For some reason I think there was a strong Jewish community out there also, but most of the people that mom talks about and that I remember from her friends, from Dunbar High School and the elementary and all of that, were from that neighborhood and that community. And it was a working class community, working class by 1920s, 1930s, for black people in, in an urban city, a southern urban city. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And did she share specific stories of her childhood with you? Speaker 2: Yes. It was rough. I mean, they were--they did--they--it was full of hard work, but the thing that comes out for my mother, more than anything else, is there was so much love. I mean, they just--they worked hard, but little things meant so much to them and, and being with your mom, and with watching the, the smiles and being with your brothers and sisters and loving each other was just--it, it shaped her life; it truly shaped her life. To this day, my mother--the bloodlines of family and loving and caring for each other, good times or hard times, oh, that is such a priority for her. And, and, and that's been a wonderful thing because I'm an only child, and then she had all these brothers and sisters, so it was just--it was great to hear it. Speaker 1: Do you know--can you name in order, the siblings in the family and when--their names and when they were born? Speaker 2: Of my mother's? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: My aunts? I actually think I can. My Aunt Dorothy, well, she's--she's been gone. Speaker 1: She was the oldest? Speaker 2: She was the, she was the oldest. And after Dorothy, came--it wasn't Aunt Ethel--Grace, then Ethel. And Mom, forgive me if I'm not getting them in the right order. Then I believe Conrad, Howard. Something must not be right. I must be missing somebody. Mom, Aunt Jessie--oh, I'm sorry, Irene, Aunt Irene. Oh, got to tell you about Aunt Irene. Aunt Irene comes after Howard and Conrad. Aunt Irene, then is Mom, then Jessie, then Justine. Now, Aunt Irene is the Irene Morgan in Morgan v. the State of Virginia [Morgan v. Virginia] that Thurgood Marshall argued before the Supreme Court in order to bring down the Jim Crow laws in this country. And the 1960 Freedom Riders rode on the precedent of her case. She broke down the Jim Crow laws in this country; 1941--19--I'm sorry, 1940--no, I was born, so that was probably, 1946; something like that, but you can look that up. Thurgood Marshall remained friends with her until his death. She is still alive. She is in Hayes, Virginia, with my cousin, and that's where my mom is right now. They're visiting. She's ninety-years-old. And she's been honored by the State of Virginia, by the President--by President Bill Clinton and by the Orl--Olander [ph.], that marvelous awards program that we have at the Kennedy Center here. And she's an amazing woman. She is the only other one of those kids that went to college, but she has an interesting way she went to college. Speaker 1: Okay. So we can come back to-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Come back to that. Okay. And-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was Spottswood [William] Robinson [III] who took her case originally; he was too young--I mean, not too young, he hadn't argued enough cases to go before the Supreme Court so he gave it to his friend, Thurgood, who had the credentials to go before the Supreme Court. And all three of them remained friends all their life. Speaker 1: And how old was she at the time? Speaker 2: Aunt Irene was probably in her twenties. Speaker 1: Okay. Wow, that's a big deal. Story_ID: 100899 Speaker 1: Tell me about your grandfather, maternal? Speaker 2: My maternal grandfather-- Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Is--I don't want to say Ed Amos because it's not. I'm trying to--my grandfather. Amos is the name, and I'm blocking because I'm, I'm thinking about my cousin named Ed Amos. It's--this is--I don't know why I'm blocking this because we always said Papa Amos. Papa Amos. But I will know his name, it'll, it'll--I told you I'd have these senior moments and the long-term memory will come up. But he, he was able to do trades. He was from a part of the state called Long Green, Maryland, and many of his people were Hispanic, so the name is really Amos, and--but we've all said Amos, and he was a devout Seventh-Day Adventist. And I remember Pop Amos--a handsome man, gorgeous cheekbones, and these grayish eyes, and he, he would always call us feets. "Hey feets," for, for sweets, you know, just playing with us and everything. But he had kind of a, a, a bristly kind of a beard growth. You know, it wasn't a big beard, but just a little stubble, and so we would all say, "No, you go kiss Papa Amos. No, you go," because, because it would scratch your face. But he was, he was a wonderful man. A hard worker and loved his family dearly and worked hard. Worked hard. Speaker 1: Very good. Any other stories that your mother told you about holidays or anything in the, in the house? Speaker 2: Oh. Well, they, they grew up eating kosher, so she always ate well. And when I say well, I mean, all the healthy stuff and I have no idea why she didn't get me to eat that way; I have no idea. But at any rate, that--the food was always--you would go to the store, you could get the fresh milk, the cream. Sometimes you would actually go to the store, you'd get--the baker would put aside the bread for you, or put aside the--not the nicest cuts of meat, but the meats that you could work with. Or if you did some kind of work where you were preparing food for a family or something like that, you could bring home things, and, and so there was that. And, and those are the things that she remembers. She remembers always the family looking out for one another. Speaker 1: Are you aware of your great grandparents? Do you know who they were? Speaker 2: I know by name, on my mother's side; I actually have a memory of my great grandmother on my father's side. Speaker 1: So what are the names of your great grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side, it's Martha [Tabb] Smith, and I don't know his first name. I don't know his first name. As in many families, the tracing is through the females, which is, you know, so Martha Smith. Speaker 1: Do you know where they're from? Speaker 2: Yes. From--the Tabbs are from Virginia, from--I want to say Hayes and Gloucester, but there's also a place in Virginia called Water View. And the Tabb Plantation's down there, the white Tabbs and the black Tabbs, and every year or every other year, we have a Tabb family reunion and we go down there, my cousins and everybody. And we go and there's a trip to the plantation and then you see the, the two Tabbs that are--actually, have the same name, the, the white Tabb and the black Tabb. And you have the pictures and then you go through the plantation, you see where they were buried, and all of that. And the white Tabb family is still living there and they know that's coming every year. Speaker 1: Wow. How do you spell Tabb? Speaker 2: T-a-b-b. Story_ID: 100900 Speaker 1: And what about your father? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, that-- Speaker 1: Tell me about him; what's-- Speaker 2: The Finneys. All right, the Finneys. My father's name is James, so I had fun as a kid. My father's name was James Cornelius Finney [laughter]. And when I was a part of desegregation, the first desegregation in Baltimore in the '50s [1950], it was very funny having to explain to the teachers. You know, "What's your mother's name? James. What's your father's name? James." And they went through over and over again trying to explain to me that I did not understand their question, so that was the beginning of some interesting things. But, but at any rate, my father's family is actually from the eastern shore of Maryland, and I did not know my grandfather. He died when my father was a little boy. He graduated from Drew Seminary, I think it's in New Jersey, and he was into the ministry. And I have all of his--I have his diploma, his record, the notes that his friends wrote to him, and those things had been turned over for photographing to the Reginald [F.] Lewis Museum in, in, in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: I don't know whether it was James or not. I'm not sure whether my father was named after him. I'm really not sure whether my father was named after him. I think the Cornelius may have come from him, but I, I can't remember that. I--like I said, I never knew him; my father was a little boy. My grandmother then was a Waters [ph.] from the eastern shore; loads of Waters on the eastern shore of Maryland and the Cambridge area and all of that. And so we had a lot of family ties there that my father has stayed in touch with over the years. My father is a college professor, retired college professor, and he lives in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] now with his wife. And when my mother and father were divorced, in the summers, I would spend summers with my dad and so I grew up in the summer on historical black college campuses, so it was just really wonderful; NCC [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and Delaware State [University, Dover, Delaware] and it was nice. It was great. I enjoyed it. Speaker 1: What was your paternal grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Edna. And actually, that is my middle name. Jacqueline Edna Finney. Eww. Yes. But I'm glad it wasn't Lavinia because that was her name too, so I just thank God for that. Speaker 1: And it was Edna Waters Finney? Speaker 2: Yes. Edna Waters Finney. And her mother, I can't remember her first name, we called her Ma-Ma [ph.], and I have this image of her because I was a little kid, very, very little. Because my mother and my father lived with my grandmother on Mcculloh Street in Baltimore as a young married couple with this little baby before he got an assignment to teach at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And so I have pictures of me down there at Tennessee State with my dad and my mom. And he was also at Delaware State, and then I retire--he retired from Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania in Cheyney, Pennsylvania]. And it really--that was a very rich, that was a very rich set of experiences. So-- Story_ID: 100901 Speaker 1: Let me take you back a little bit-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to your earliest childhood memory. First of all, you were born in Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: Born in Baltimore, um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. So what do you remember, your earliest memories growing up in Baltimore? Speaker 2: The earliest memories? I guess being on Mcculloh Street with my mom and my dad and my grandmother and my great grandmother, those are the earliest times. And then after that, it would've been when my uncle, Ralph Finney, came home from overseas and brought a blonde, blue-eyed bride with him, a German bride, (unclear). And that allowed me to begin speaking German at the age of three. And it was an amazing experience. My grandmother had feelings about that. My--on my father's side, with my grandmother having been an educated woman and a teacher, and she was married to an educated man who was a seminarian, you're, you're talking about this rarity of having all this long line of college educated people in the colored community, and we judged the wealth back then not by money, because nobody had any money, but by how well educated you were. And education was a major thrust with my family. And so my grandmother felt that her son, my father's brother, was really going to endanger his status, his ability to learn a living and everything by bringing this white woman into this family; this was just a downfall. Speaker 1: Now, when was this? Speaker 2: This was in the '50s [1950]. Story_ID: 100902 Speaker 1: And so tell me about the neighborhood and the social climate, at the time, between whites and blacks? Speaker 2: Oh, it was total segregation; Baltimore [Maryland] was a totally segregated town. We had a totally--I went to totally segregated schools. The schools that numbered 100 were the colored schools, and the schools that had the other numbers were the white schools. We had a different set of administration and everything. I went to Coppin Demonstration School 132, where the teachers from Coppin, normal--Coppin Normal School for Colored Teachers went because it was against the law for colored teachers to practice their profession with white students. You could not do field teaching, you could not do your, your field placement, so you had to have a demonstration school. You had to learn your craft somewhere so they set up the demonstration school, therefore, I got the best of the best. Story_ID: 100903 Speaker 1: Okay. So you had mentioned that at three-years-old you learned German-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --from your uncle's bride? Speaker 2: Wife. Right. Who my grandmother really didn't like that much and really didn't want us to talk to her, but I was three-years-old, I didn't care. I was going up there to see her anyway because she was--they were up on the third floor, and I would go up there and climb up in her lap. And I remember one--and she was just a kid herself. She couldn't have been more than twenty, and I remember climbing up in her lap, because she was crying. And I was looking at her and I could not believe--you know, I thought she was blind, I remember thinking that because I had never seen blue eyes, so I, I didn't think she could see. And she just was so different and I would touch things and I'd touch her mouth, and she'd say mund; and eyes, augen; nase. And so we learned, we learned from each other. Story_ID: 100904 Speaker 1: And when did you learn to read in English? Speaker 2: Oh, I learned to read probably, probably in kindergarten at Coppin Demonstration School [132]; it was unbelievable. I mean, that was a school that was prime educators; it was, it was unbelievable. And it happened to be that my year was the group that would be sent on the buses for desegregation so we--there was a special thing going on with teachers working with you during the day, during the night, telling you you're just as good as anybody, you have nothing to lose, blah, blah, blah. I mean, it was, it was just wonderful. Speaker 1: And did all of the students learn to read in kindergarten? Speaker 2: Yes. And we did not have special ed. It did not exist in the school systems I grew up in; it did not exist. And so we went and we learned and our teachers always expected that we were going to excel. I mean, there was just no question you were going to excel, so it, it, it was an essence of excellence; an essence of excellence. Very rich soup. Story_ID: 100905 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm going to take you back just a little bit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You were telling me about your great-grandmother-- Speaker 1: M-hmm. Speaker 2: --and the Tabb family dynamic. Tell me again what was your great-grandmother's full name? Speaker 1: Martha Tabb Smith. She married a man named Smith. Speaker 2: And tell me about the Tabb family-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --dynamic. Speaker 1: The Tabb-- Speaker 2: White Tabbs-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and Black Tabbs. Speaker 1: Right. White Marsh Plantation in White Marsh, Virginia which is down near, you know, in that Gloucester region. And, the families, the, the black Tabbs were families were the families that worked that land. They worked that plantation, they worked that homestead. And, one of the Tabb young men was like the driver, almost like the valet or whatever with the, plantation--I don't think, I'm not sure whether it was the master or the master's son, I'm not sure--but there was picture taken of them and, they had the same name. There were two of them that had the same name which is just so interesting to me because I kept looking at it and said "They don't look at all alike, you know." So it wasn't what you would normally expect that there was a lot of interbreeding. It's like there's this black group of folks who worked there. They took the name of the owners, which was typical in that time, and that became the family name. Speaker 2: And tell me a little bit about how they've socialized over the years. Speaker 1: Oh, the Tabbs are everywhere in that part of Virginia. Where I live, uh, and uh, we have a home in Urbanna, Virginia which is in, actually it's really in Saluda, Virginia but, uh, that's Middlesex County which is right next to Gloucester. And you go into Gloucester County and you go down to Hayes [Virginia]. Tabbs are everywhere. Tabbs are everywhere. You cannot go down there without finding a Tabb. My mother can tell you who's related--this is the fifth cousin's aunt, uncle of the third generation's cousin. You know, so, it's really amazing how the family has basically stayed there. Now, they have spread out. There's quite a few Tabbs in Maryland. And they come down all the time. And in other parts of the East Coast, I'm not sure about the other parts, but the families, of course, the generations--mine and younger have just spread out and everything. But, the family genealogy is very clearly kept down there and, including the tour of the homestead. Speaker 2: But there was some race-mixing because there's a family reunion, right, with both sides? Speaker 1: The family reunion's not with the white Tabbs. The family reunion is just--it's the Tabb family reunion, it's the black Tabbs. Story_ID: 100906 Speaker 1: All right. We are going to talk more about your earliest memories-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell me the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: Elementary school, um, Coppin Demonstration School 132, Mount Street, Riggs Avenue. Speaker 1: Is that a big school? Speaker 2: It was, it was--I don't think it's there anymore. It was, it was the school to go to in the black community because it was the Demonstration School for Coppin Normal School, you know, for colored teachers, it was THE school 'cause you knew you were gonna get really, really, good education. Speaker 1: Tell me about the teachers there. Some of your favorite teachers, what did they do? Experiences? Speaker 2: The teachers were absolutely amazing. Some of my favorite teachers were--there was one, a teacher named Miss Lockwood; another Mr. MacDonald; Miss Dancy (ph.). These teachers, it--when you compare the segregated schools from a kid's standpoint, from a child's standpoint--when you compare the segregated schools that I went to, to the desegregated schools that I ended up having to desegregate at the junior high level, there are huge differences in support, in caring, in a sense of community, in loving you into excellence, in knowing that whole surrogate mom and dad piece. These were folks that you would see on Sunday in your church, or in your community. Your mom and your dad would socialize with them because being a teacher, and being an educator was a big, big deal, in the black community. It--there has not been--I call those our halcyon days of educating. And it didn't matter if your mom or dad was a domestic worker, a garbage worker, or a doctor--my stepfather was a doctor so I was raised with my mother and my stepfather--and, or a lawyer, it didn't matter. It didn't matter. The village actually existed. The village actually existed. Story_ID: 100907 Speaker 1: Give me an example. Speaker 2: Um, we had restrictive covenants--there were places we could not live. So black folks lived where they could live. And so within that communal area you had all classes of black folks. But you also had something else, which was absolutely wonderful. Because the stars--the people who were the great entertainers of the day, could not stay at the hotels in which they entertained, then they had a circuit--and we were on their circuit of doctors, lawyers, teachers, whose homes they could stay in when they came to town. So Leslie Crane, you know her as Leslie Uggams, practiced--when she was around nine years old in Baltimore [Maryland] in our basement because we had good acoustics down there. The Fashion Fair models, brand new idea Fashion Fair models, brand new, brand new stayed--the Ebony Fashion Fair models--stayed, some of them stayed at our house. I remember they got sick with the flu or something and Daddy Al--that's what I called my stepfather--had to come home and give them shots. And I just remember in the guest room seeing these ladies lined up across the bed with these bare buns out, just lined up and my mother standing in the door watching my stepfather making sure "Give 'em their shot and leave. Give 'em their shot and leave. Give 'em their shot and leave." So that was a funny image that I will always remember. And one of the ladies was a lady named Harleen [ph.] something--and she was Sam Cooke's girlfriend, and it was just amazing. And I remember, and we have, actually, the picture is in the museum up in Baltimore. I couldn't have been more than around twelve and heard this wonderful piano playing because Mom and Dad would have these great parties. And so I kind of snuck downstairs to see, and there was this guy with his wavy hair playing a piano. It was wonderful. I had no idea it was Duke Ellington. And so I came on down and I sat on his lap, and everything, and he kept playing and everything. I'm still sleepy, you know, got my bathrobe on and everything. And Mom said "Jackie, you know it's time for you to go back up now. And say good night." And I said good night. And he kissed me and he said "Love you madly, sweetie." And I went on upstairs. And that picture, though, they took the picture, and the picture's up in the museum. So it was just very--those were experiences you wouldn't get. The sad part is, you know, that they couldn't stay where they should be able to stay. But then again, look at what the exposure was. And so my generation is a tough generation to deal with because my generation has, uh, when you look at my father's side with the education that goes back forever and high intellect. When you look at my experiences with my mother and my stepfather and the "Baltimore black society" there, and all of that when they put me on that bus to desegregate and my peers, we knew we were the toughest things since sliced bread. I mean, we never had an inferiority complex. And so our response to people thinking we were stupid was "What is wrong with them? Isn't that sad?" And I think the marker for me about how strong I was from that segregated experience was I have always, and still to this day, attached the concepts of high intellect to black men because that's what we saw. We saw the Thurgood Marshall. Thurgood Marshall's from Baltimore, saw his family, Miss Charlotte, his sister, all of them. So we grew up with them. So all I'm saying is we were around that--and of course, going to the college campuses in the summers. So all I knew was black and intelligence is one word. I had no idea that there were people who thought that those two terms were antithetical. I was shocked. Story_ID: 100908 Speaker 1: Speaking of black men, tell me about your parents. You mentioned your stepfather, you mentioned your father. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Tell me about that dynamic. What happened? Speaker 2: Oh, it was great fun. It's nothing like this acrimony or anything like that. It was nothing at Christmas to have my mother, my stepfather, my father, his wife, my half-sisters, my stepbrother, and stepsister all together at the house having a good time. And sometimes they'd pick up the phone--and my stepfather's wife, his first wife--and pick up the phone and they'd say "Is Mrs. LaForest [ph.] there?" "You want the first Mrs. LaForest or the second Mrs. Laforest?" And I mean, we just never--I cannot explain it. We never had that acrimony. It, it was like this expanded family. It was like this expanded family. I mean, we all lived in different homes but--I, I, I can't explain it. Speaker 1: Were you parents married? Speaker 2: Married? Speaker 1: At first? We they married to each other-- Speaker 2: Oh, they-- Speaker 1: --or-- Speaker 2: --were married to each other long time. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me-- Speaker 2: They met on a college campus-- Speaker 1: --when did they get-- Speaker 2: --they met at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. They were married a long time and once my father got his doctorate, then they got a divorce. His doctorate was in education from Columbia [University, New York City, New York]. And they got a divorce. And then mom and Dr. LaForest got married and my father married a wonderful lady named Francis. And we just--and then she had two little girls and that gave me half-sisters. And they are ten and twelve years younger than I. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me your stepfather's full name? Speaker 2: Albert Leland LaForest. It was actually Laforet [ph.]. He was from Trinidad. When he came over, the customs officer said "no nigger has a name like that, you're name now is LaForest." So it was really interesting. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And he had a British accent which is so funny. He kept that British accent. Speaker 1: How old were you when your mom married Mr. LaForest? Speaker 2: When mom married Daddy Al, I guess I was around six or seven. Something like that--yeah. Speaker 1: So tell me about your siblings. Give me all of your siblings in order and their names. Speaker 2: Okay. I have, its--I always tell people I had three sisters and one brother--but I'm an only child. My stepbrother and sister are Stephanie Brown, Dr. Stephanie Brown, and my stepbrother who is deceased was Bert LaForest, Jr. My half-sisters, who thank God are here with us, and we stay in touch, are Joan Finney, and I have a nephew Quinn whose getting ready to go to college. And then Joyce Finney--both my sisters are married. Then, I was raised though with my mother and my stepfather so that was the family. It was just the three of us. And my father and Francis raised Joan and Joy, until they got a divorce. And then my stepfather died, Dr. LaForest, died after many, many, many, many, years of a very, happy and wonderful marriage with mom. Story_ID: 100909 Speaker 1: What are some of your favorite sights, smells, sounds of your home growing up? Speaker 2: My home growing up was the lilt of the West Indians coming. One of the things that would happen is from Trinidad, folks would come over to go to med school. And they'd base from our house and--'cause there was this wonderful West Indian connection going on with the Trinidadians and the, you know, Jamaicans and all this, and that's when I learned nobody loves a Bajan. But that's not right--but at any rate. So it was a lot of fun. And so the plantans [ph.], I loved the arguments between my mother and my stepfather because when he would, they'd get in an argument, his British accent would--it didn't come out until then. You know, and she'd get very ethnic in terms of African American and he was a Carribean Ameri--not Carribean, he was Trinidadian American. And I'm here to tell you there were some interesting times around that dinner table. There were some interesting times around that dinner table and when he would get upset because she had just pushed the wrong button. He'd say "My dear lady, you don't know me very well." I thought that was so cool. So, you know, and I'd say "Go Daddy Al" because Mom had a fast mouth. But it was an interesting piece around the kitchen table. Then we went over the news of the day every day. We had to talk about what was going on, the issues in the world. It was a rich soup. I am telling you the education never stopped. And I remember my father, my birth father, who I'm very close to--I was close to both of them growing up--I just never had the schism. And so my birth father, my mother tells the joke that she would hold me up to him and say "Look James, look at this precious baby that we have", and all of this. And his response was "When she can converse with me, I will talk with her." And so that's the education--and we always interfaced in that way. And I tease Dad and I say "Dad, what would you have done if I wasn't smart? Could we have talked?" So--but it's funny. It was a very, very rich childhood with many, many lessons but talk about being sound about who you are as a black woman with intelligence. Oh my God, it was fed into your veins. It was fed into your veins. Story_ID: 100910 Speaker 1: It had nothing to do it anything else, it had to do with, you know, who you are. The teachers at that school "Look, you going to get on that bus, you're going out to Pimlico Junior High, this is gonna happen to you." This is--don't let them do this, you're just as smart as they are. You've had this. And see, everybody didn't go--I don't know whether people know that story. And this is across the country. Everybody in the sixth grade at Coppin Demonstration School [132] did not go to Pimlico Junior High, they selected. They hand selected the kids to take the race on their shoulders and put it forward. And what it left in me was a horrible, bad taste in my mouth about putting that kind of weight on a twelve-year old child. Speaker 2: How did they send you that message? Was it continuous through different disciplines, or-- Speaker 1: Oh, they would sit down and say they prepared us, they prepared us for what we were going to face. I mean we lived in a cocoon. This was a cocoon. It was wonderful and we, I mean, it was--I can't explain it--it was a cocoon. I knew I couldn't try on clothes in the store, in the hair company. I knew that in Hustler's. I knew I couldn't eat in that restaurant. I knew I had to go to a certain place on the bus. I knew when my grandmother, my father's mother, and I went down south to see my father in North Carolina Central [University, Durham, North Carolina]--and down there that I had to go--she had to train me. "That says colored, sweetheart, that's the colored fountain. That's what you have to drink out of. You can't drink out of the white fountain." You have to do that. You know, you can't go to the colored--to the white bathroom, you have to go to the--so you have to be taught that. I remember going down there in Durham and going into the movie and getting--the only time I heard my father really lay me out--I came down and went with Dr. Boxdale's [ph.] children, and we went to the movie in downtown. And they were used to that wretched segregation, okay, wretched. And so we had to go around the back, go up and go on the balcony. So I was pissed that I had to go on the balcony. Then--so I went to the front of the balcony. And they said "Come on, you gotta go in the back." I said "I'm already on the balcony, how far back do I get?" They said the back of the balcony is for colored, you can't sit up front you're going to get us all in--well, I just left and I just sat upfront and I just sat there. Well, I'm telling you they could not wait to get home to my--and my father said "Do you know that you put us all at risk?" See I had no idea these folks could come and shut down the university. I mean, they could do anything they wanted. I didn't understand that kind of power. And here I am just a kid who knows I'm free, whether you know it or not. But that was selfish because I didn't understand. And so we had to--and I think that was one of the first lessons of, you know, when it's just you on the line that's one thing. When it's other institutions, human beings lives on the line, you know what? You have to kind of--switch back a little bit because you can't put that on the line for other people that way. And that was a tremendous lesson, but we, we had to learn those lessons. Story_ID: 100911 Speaker 1: And I remember in Baltimore city [Maryland], though, going to Western High School. Uh, that was an experience. Speaker 2: Well, even before you get to Western High School, as a young girl-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --in Baltimore city-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --what was it like going into restaurants and stores? Did you feel the segregation then? Speaker 1: Well, I went to the colored places. So I didn't, you know--I'm in that generation where our formative years were solidly in a completely segregated apartheid situation. This is going to sound wonderful--which was wonderful for us from a child's standpoint. It was amazingly warm, creative, loving, encouraging, intellectual. It was beautiful. Because our parents--now that I'm looking back from the other way, they must've worked their butts off making heaven out of hell. And that's what they did. They created a heaven out of hell. And we didn't know it. When we knew it was when the, we were the transition generation so we ended up at twelve, thirteen and fourteen having to desegregate. Story_ID: 100912 Speaker 1: So the young Jacqueline-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --were you outspoken? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: I, I, I said what I thought needed to be said that was creative, that was helpful-- Speaker 1: Give me an example. Speaker 2: I'd always kind of look out for people. That was always a thing with me. My mother always tells a story--I just thought it was awful that we didn't give everything we had to people who were poor. I just thought it was the worst thing in the world. I want to give 'em my clothes, I want to give 'em my bed. I want to go live with people who are poor. I want to do all that. That was just a thing with me. And it's been that way from childhood. I've always been a lover--I don't know, my people mean so much to me. And I can't help but love you--although, my people can take me to the river sometimes, believe me--but it's that piece that's built in. And I think that comes from mother with her love of her family--her family everybody wasn't as blessed as she was to have all of the things that she had as an adult. But my mother never turned her back. I don't care what level you were of her family and that--she instilled that in me--she said "So help me, God, you will never do that." Story_ID: 100913 Speaker 1: I'm going to bring you to junior high but I just want to know--describe for me your block. Your house and your block. Speaker 2: Okay. The earliest block was Mcculloh Street and there were--Miss Coleman (ph.) was across the street and she taught music. And then the Y[MCA] was around the corner on Madison Avenue, the black Y. And that was great and people went there for dancing lessons. And you had your little parties there. And then there were friends across the street, and down the street, and around the corner. And we all were growing up there together, but we were little, little kids then. Then when we went to Bentalou Street there was a whole 'nother group of kids there, it was great. Moms hung together and they were in clubs together and we all grew up--and they formed a group, the Northwest Child Study Club--and all of that came through. And all of those kids are together to this day, although we're grandparents at this point. And all that was there. Oh, on Lanvale Street--you kept movin' on up a little bit--and Lanvale Street was West Baltimore. And you had wonderful people there. The black would've had teachers, lots of teachers and professors, and doctors--and doctors on Harlem Avenue--and, Lanvale Street and people who worked as business people running their own businesses. Not mega corporations or anything like that. Hard-working folks. That's what it was. Those were the communities. So my communities of socialization were all segregated communities that were absolutely wonderful. Story_ID: 100914 Speaker 1: Very good. And you were telling us about being chosen-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --to go to [Pimlico] Junior High. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about that selection process and the transition? Speaker 2: Well, I can only tell you that now from a child's standpoint. I can tell you what I think happened from an adult educator standpoint at this point. But what happened is our people had decided in this great experiment called desegregation, and you notice I don't use the term integration because I don't believe we have it yet. But in this desegregation piece, what happened is--it's like this door's open, the Supreme Court ruling is here, you know what they think about you; that you're dumb, you're stupid, you can't do anything, you smell, you're all that crap that came through. We had been completely, I'm telling you, we had been completely shielded from it. So on the bus, when the white kids did their thing on us, it was like "Whoa, where is this coming from?" 'Cause we had been completely shielded. So to have people talk about your hair, to have people laugh at you and not speak to you, and look down their nose at you, and think there's something wrong with you, "eww" and all this--I mean, where is this coming from? You know, so that was a weird thing there. But when we got on the bus, what those folks had to do--those folks being Mr. McDonald, our sixth grade teacher and all of them, they had to choose the ones who they thought were intellectually and psychologically, the strongest. Story_ID: 101165 Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me who was selected with you. Tell me about your friends on that bus. And what happened on the bus? Tell me some stories. Speaker 2: I'm sure there were boys--but I can't really remember them just because of that age, you stick with the girls, you know. But every last one of them was very, very bright. All those young women were very, very bright. We were very close. We saw each other socially. Our parents, you know, interacted together all the time and so it really--they've done very, very well. Speaker 1: Who are they? Speaker 2: Zenobia Cornish [ph.] was one. Carol Williams was another. Nina Adams [ph.]. There were--I think Laverne Lockwood [ph.]. There were a lot of the kids that came from Coppin Demonstration School 132 but it was the top of the line that went there. Speaker 1: And what was the name of the junior high? Speaker 2: Pimlico Junior High School. Speaker 1: And this was going to be a desegregated school? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Right. Right. Speaker 1: So tell me about that experience on the bus. What exactly happened on the bus and what happened once you got to school? Speaker 2: Well, once we got on the bus, the problem was--I, I have to admit part of being segregated is that you really aren't around white people a lot. So that was a real new experience 'cause I was looking at them, just like they were looking at me, you know. I was, you know--they, they, just the physical differences, you know, our physical-ness is different and so I was looking at that kind of like I used to look at my Aunt. By this point, I didn't even think of her as, as white anymore especially since she had my two cousins and, you know, those were the cutest little brown babies I'd ever seen, so, you know, so, that, that. But I mean just looking at them, and it was predominantly Jewish community. Pimlico was Jewish and so they were very tight with one another 'cause they were a very tight knit community. So it, it, it was interesting watching them, little habits like twirling the hair, those kinds of things. It just, I don't know, you looked at it and it was just alien, it was just very alien. And wouldn't necessarily want to sit next to you on the bus, didn't know what to say to you. I don't know what messages they had been given, I'm not sure whether the messages they had been given were--they are just as good as you are, blah, blah, just as smart or whatever. But, you understand, a Jewish community, there is a tremendous emphasis on intelligence and intellect also. So you've got two sets of kids whose parents still have something to prove to the gentile community, or the white community. And so it was a very interesting choice where we were. Now this might've gone to other schools, but I can only speak about our experience at Pimlico Junior High. And you knew you were different and something wasn't right, but you couldn't quite put your finger on it, and so. Speaker 1: Were there overt-- Speaker 2: Sometimes. Speaker 1: --tensions? Speaker 2: Yes, sometimes there were. Speaker 1: Tell me about those. Speaker 2: Sometimes there were, you know, with the snide remarks and mostly the thing about--it was almost, I can't explain it--it was almost like an 'eww' factor. It was like you were made to feel like you were something not clean. And it, you know, 'eww'. And then there was always somebody who was going to befriend you. There's always that good human spirit that's going to be there. And that happened, too. So. Story_ID: 101166 Speaker 1: Tell me about those 'eww' moments either on the bus, in the cafeteria-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or the classroom. Speaker 2: Yeah, its-- Speaker 1: Any specific students? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember the specific students. I can remember what it, it felt like. It's, you know, I knew, I was--it was the first time I knew I wasn't really being seen as a human being. And that's a very disconcerting feeling. Speaker 1: Was this in the cafeteria? Speaker 2: Well, the cafeteria we didn't worry about it because we sat together and we'd, we'd cling to each other. But on the bus, we were coming from different parts so we all weren't gettin' on the bus at the same place, or on the same bus. So--it, it, it was hard. I think, if I--now that I think about it, you know, what I think the real issue was? It was my first time feeling like a minority. I had never been in a minority situation before. Most of the situations I was in had been majority black. That's what happens with segregation. You are in a black world. Speaker 1: Did you have to sit at a certain, in a certain portion of the bus, or? Speaker 2: No. No. You didn't have to sit at a certain portion of the bus but finding where you wanted to sit was a whole 'nother thing. I mean you didn't have anybody to talk to 'cause you didn't know you really had anything in common with 'em. So it, it was, it was not a good experience. Speaker 1: You mentioned name calling. What were some of the names? Speaker 2: Well, you know, people would do the whole colored thing and the color thing, and the--it wasn't so much the 'n' word, as much as the whole colored jigaboo crap and, I mean it's just, I mean, it--but that wasn't the main thing. That was, I have to say, that that was the smallest piece. It was the 'eww', I can't explain it. You add that--now, that I look back on it, you add that along with adolescence and who's in the in crowd and all of that, and, you know, there it is. Because if you look at it now with desegregation, you may find that same thing 'eww' but you might find that the 'eww' people are black, white, latino, and all that looking down on some other groups that are black, white, latino. So they're very, they're very multi-cultural in there. But when you're a kid, you don't know that. But when you add desegregation to it, where you're bringing together cultures that have been de facto and de jure segregated, that's a whole 'nother story. That's a big, big deal. That's a big, big deal and, and you're folks every day, you know, you're carrying the weight of the world on your shoulders because when you fail, every, every negro fails. If you're stupid, all colored children are stupid. It's just, oh God. And then they would tell you that you really need to understand that white folks are so much smarter. Speaker 1: Who told you that? Speaker 2: Actually, the teachers would give us that impression. Some teachers made it very clear that they did not want to be a part of this great experiment, and they didn't understand why they were being punished. And some people--some teachers, were the exact opposite. I had a teacher named Ms. Akerman [ph.], she was my social studies teacher and I will never forget. She said "you are so smart." And, I mean, she was so sweet and she would make sure that you never stopped being smart. I mean, she was real clear. Speaker 1: What about some of your extracurricular activities? You mentioned music. Speaker 2: I, we, we didn't--I don't remember getting involved in a lot of extracurricular activities at Pimlico, but by the time I got to Western, now that was a whole 'nother story. That was a whole 'nother story. Story_ID: 101167 Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you get from Pimlico Junior High-- Speaker 2: Well that-- Speaker 1: --to Western? Speaker 2: --was high school. Okay. And from junior high to high school. And when I went to Western, other African-Americans had--the year we desegregated Pimlico, there were people who took it upon themselves, you see, to have to have the weight on them to desegregate Western. Western was a bastion of white females. In Baltimore city [Maryland], you had all male, all female public schools. Okay, the closest thing to private schools that a public school offers. They were the top of the line. Polytechnic and City College were for the boys, you had to be smart. Western was for the girls, you had to be smart. Eastern was for the girls, okay. And so they used to call Western the school of 1,000 angels, and it was downtown on Howard and Centre Streets when I was there in Baltimore. Funny time to go, even though the sophomores, and the juniors, and the seniors, had already hit the streets for us ahead of time, and taken the brunt. When we were coming in, we had, you know, other African-Americans who were there and had done the desegregation piece there and were, you know, now upper class and moving on through. But Western didn't have an auditorium. So we went to, I think it was Hippodrome Theatre--Stanley Theatre, maybe it was Stanley Theatre--next door to the school for assemblies. After school, we were not allowed to go to the Theatre because of race. The White Tower hamburger place across the street, big sign in the window, "no colored served here." Other people go to the Greyhound Bus Station across the street, we couldn't go. It was just absolutely amazing. It was, you know--racism is such a stupid thing that when you look for logic, you're never going to find it. And part of the problem is trying to handle the illogic of it all. And so the same theatre, we couldn't go in. Speaker 1: What about extracurricular activities in high school? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I ran for office. I became the vice president of the senior class after the black and white adult community came together to fight for me. The advisors had tampered with the ballots and threw them out, because I was winning and they were not going to have a black girl carry the flag for graduation, which was a big affair with evening gowns and everything. It was very, very gorgeous. And so it was the kids; black, white, blue, green and purple. The kids came together and said you know, Miss Hare [ph.] has tampered with the ballots and she us told us point blank--she was a class advisor--you're not going to have that colored girl do this. And the kids stood up, and they said that's not right. And they told me. They told everybody else that they weren't going to do it. By the time members of the white community, the adult community, members of the black adult community got together and really pushed that school administration to do what they were supposed to do. And they ran it again, and the, Petrina Loucasi [ph.] was the white girl who they said had won. And Petrina was a friend of mine, and Petrina said "Well, this won't be a problem 'cause I'm not running this second time." I was the only name on the ballot. So that was it. And so it was the beginning of understanding that if you want to, you can leave racism with the older generation, and the younger generation can decide, we don't want to this anymore. And that's exactly what happened, and that was another wonderful lesson. Another wonderful lesson. Story_ID: 101168 Speaker 1: Were you also involved in music? Speaker 2: Well, music wasn't a, a big thing for me. I danced, but I was very much involved in, in, in, theatre, in drama, in the drama club and doing the plays, the student government, of course, class leadership; that type of thing. Speaker 1: Were you an achiever, academically? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. You had to be at Western [High School, Baltimore, Maryland]. You had to be at Western. Speaker 1: Favorite subjects? Speaker 2: My favorite subjects--well, I liked--I didn't like creative writing because the teacher didn't like what I wrote about. But I liked the art of writing but they told me you couldn't write things about, you know, really, black people--I don't understand what you're writing about so that was-- Speaker 1: You were writing about-- Speaker 2: --yeah, I was writing about black folks and the struggle and all of that, and they didn't--and you see I graduated in 1961. So the air was full of all of that stuff, and she didn't want to deal with that. But that--the actual art of the writing, I liked. But the other one that I liked was the German, okay, which made me decide to be a German major in college. That's what I declared for my first year at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], which was really funny. And then the other, the other one was--for some reason, I liked geometry. Do not ask me why, but I liked geometry. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101169 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And you mentioned Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], so we're going into college. But in 1961, so you were making the transition from high school to college in the middle of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: How was that affecting your life? Were you involved in the movement? Speaker 1: Well, you had to be. I mean, I mean, you were the movement. Your life was the movement--I mean, you had to be. The biggest fight that was going on Howard's campus at that time, though, there was a fight going on about whether you should be bougie, or whether you should be black, you know, with your afro. I mean, it was switching from Negroes to blacks. And Negro at that point was a insult, you know. You had to be black. You have to understand at that time on campus, we had Stokely [Carmichael, also known as Kwame Ture] and he and I would talk after anthropology class on Wednesdays and we'd have some good 'ole arguments. Then you had (unclear) rides down south, the freedom rides. And I was so stupid, I didn't even realize at that point that those freedom rides were based on the precedent that my Aunt [Irene Morgan] set [in Morgan v. Virginia (1946)]. I didn't even realize that. But there was that, and, you know, you were kind of torn and there was this thing about you couldn't be black and have straight hair. I mean, that's what it amounted to. And you really couldn't be black unless you were dirt poor, and had to deal with rats and roaches. I called it the times of glorifying rats and roaches. And I think it's a damned disgrace, and I'm very angry about that because it, it led into the mindset of entitlement, which I think is about as wrong as you can get if you're talking about having people move forward 'cause if I wait for you to give me what I need, I will always be in bondage to you. I am no threat. I am no threat. And that headset was so clearly planted by organizers who would go into the black community, tell 'em power to the people, you know, be proud of your roaches and your rats, and it's okay and that shows your struggle and all that. Then, leave and put on their Botany 500 suits, okay, and go out and party and do something else. I have problem with that kind of hypocrisy. I have a terrible problem with it. Now, there were others who didn't say that at all. [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], you know, the Southern Christian Leaders, they didn't say that at all. They said, let me tell you, I know you're poor, but let me tell you what we're going to do to pull outta this--we're going to march for our rights, we're going to do this and the other one. But there's a group that glorified, and I don't know whether they intended to do it or not, but they glorified poverty as the only way you can say that you're black. And we're still dealing with some of that today with what our educators are finding out now, which they call that identity crisis. Where, how can I be black and smart, or you talk like you're white? What the hell does that mean? Story_ID: 101170 Speaker 1: Right. Let me just--two things. One, is you mentioned your Aunt Irene [Morgan] and her role in the Civil Rights movement-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --how was that affecting your life? What was her role and how did that affect you? Speaker 2: Actually, at that time, it didn't at all. It didn't at all. I mean, I was a full grown woman before that was even brought to my attention. I mean, you know, when all this attention started coming to her, I mean, it just--because she didn't have a movement behind her. See Rosa [Parks], the people decided she would be a good one, that's the best person to do it because she--I mean, it was just like for, these are the kids that you want to send to Pimlico Junior High. I mean, there was a movement behind it, okay, there were people who were planning, setting it up, going for the most successful strategic move. Smart thing. Aunt Irene's was nothing like that. It was spontaneous. Speaker 1: What was the circumstance? Speaker 2: The circumstance was a bus leaving from Virginia to go back up to Maryland, to go back up to Baltimore [Maryland] from visiting her mother to go back up to Maryland. And it's an interstate travel. And Aunt Irene was sitting in the back of the bus, because it still was segregated, back of the bus--white folks got on up at Saluda [Virginia] and there was a pregnant woman sitting next to her, and she was sitting there and they said "We need your seat 'cause there's not enough seats." She said "I'm already in the back" so, said "No, you're going to have to get up." Well, she didn't get up and then they made a mistake they put their hands on her, you don't do that. And then that was all she wrote. And then she got put in jail. And where they put her in jail is five minutes from where our house is in Urbanna [Virginia], which is funny, in Saluda. Speaker 1: And Thurgood Marshall took her case? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Because Spottswood [William] Robinson actually took the case, but he couldn't take it to the Supreme Court. Speaker 1: And what happened next? Speaker 2: When it went to the Supreme Court [Morgan v. Virginia (1946)]? They won. Thurgood Marshall won and it, it established no segregated processes on interstate travel vehicles in the United States. It was the breakdown of the Jim Crow laws. Story_ID: 101171 Speaker 1: And back to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. How did you get to Howard and why did you choose Howard? Did you have a mentor? Speaker 2: I choose Howard because I was determined to go to a historical black college and university. I didn't want to go to Morgan [State Univeristy, Baltimore, Maryland] 'cause I knew everybody in Morgan. I was born and raised in Baltimore. I wanted to do something different, so I went to Howard. And basically, I enjoyed Howard. I enjoyed Howard. I enjoyed Howard. And then-- Speaker 1: What were your organizations at Howard? Speaker 2: I joined Delta, and I was a member of the German Club and, what else, probably Sociology Club, something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: And tell me about your major? Speaker 2: My major was supposed to be German but at my--at one of the courses, I was in the honors program, and one of the courses I took was something that was a new field called social psychology. Blew my mind. And I said, that's it. That's it. So I became a sociology major. I loved it. I mean I fell in love with it. Broke Dr. Domstedders [ph.] heart because, I mean, he didn't have that many, he didn't have that many students who actually speak German and everything, even though I was only a freshman, you know, but I was taking courses some of the juniors were taking. And all of that, so, he was so sad to lose me. And then the only other thing that I was really, really toying with was with Mr. Owen Dodson to go over to the School of Fine Arts. I was really toying with that, with theatre. So, but-- Speaker 1: How was--tell me more about the movement, the Civil Rights Movement on campus? Speaker 2: Oh, it was very active during those days. Stokely [Carmichael, also known as Kwame Toure] was very active on campus, we had a lot of Freedom Riders going out from Howard down through the Deep South. It, it, it really was a time of consciousness raising. It was very, very active, but there was a huge disconnect between the consciousness raisers and the bourgeois class, as they called it. Speaker 1: And where did you fall? Speaker 2: They tried to put me in the bourgeois class, but I just couldn't buy that. I don't like you labelling me like that. And so I would fight and I'd do what I had always done all my life, I'm going to look out for people and be involved with folks and that's what happened. But I didn't do a lot of it because I ended up falling in love so early and getting married. Story_ID: 101172 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, I got married at eighteen. I had finished two years of college, and I met a wonderful guy from Hampton Institute [now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] at that time, a Baltimorian, and he was home on break and we met in the summer of '62 [1962] at home in Baltimore and we've been together for forty-four, almost forty-five years. Speaker 1: When did you get married exactly? Speaker 2: The first time was December 22nd, 1962 when we eloped. And got married before the public society on June 15th, 1963 'cause I was my mother's only child and she was determined to have a wedding and she didn't know that I had already been married until seven years later [Laughter]. Speaker 1: Did anyone know? Speaker 2: My step-sister knew. She knew. Yeah. Speaker 1: Why did you decide to elope? Speaker 2: Because in those days, there was an absolute belief that if people wanted to go further in intimacy then you're going to pay the cost to be the boss. And it was that simple. [Laughter] Speaker 1: And what's your husband's name? Speaker 2: William A. Brown, Sr.; William Augustus Brown Sr., so. Speaker 1: So you got married and both of you were in school? Speaker 2: Actually, yes. He was in his fifth year as an architecture major. Architecture, is five years at Hampton. And I had finished my second year, 'cause I started college basically on my 17th birthday, so I graduated when I was sixteen and started college when I was on my 17th birthday. Story_ID: 101173 Speaker 1: What other big memories do you have from the college years? Speaker 2: Pledging, at seventeen and being the line (unclear) president. And deciding that we didn't have to take all this crap and if we wanted to, we could downtown and find a lawyer and incorporate and form a new sorority. So it was interesting. Speaker 1: Are there things about that pledging process you can share? Speaker 2: Well, except that it's all changed now. It's all changed now, as it should be. I mean, I've, I've gone on to be an advisor and some other things, and it needed to change. It needed to change. Speaker 1: Was your college experience being in a majority black institution similar to your early years with the kind of all-around nurturing? Speaker 2: It was all-around nurturing but I have to admit, and god rest his soul, there--Stokely [Carmichael, also known as Kwame Toure] was right about this bougie stuff in the '60s [1960s] though. I mean, it was sickening. And I guess I hated that you were so superficial that you decided who I was in my heart based on the roots that I come from, so that's the part that was there. So that was always the piece there. And I think that was something I was always fighting. Story_ID: 101174 Speaker 1: Okay. So just tell me the years of graduation, high school, college. Speaker 2: Okay. High school, 1961. College, 1967. Speaker 1: And tell me about the transition from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Well, Bill [William A. Brown, Sr.] and I got married in '63 [1963] for the public and that was his year of graduation. And that was the, I had finished two years of college, '61 [1961] to '62 [1962], '62 [1962] to '63 [1963]. Then he had to, he took a year's deferment because he was with ROTC so he took a year's deferment, and--because he wanted to get his feet wet in architecture in his field. And he took that deferment because he wanted to work in the field instead of going into the [U.S.] Army, and somehow we ended up in New York after we got married. And I was going to transfer to, was it Hunter? I think it was Hunter College [New York City, New York], all right, couldn't get the stuff from Howard for all my transcripts and things for matriculation so I sat out that year, while he was working at Rockefeller Center with a company there. And then time was up, and the company didn't get the contracts that they needed, so we ended up having to come back to Baltimore [Maryland] and he started working for a firm in Towson, Maryland. But by that time, I didn't have anything else to do so I was pregnant. And so I came back and then we--he started working with Towson, because he took a two year deferment, and started working with Towson and stayed there for that year. Well, what we did during that time, it was somehow--and this is a long time to think back, somehow after I was away from Howard for a year, I came back and did my junior year. Oh, that's what. The two year deferment was over and he had go to service and he was stationed in Fort Belvoir [Virginia], and so I finished my junior year commuting from Fort Belvoir and at that time, my little daughter was with me, Whitney [ph.] was born and so we lived in the officer's quarters down in, at Fort Belvoir. Well, once he had finished--somehow along he had finished his service requirement--at the end of that time, he turned down a regular Army commission and decided that, you know, he had gone to school to be an architect and that's what he was going to do. And he got a position, and we ended up in Cincinnati [Ohio]. And this time, Howard did get all my stuff in on time, and I ended up doing my senior year at the University of Cincinnati. Speaker 1: What year did you leave Howard? Speaker 2: I left Howard in '65 [1965], and then--'65--because then my son came along in '66 [1966], but--yeah, my son came along in '66, but I ended up, I finished going to school at Howard in '65 [1965] and I remember that because '65 [1965] should have been my graduation year, but it was not, it was my junior year 'cause I had stayed out a year. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101175 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --tell me about--so the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio]-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --what was that experience like? You were back in a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. It was-- Speaker 2: --mixed environment. Speaker 1: --yeah, it was very, very interesting. Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] had prepared me so well, and I'll tell anybody that. Howard had prepared me so well in my major. Because one the things when you're married with kids and going to school, all bets are off. You are serious student. And I have 4.0s, 3.8s, I mean I was tearing it up academically, carrying heavy loads because I wanted to have as much under--I knew I'd end up having to leave, I wouldn't be able to graduate from a place that I'd done three years--so I wanted to get as much under my belt as possible. Well having done that and with really good advisorship there at Howard, what happened was as a sociology major, I ended up having to take mostly graduate courses at the University of Cincinnati in order to get my undergraduate degree because Howard had prepared me so well. The course that they were looking for me to take, I had already taken at Howard. And so I, I was choosing grad courses, courses that could go for grad or undergrad, and I was having to choose graduate courses. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm just--tell me just quickly about colorism. Comparing Howard to the University of Cincinnati, issues of race, within the race and white/black? Speaker 1: It was a little different because I was there--I was at the University of Cincinnati again as a married woman with two children. And it's a completely different headset that you're going in with. And the whole issue is let's get the degree. However, I affiliated with the grad chapter of Delta. Well, I was at a time where there weren't any undergraduate Greek Black letter organizations on campus, so I ended up being a charter member of the undergraduate chapter of Delta at the University of Cincinnati which is just weird to me. But the graduate chapter asked me if I would do that because they were in a real political push to open that campus up. Speaker 2: Were they feeling the pangs of civil rights? Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely. Cincinnati, yeah, Cincinnati was definitely feeling the pangs of--this was a hard time. I mean, it was a hard time all over the country. Speaker 2: Tell me about a memory that you have being on campus during that time? Speaker 1: Well, the Black Student Union was forming. It was a pleasure meeting with the black students. I felt at home, we formed a really close bond and it, it was a good experience in that way. And we all knew we were setting up new roads on that campus. Speaker 2: And any specific moments of racial conflict? Was there tension? Speaker 1: No, there wasn't racial tension because the, I found that the--just like there were cliques at Howard, there were university cliques at the UC. They had white frats, and white sororities and the same thing in clubs, in organizations, so the blacks were together all the time. But the blacks were really talking about civil rights issues all the time. Speaker 2: So you had a husband that was affiliated with the military, you were at a-- Speaker 1: Well actually, no, he had finished his military piece. Speaker 2: Right, but he had a connection. Vietnam War, was that an issue? Speaker 1: Yes, it was a big issue and we had friends, we were stationed the same time as friends who had graduated with him from Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] who were on duty with him, and at the point where he was, they had decided they were going to take them and send them over based on whether you were single. Then whether you were married with no kids. Then whether you were married with kids. And when they got down to the list where it was time to send him over, it was at that point where they didn't need to send anybody over anymore. When he was on active duty at that point, but he had been pushed down from going over because he had a wife and two kids. Speaker 2: Okay. And at the University of Cincinnati, anti-war activity, were you involved? Speaker 1: No, we weren't involved in that. We were much more involved in the civil rights issues. Speaker 2: Was it divided by race? Vietnam? Civil Rights? Speaker 1: A lot, yes. Yeah, I mean, I don't remember us focusing a lot on that other than it seemed that an awful inordinate brothers were being called up. Speaker 2: Did you graduate with honors? Speaker 1: Yes, I did. I graduated with honors and was told by the advisors there that, you qualified for Phi Beta Kappa and we need you to lead the line, which I did but I can't let you have Phi Beta Kappa because your GPA has been three years--part of your GPA is three years at another university. But I need you to lead the line. Speaker 2: A proud moment? Speaker 1: A very proud moment. Very proud moment. Story_ID: 101176 Speaker 1: So how did you get from the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] to grad school? Speaker 2: When we left Ohio, we went from Cincinnati to Dayton [Ohio], stayed in Dayton--was very active in the Civil Rights Movement in Dayton, very, very active--very active with the anti-poverty movement in Dayton, very active. And from that point, then Bill [William A. Brown, Sr.] had gone from private sector to the Civil Engineer Program with the [U.S.] Air Force, and when he did that, they were shifting where they were going to be, and we ended up with him coming to operate out of Bolling Air Force Base here in [Washington] D.C. However, we chose to live in Prince George's County [Maryland]. Speaker 1: And so you went to grad school? Speaker 2: Yes, at Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland]. I went to grad school at Bowie State after I'd been here about two years, I went on and started taking some courses. Had no intentions of getting a master's, ended up getting a master's, ended up teaching at Bowie between adjunct and full-time tenured professor for twenty years. And during that time, was interested in some human development courses, certificates or whatever at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], ended up getting a Ph.D. there and being the graduation speaker for the doctoral class that year. Story_ID: 101177 Speaker 1: Okay. So taking you back because you had children, you had three children within this time span. Speaker 2: Okay. I can, let me tell you--when I graduated from undergrad, I had two pre-pubescent kids in the audience. When I graduated from-- Speaker 1: So take me through each child. Give me the child's name and the year of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. Whitney Erin Brown, our daughter, was born April 24th, 1964. Okay. As a matter of fact, we just celebrated her forty-third birthday. William Augustus Brown, Jr. was born January 17th, 1966. Wade Douglas Brown was born December 2nd, 1971. So when I graduated from undergrad, I had two kids. I had two kids. They weren't pre-pubescent; those were two kids, okay. When I graduated from my master's, I had two pre-pubescent kids and one baby in diapers. Okay. When I graduated with my doctorate, I had a son who was finishing his work towards his M.D., Ph.D. at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], so it's been an interesting journey. It's been an interesting journey. Story_ID: 101178 Speaker 1: Now, at Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --you were pursuing a master's degree. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: How did you decide to pursue a master's degree, and I know it was in sociology, psychology--tell me a little about-- Speaker 2: It was psychotherapy. Speaker 1: --okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was psychotherapy. I told you what had switched me from a German major at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was this wonderful thing called social-psychology which is actually the art of applied psychology. Its applied sociology, I love it. And it deals with how people move one with another and get along with one another, and how communities build and this type of thing. It brought together a lot of my interests. Well, the applied social psychology from a therapeutic standpoint that was most intriguing to me was Adlerian psychology; the psychology of Alfred Adler. And I became a real student of it and received my degree from the first degree granting at Adlerian institute in the world. Speaker 1: What year did you get your master's? Speaker 2: '74 [1974], and did a lot of teaching overseas working with the Adlerian institute for summer schools across the country. I taught in Holland, and England. It was interesting. Speaker 1: So Bowie, historically black school? Speaker 2: Oldest HBCU [historically black college and university] in Maryland. Speaker 1: So what was the cultural atmosphere like there while you were in school? Speaker 2: While I was in school, it was absolutely wonderful. We had a dynamic president at that time, [HM] Dr. Samuel Myers. It was just an amazing place to be. Speaker 1: What are some of your fondest memories? Speaker 2: My fondest memories are really with the ADI, Adler-Dreikurs Institute with the visiting students from Israel and the international travel and the work with Adler's children who are psychiatrists and psychotherapists out of New York, and working with Rudolph Dreikurs family. Speaker 1: So tell me about one of those days? Speaker 2: I had to present at the Barbizon up in New York to the, one of the oldest and most prestigious Alfred Adlerian society, and it was the first time that they'd ever had a black person to present. And I remember talking with them and making my presentation about the similarities between the African American cultural value system and Adlerian psychology. And that was a paper that I presented and it was very interesting, I mean, Dreikurs had actually, who was Alfred Adler's star student who was just amazing mind, and he had--he and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] conversed a lot and wrote to each other a lot about how you do this movement and this type of thing with things from him saying "You don't have to ask to be equal, you already are." You proceed from that way, it's a very different thing. So it was very interesting process, and then I had nerve to correct them 'cause they said, "well the next time we want you to talk about vandals." I said I don't know vandals. They said "but no, you know, vandals." No, I said, let's go back to your roots. So here I'm talking to these folks who are concentration camp survivors, this is the heart of Adlerian psychologists, where it comes from. And I'm talking to them, these logo therapists and all this. And I'm saying, "Remember now, make a distinction between what people do and who they are. They're not vandals, they are people who have committed acts of vandalism, let's make the distinction." And they stood corrected. It was, it was amazing. It was amazing. That's a lot of chutzpah. Story_ID: 101179 Speaker 1: Was there this sense on campus, the colorism, the divide, the bourgeois, the people who were-- Speaker 2: Not at Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland], no. Bowie, that's why I like Bowie, I liked schools where you are attracting--the majority of your students are the first ones and their family to ever go to college. Those are the schools I like. I prefer those schools, because to me, selfishly, you can begin to make more of a difference and you can begin to influence whole new patterns for the future. It only takes one. It only takes one. But they need a family because it's a completely different lifestyle. Speaker 1: You also travelled during your tenure at Bowie. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Were those experiences eye-opening in Holland and England? Speaker 2: --England. Yeah, they were. They were very eye opening. Speaker 1: Tell me about a couple of the encounters? Speaker 2: Well, the, the, Adlerian Society, the International Congress of Adlerian Summer Schools and Institute. Adlerians believe in applied social psychology, and our definition of mental health is social interest. The degree of social interest that you have. How much do you care about what goes on with your fellow human beings? How much do you care? Isn't that an interesting definition of mental health? Speaker 1: So how did you experience that in Holland? Speaker 2: I experienced that with them, but I was lonely because I didn't see very many of me who were a part of this, even though Frantz Fanon who was this great black psychologist was an Adlerian. But it--there weren't many of us that time coming through for the international study. But the whole campus had lots of black Adlerians, but getting our people to take advantage of that. And then that was very good because one of the things that I was able to do along with the some of the other staff members was to encourage our students at Bowie to take advantage of the international travel, and when they did, as per usual they just changed the dynamic. It was wonderful. Story_ID: 101180 Speaker 1: What year did you finish your master's and go on to University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]? Speaker 2: I didn't go on to the University of Maryland until, what's five from eleven, what seven, so--'86 [1986]. Speaker 1: So you graduated Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] in that year? Speaker 2: '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And I didn't begin to deal with doctoral work until 1986. Speaker 1: What brought you to the University of Maryland? Speaker 2: Because I was in private practice as a psychotherapist and a consultant, a mental health counsellor and consultant and did a lot of work with divorce and family therapy. And they had this wonderful certificate program out there that they advertised. It was in my mailbox, it was a flyer in my mailbox. Something called divorce mediation. I said that's an interesting thing, I would like to take that course. And I was going to take the course for certification purposes and that's it. I was not thinking about a doctorate. Five years later. Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights of the Ph.D. program? Speaker 2: Some of the highlights of the Ph.D. program are the two year internship in the courts as a family mediator. It was absolutely wonderful. It gives you a grounding in the theoretical base and the application of conflict resolution in ways that is, that's absolutely unbelievable. I mean there's, it's a whole body of knowledge on that. Speaker 1: Did you have a strong mentoring during the doctorate program? Speaker 2: Powerful. Two white women. Powerful. One has died. Speaker 1: Who are they? Speaker 2: Joanne Hunt and she's passed. Dr. Joanne Hunt [ph.]. She was amazing. And Dr. Liz Copeman [ph]. Best Quaker I've ever met in my life. These two women were amazing and they were determined that I was going to finish that and finish it in record time. So, they were wonderful. Story_ID: 101181 Speaker 1: And so you finished Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] in 1974? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you didn't start Maryland [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland] until 1986? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What happened during that twelve-year period? Speaker 2: Working. Working. Speaker 1: Where did you work in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s], it was a combination of teaching at Bowie State and also having my own private consulting practice, and that kept me very, very busy. Speaker 1: And so you were balancing being a mother-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --and being a professional? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. And a wife. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that challenge? Speaker 2: We'd always done it so we didn't know we couldn't. Bill [William A. Brown, Sr.] and I work as a team, we've always worked as a team and I, I--we don't know anything else. You'd have to have known something different. I mean, you're talking about eighteen, twenty-one, somebody's still in school. Somebody's getting a career started. If you don't know the choreography of teaming and partnership, then you're never going to survive it. Speaker 1: So what was happening in your household? Did you re-create the household you had as a child? Speaker 2: Well, no, because my mother stayed home. Speaker 1: Music lessons? Did you talk about black history? Speaker 2: Oh, my dear--our children knew. You can go to any of the 117 historical black colleges and universities that you want to go to for undergrad, okay, you have your choice, but that is your choice, and within that realm there. Now, if you want to go someplace else for graduate school, great, branch out, that's fine. But you will get your base, and you will get your grounding at HBCU. So that was real clear. And we were always active in the community, on top of everything else, we were active in the community as it related to issues that were helping people. Speaker 1: Organizations? Speaker 2: Yes. He was very active in Kappa, he was very active in Kappa at that point. I was active as an advisor to Delta. And then twenty years ago, I followed my mother's footsteps and went into Links, and I had followed her footsteps to go into Delta, actually. Although, (unclear) don't kill me but I had gone home and said, "Mom, I want to be a Zeta." And I'll tell you why. I had even gone to the Argonian [ph.] Rush and to this day, I have tremendous respect for Zeta Phi Beta. At that time in the '60s [1960s], they were doing work with sharecroppers in the South, taking real shots and those were the people I wanted to be like 'cause I felt they were doing something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother said that's really wonderful. And they had a 4.0 line average and my mother said, "That's fine, sweetheart, you can do that. And then you can find someone else to pay for your college 'cause you going to go into Delta." And I said "okay." [laughter] Story_ID: 101182 Speaker 1: But back, so the '70s [1970s] though, in the mid '70s [1970s] to late '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --you were a therapist-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at that time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what-- Speaker 2: Marriage and family therapy. Speaker 1: And what was that experience like? What are some the moments you remember? Speaker 2: I think the moment that I remember the most is acquiring the skill of hypnotherapy, and getting trained in Ericksonian hypnotherapy work. That was absolutely powerful. Speaker 1: What was that training like? Speaker 2: The training was completely mind altering and perspective altering. When your trainer begins by saying you don't have a mind, you are a mind that happens to have a body. And we will proceed from that premise. It was a very amazing process and many things have come in terms of strengthening spiritually, and understanding and insight from that experience. Speaker 1: So what were some of those turning point moments during your work as a hypnotherapist, as a family therapist? Speaker 2: Well, one turning point moment was during a regression, and, actually, understanding where pain from my client was coming from and that it was not from this experience here, it was from a previous experience in a past life. Speaker 1: So during hypnotherapy, was that a consistent encounter? Speaker 2: What, the regression? Past-life regression? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: If that is where the guidance goes. It depends on where the source is. The source can be in this present experience, or it can be in a past life experience. Speaker 1: Any other big turning points during that time period? Speaker 2: Knowing that successfully I could coordinate and run a business, and publish books, and do all kinds of things. And that was a wonderful thing. Speaker 1: Did you publish several books? Speaker 2: Yes. Personality Priorities and to work out that whole theory, and to have it published and to have schools and colleges to use it who were doing Adlerian psychotherapy training, and have to have excerpts of it published in other textbooks. Yep, so that was good. It helped me to be a good scholar, and it helped me prepare for all the writing that I would have to do, and the research I would have to do at the doctoral level. Story_ID: 100933 Speaker 1: Welcome to Part Two of your History Makers interview. Again, I'm Cheryl Butler. We're joined by videographer, Matthew Hickey. I'll have you say and spell your name again for us, please. Speaker 2: All right. Jacqueline Brown. J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E; Brown, B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: And when were you born? And where? Speaker 2: September 4th, 1944. In Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is September the 24th, 2007. Speaker 1: Where are we conducting this interview today? Speaker 2: And we are conducting this interview in my office. The office of the Chief Administrator Officer for the Prince George's County Government in Prince George's County, Maryland. Story_ID: 100934 Speaker 1: I want to start with your education. You graduated from the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] after doing a-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --few years at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, two years, actually three years at Howard. Three years at Howard. Yes, I did two years, had a break for the baby, then went back for one more year and then went to the University of Cincinnati, right. Speaker 1: When did you leave Cincinnati and make the trek back north--back east? Speaker 2: Back east. Back east. Well, actually, we went from Cincinnati to Dayton, to Dayton, Ohio. And we stayed in Dayton for a while and then we came back in 1972. Speaker 1: And back to Maryland? Speaker 2: Yes. To Prince George's County. Speaker 1: So tell me about that time period. You were juggling children-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --education, work? Speaker 2: Right. We had three children. When I finished--well, when I finished undergrad school, we had two, two kids, two little, little kids. Speaker 1: And who were those kids? Speaker 2: Whitney, our daughter, Whitney Erin, and our son, William Jr. And today, Whitney Erin is a civil engineer, married to a wonderful man, a professor at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Dr. David Montague. And they have an amazing little girl, Riley Grace Montague. I don't think you can get much more southern than that. Riley Grace. And then, William is a vascular surgeon and he and his wife, Catherine, who is a neo-natal intensive care nurse and they live in Fairburn, Georgia right outside of Atlanta [Georgia]. And he is in private practice there. And I have three amazing grandchildren from them. William Augustus Brown III, we call him Trey, and then Brianna Michelle, and Miss Cheyenne Elizabeth who is all of a year and a couple of months. Then, those were the two that I had when I finished undergrad school. Speaker 1: And when were they born? Speaker 2: Whitney was born in 1964. Bill Junior was born in 1966. And I graduated in '67 [1967]. So I used to say I had two babies in diapers and the audience kind saying Go, mama. And basically, give me my milk. Story_ID: 100935 Speaker 1: But when I graduated from there [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], and then, we moved to Dayton [Ohio] and I did a lot of work in Dayton with the welfare department there as a social worker and also heading up one of the preschool programs for settlement house work, settlement house work--Lincoln, what was that called? The Hills [Seven Hills Neighborhood House]. I should remember. But it was one of the few left of actual settlement house work. Settlement house work is interesting. You don't really have clients, you have neighbors. And you handle every aspect of their life. It is, it is a wonderful thing. It's like Jane Addam's whole house, it's that type of piece and it was based on that. It was a wonderful experience. I don't even know that they have them anymore. Speaker 2: Tell me a little bit more about that. What was your responsibility? Speaker 1: My responsibility, I was the daycare teacher. Okay, I was the daycare teacher. And the center was right there in the community. We were right on the Ohio River--Seven Hills. That's what it was called, Seven Hills Settlement House. And it was right there on the Ohio River. A lot of our clients or our "neighbors" were Native American, Appalachian White, and Appalachian Black. And I say it in that way because each one of those is a cultural difference with cultural norms, values, ideas and all of that. And anybody can do anything--in other words, it would blend. If in fact one of my kids in the daycare center had an issue, then I could always work whoever was handling rent subsidies, I could work with whoever was handling housing advocacy; those kinds of things. The whole staff handled the comprehensive issues of life, facing the families in that community. Speaker 2: Now, these were poor families? Speaker 1: Yes. Yes, and coming up against some tough, tough stuff. I remember working with a young woman named Maxine, and she had a couple of children and we would talk about training for advocacy to get your landlords to do what was right for where you lived. And one day we were working and were getting it done, got home and got a call, had to go back. Maxine's house had burnt and we knew that that code was in violation, we had been trying so hard, you know, to get the landlord--and she and the children died. And, you know, that was tough. That was very, very tough. And then one little boy whose life I saved, little Jeff Archer. I'll never forget him. I don't even know if Jeff and his mom--still, they had a hard life. He lived up the street and Jeff would come to the center sometimes in the winter with just a t-shirt and underwear on, barefoot. So we'd have to dress him and all this. And that was the first time I went up against the discrimination of whites against Appalachian whites. It was terrible, absolutely terrible. And, of course, the Appalachian whites did not have, at that time, the civil rights background and organizational things that African Americans had, so they were just kind of getting beat down. It was terrible. And so, I went up--one day Jeff wasn't there. I would always worry when Jeff wasn't there. So I asked somebody to watch, you know, finish the program with the kids and I went up the street. His mom had fallen asleep, she had a lot to drink, the gas stove was on, the children were trying to warm themselves around the gas stove. I had to call the fire department 'cause people were getting ready to die--and to pull them out of there and all that. So, it, it it was tough, you know? It was tough, it's the real deal, you know what I'm saying? It's the real deal, and we would set that up. And I guess that's when I realized, you know, poverty is--you know, we used to have a sign up during those days saying "Poverty Sucks" and it does. Story_ID: 100936 Speaker 1: Poverty sucks. And because you don't get your human needs addressed, your basic human needs addressed, and, and, and, it, it makes no sense to me in this society--I'm not even going to get on that soap box. But with all this plenty that we have, it's ridiculous that children should go to sleep hungry and that you don't have healthcare and all those kinds of things. That to me is unconscionable and that you can't go to school. I mean, that should be an, an, an assault on the morality of a person for those kinds of things. And I think that helped shaped a lot of the work that I have done, in terms of I'm always clear about what's real and I'm always clear about who in the end I work for. And that is my neighbor. And that's an important piece. And that's why I'm sorry they don't do settlement house work anymore in this country. I'm sorry about it. I'm sorry that they don't do in schools of social work, CO anymore, community organization training, where you learn to organize grassroots people. Speaker 2: Well, tell me about the settlement houses, how was that working as a program? Speaker 1: Well, it came out of Chicago [Illinois] and, it, it, it, it came as a way of trying to help people coming through Ellis Island actually to get acclimated to this country, and all of them--the multitude of things that were necessary to deal with them. And it was a wonderful type of social work. They don't have it anymore, which is sad. So you, you come away with things now compartmentalized, instead of seeing the entire life--quality of life issues that are there and being able to pull your load and do some of the heavy lifting that's necessary to move it through. It also was not a missionary "I will do things for you" piece, it was an organizational piece, too. You organized people--that's the things that just really killed me with Maxine. They found her body over the kids trying to save them from the smoke. I mean, it's just horrible. And organizing, giving you a voice to speak up, taking you down to City Hall; those kinds of things. I don't-- Speaker 2: Did you take anyone--do you remember taking anyone to City Hall? Speaker 1: Well, actually in Dayton. When we moved-- that was in Cincinnati and that was my first job actually out of college, was at Seven Hills Neighborhood House. Story_ID: 100937 Speaker 1: Then I went to work for the welfare department in Cincinnati [Ohio]. My husband [William A. Brown, Sr.]'s job transferred and so we moved to Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 2: So working at the Welfare Department in Cincinnati-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --I mean we hear so many things about welfare. You were there when things were sort of getting started-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: --in a way. What did you, what did you see? Speaker 1: Well, you saw, you saw people making the best that they could. The system was in some ways, anti-family in that, if you had the father living there, he had to get out, and you know, the whole thing there. So, it was almost--and I don't whether it was doing it wittingly or unwittingly, it was giving the message to people that it's better not to have a potential person there to help you, then it is to have that person there to help you. Speaker 2: Right. So it was all about the money. Speaker 1: It was all about the money, and if you're talking about a generation being twenty years, you've got some cohorts from that time and from before where you have whole families over generations that have never, ever, associated income with work. Now, that builds a whole cultural piece that's very, very different and very difficult to deal with. Speaker 2: Can you recall any specific examples of that? Speaker 1: Oh, well, that's going on right now. Speaker 2: Right. Do you remember from your time in Ohio? Speaker 1: Of, of working with families? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, one of the families I remember which was so wonderful. The first family was a senior lady and she was delightful, but she was on one of the programs 'cause God knows, in those days there was always a program. And she was on one of the programs for senior citizens because she had a very, very, limited, very limited income. Every time I went, she always had something set up for me. She would sit down and talk to me about what I needed to do and to learn about people. She was one of my best teachers. And it was one--'cause I was very young, and you know, but I've always been a good listener and a good student and, you know, I have no confusion about position having anything to do with wisdom. And so you know, I will listen to where the wisdom is and she would talk to me. At the same time, there was another lady I went to in another part of the city and learned a lot about cooking, 'cause see when you don't have a lot, you cook differently. And the best sweet potatoes in the world on the stove. You know, it's like she fried them up or something, I don't know how she did it, but it was really good, and all of this. But they were always looking out for their kids. They were always stretching, stretching, stretching for their kids. Now, at that time, it was a heartbreaker that whoever the father, the husband was couldn't participate the way they needed to. And also, they didn't have the--how can I say it? The social services program has gotten a lot more sophisticated over the years, thank God, because it used to be almost like an all, or nothing. Either you're all there, or if he's there, everything's cut. Medical cannot be cut. Food cannot be cut. Now, if you want to do something with rent, or if you want to do something else--but medical and food can't be cut. There was also an issue with daycare. People didn't understand if you were going to go work, I need to be able to pay someone. So the system has come a long way since then, I have to admit, the system has come a long since then. However, you still have had many generations of kids where somehow it's almost just that amount, and not enough, just that amount and not enough. Just that amount of help, just that amount of transitioning services. And so, we've got some challenges. But in the early days back then, and this--and the system had been around for a while then because my mother was a social worker. She worked for the Baltimore City Department of Public Welfare. So it's not that it was a brand-new system, it was in its teenage years when I was there. And so, it was really interesting. It really worked with that Elizabethan Poor Law, you know, it works and makes it more beneficial to stay poor. Story_ID: 100938 Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Were you conscious of the [1965] Moynihan Report [The Negro Family: The Case For National Action] that later came out describing the black family? Speaker 2: Oh, I raised hell about that. And, and, and, let me tell you where the report really, really got me angry. He [Daniel Patrick Moynihan] started talking about matriarchy, okay. And for a man who is supposed to be, or was supposed to be educated, he should know that "-archy" means power. We had the responsibility, but we didn't have the power. And to shape black women as the ones who were in control is a huge, a huge disservice--and that we emasculate men. That is a huge disservice. Black women were the ones that held things together because the children were there. There's a responsibility for the children, and because this country would rather do things to help--at that time, a black women than to acknowledge the strength of black men. It's that simple, okay. So then to tell us that we are the, the enemy--and unfortunately, that myth has persisted to this day. And I see young sisters still having to deal with that image of the bossy, black woman. Understand the difference between having a responsibility. "Archy" also means that you, it, it, we weren't--we were matrilineal, not a matriarchy. And "archy" has to do with power. One my undergraduate areas is anthropology, cultural anthropology. So let's get it right. Matrilineal is what we are. Now, that's true. We do trace down through the women, along with many, many, other cultures in the world. We trace down through the women. Well, we had to trace down through the women. My God, what happened in the breeding pens? What happened when people were sold off? What happened, and understand the history of African Americans in this country from the institution of slavery. So we track, that's Jenny's child, that's Aunt Virgie's child, that's--you know, you don't usually say that's Uncle such and such's. Okay. Because God only knows what Uncle such and such had to do, or where he was sent or what was out of his control. And so you held onto the lines of relationship through the umbilical cord. That's what you did. And so that's what was there. Now, that's matrilineal. That's fine, you can trace it matrilineal. We've gotten to the point now, thanks to Alex Haley and a whole lot of other people, where we can actually do some tracing, okay, to get the men in there. And all of that, it's fabulous. It is fantastic. But a matriarchy is the women are in charge, and the women call the shots. That's the biggest crap in the world. What we do is we take the weight of the responsibility 'cause we do what's necessary. Story_ID: 100939 Speaker 1: Now, were you seeing comparisons contrasts between the white community, the white Appalachian community, the black community, poor, middle class, when it comes to this matrilineal identity, power structures? Speaker 2: Yeah, the--I think that the Appalachian white woman was strong in her own geography, but when you transplanted her to the city that was a whole 'nother thing. Speaker 1: Can you give me an example of that? Speaker 2: Well, if, if, if, I'm with my geography and if I am working my land, and even if the land doesn't bear a lot, at least, I know how to work the land, work the kids and all of this to get something in the pot to eat, to hold stuff together, to do this kind of thing. But when you bring me to the city, I don't even have la--I'm now dependent on a system for my food. And I wasn't before. Okay. Not that I was eating high on the hog before but at least I had a hog, maybe. Or I knew had to get something. When you pull me out of my geographic culture, there's a problem. And that's what I saw a lot in Cincinnati [Ohio]. Pulling people from the hills of Kentucky, pulling people from the Appalachian areas where they had been used to making it on their own and they were in the city. You know, and a lot of times they were in the city for the same reasons that the black migration took place. The men thought they could get a better job there of course. The discrimination against white Appalachian men from the white power structure was unbelievable, they weren't prepared for that. And so what happened is they really got discriminated against, so that's a group that ended up in the welfare system in Cincinnati at that time. And the discrimination against them was unbelievable. One of the best things that I was able to do once we moved to--actually Dayton [Ohio] because its two inches up the road practically--but I joined the first Models Cities Planned Variations staff in the country which was in Dayton, Ohio. And that was OEO--Office of Economic Opportunity--doesn't even exist anymore. And that program, Models Cities Planned Variation, I was a social planner. They gave me East Dayton which is Appalachia at that time. And I helped to design and execute the first Appalachian American Cultural Center. Because people had to have a restored pride in who they were. These are Daniel Boone's folks. They were speaking in medieval English and still playing the dulcimer. The quilting work was amazing. They had to learn to stand up on their own. Their children were being discriminated against in the schools, all of that. Well, you're talking about during the '60s [1960s], late '60s. Well, you do that to an African American during the late '60s, everybody and their mother's coming out to march. These folks knew nothing about that. They were just victims. And so I couldn't stand that. And as social planner, that was my job to start empowering people. And so I understand that it may be still there, I don't know. The Appalachian Cultural Center might still be there. Story_ID: 100940 Speaker 1: Can you remember a pivotal event while you were in that position? A story? Speaker 2: Well, things are running together. This didn't have anything to do with the social planning piece. Some of the things I did in Dayton [Ohio] was also working with community action agencies, and I did a lot of work with the Welfare Rights Organization. And we had been trying to get the Dayton City Council to bring exterminators out to some areas of west Dayton because we were having a rat problem. And they didn't come. And I remember that people said, "We'll tell you what we'll do, we're just going to gather these up. Just get the rats up so they can see and this type of thing." And I think the threat of doing that scared people that we were going to do that because I would march with them and everything else with the Welfare Rights Organization, we'd organize them and all this because you never respond until the wolf is at your door. And one of the things that Saul Alinsky taught us was that, you know, take it to 'em. Take it to 'em. And so we were going to catch some rats and take it down to city council for that 'cause they wouldn't meet, they wouldn't meet with these moms. They wouldn't meet with them. And so that was an interesting thing when we did the demonstration and all of a sudden, the doors opened and they could sit down and talk with them. And that was, that was a nice thing. And that showed me something, that taught me something about organizing. Those days of organizing and those days of doing two things simultaneously were very interesting grounds. The two things that you always did simultaneously--empower the people who had been disenfranchised who didn't have a voice and become a very clear conscience for those in power. Now, some people went one way or the other. And during that time, I think the most effective thing was to be able to do both. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Oh, this was '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. Story_ID: 100941 Speaker 1: So all of this is going on, and you're doing work. You're crossing racial boundaries that kind of thing-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: --around the time of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s assassination? Speaker 2: Yes. And Avondale [Cincinnati, Ohio]--yeah, when he died I was in Cincinnati and that's when Avondale burned [Riots of 1968]. Avondale burned, and I remember lying on the ground where we were living, and--with the children because you could hear, you could hear it, it was terrible. And you could hear a lot of destruction going on. Story_ID: 100942 Speaker 1: You were describing what happened upon the assassination of [Reverend] Martin Luther King, Jr. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Right. We were in Cincinnati [Ohio], in Avondale, and it, it was, it was an amazing piece to watch that [Riots of 1968]. I remember--you know, there were a lot of fires, a lot of noise; you know, later came to understand that some of it was gunshots. But people couldn't believe it. I mean, they were just--the anger and the rage was too much; it was just too much. And it was out of control for a while; it was really out of control for a while. Speaker 1: And this was the black community? Speaker 2: Yeah, Avondale. Yeah. And it was, it was out of control for a while, it really was. Speaker 1: Was there fear? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was fear. People were putting signs up, you know, saying, "I'm a brother. This is a black-owned business," because they didn't want--people, people--that's when people were lashing out and breaking down anything that looked like a business, but it was our businesses, and it was tough, you know. There was just unabashed anger. And then, you know, anybody who wanted to exploit it could, and I'm sure they did, just like people do that all over the world. But the, the heartbreak, people felt they had nothing to lose. If you kill him, then you'll kill anybody, so I may as well die now. I mean really, that's how people felt. Speaker 1: Where were you when you heard the news? Speaker 2: In Cincinnati, and I'm trying to remember. Definitely, in Cincinnati. I'm not sure whether I, I was home. I don't know why I, I don't think I was, I think I was someplace else. I don't think I was home, though. I don't think I was home. Speaker 1: Was Cincinnati segregated at the time? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah, Cincinnati, Cincinnati wasn't different than any other, any other place in the country, really. It was--you always had your black side of the town and your white side of town; I mean, you always did. I mean, you had your white society, black society. What you had is people starting to desegregate certain communities. Speaker 1: Like which community? Speaker 2: Well, you had communities like Kennedy Heights and Silverton. I remember those. And people were starting to move out to those places, okay? So-- Speaker 1: These were middle class communities? Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, those were middle class communities there. But, normally, if I can remember, this is going back a long way now, Avondale was where you had most of the black folks, as I remember back then in Cincinnati. I actually spent more time in Dayton [Ohio], and was really even more deeply involved in the community in Dayton, so-- Story_ID: 100943 Speaker 1: So, eventually, you make your way back to Maryland? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What brought you back to Maryland? Speaker 2: Well, by the time I got back to Maryland, we had a, a third one, okay? Speaker 1: Who was this and when was he born? Speaker 2: This is--Wade was born in 1971, and big ol' baby, nine pounds and something. That's why he was the last one too. But, yeah, he was born in Dayton [Ohio], and then when he was eight months old, we moved here [Prince George's County, Maryland]. We moved back here because my husband [William A. Brown, Sr.]'s position moved here. So we moved back to Maryland and we chose Prince George's County because it was closer to Bolling Air Force Base. Speaker 1: Because your husband was a military officer? Speaker 2: My husband--no, my husband actually was a Department of Defense civilian, and he was a civil engineer for the [U.S.] Air Force. Speaker 1: That was a pretty high post for a man of color? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. In those days, it really was. And then who knew he would go on to make history, and he did. He went on to make tremendous history. But-- Speaker 1: In what respect? Speaker 2: Well, he became the first African-American senior executive in engineering in any of the armed services. He became the [Deputy] Director of Military Programs for the United States Corps of Engineers worldwide. He took over the negotiations of storage of weapons of mass destruction with Russia, and it became the Brown document. And he is the first African-American installed in the Hall of Fame in the Corps of Engineers as distinguished civilian leaders. So--and he also is the founder of AAFEA, which is the African-American Senior [sic, Federal] Executive Association, which has the responsibility of bringing African Americans in government into the senior executive service. He has testified before Congress many times, especially the black caucus. And some legislation is being constructed, as we speak, to put forward for the recommendations that he and the organization have made regarding what OPM [United States Office of Personnel Management] and what the government has to do to open up those senior executive ranks for African-Americans. Story_ID: 100944 Speaker 1: Wow. So the two of you together, quite a force. So taking us back to sort of the beginning stages of all of that, in the early 1970s, he [William A. Brown, Sr.] was working-- Speaker 2: With--he was with Wright-Patt out in Dayton, Ohi--Wright-Patterson Air Force Base out at--in Dayton, Ohio, and then the civil engineering center was going to move to Panama City, Florida. And he told them point blank he is not taking his family there, to Panama City, Florida, with a college-educated wife, children that he wants to have educated, and have them work in the timber factory, and the lumber factory, that's not happening, so he was going to leave civil service. They said, No, we don't want to lose you. Would you go to Bolling Air Force Base and actually be a part of the Pentagon staff, but simply be located at Bolling, in terms of the ba--in terms of civil engineer for the Air Force? And, and we did. We said, "Okay, that, that sounds better than nothing." But he was prepared to walk. He was not going to put his family through that. He was not going to put his family through that. And so we came there and we moved to Prince George's County [Maryland]. And, you know, my folks were not happy about that, they wanted us to move back to Baltimore where both of us were from. And they had heard terrible things about Prince George's County, as it related to black folks, and all of that. Speaker 1: What had they heard? What were the rumors at this time? Speaker 2: Well, the rumors were that Prince George's County wasn't too friendly to black folks, at that time, okay? And that there's a lot of discrimination, and all of that, you know. In the beginning, you know, Bowie's Levitt--Levitt's Bowie [Maryland], rather, you know, had restrictive covenants. Blacks could not buy. This county has come a long way. I am very proud of this county. I am so proud of this county. Black, White, Asian, Hispanic, everybody, this has become America's city, it really has. It is just wonderful, but it was not always that way. Speaker 1: What were your first--what are your first memories of the return and-- Speaker 2: Well, my first memories of the return were fine. I didn't have any problem, I really didn't. We had moved to Pointer Ridge. The restrictive covenants, other courageous people had braved that fight, and so those restrictive covenants had been lifted. Speaker 1: And what--can you spell it out for us, what did that mean exactly, in real life? Speaker 2: In restrictive covenants? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: You were not allowed to buy nor were you allowed--by the rules of your mortgage lending thing--to sell to blacks. Speaker 1: Did people tell you stories about-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Horror stories? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Can you remember any of them? Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah. Well, yes, because some of the people, some of the people who braved it the first time, you know, they had crosses burned on their lawns. Speaker 1: People you knew? Speaker 2: A person I have come to know who is a member of our church. And it, it was a heck of a time. It was a heck of a time. That was in the '60s [1960s], and see, we didn't come till '71 [1971], '72 [1972]; '71, [1971], '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Now which township was this? Was it the county-- Speaker 2: Bowie. Speaker 1: --or was it--it was Bowie? Speaker 2: It was Bowie, yeah. Yeah. So--and there were certain places you just didn't go. Speaker 1: What were those places? Speaker 2: Well, you, you--first of all, you didn't go to Bowie, but a lot of the rural areas you didn't go into. You just didn't go unless your family had lived there a long time and you knew the rules. But, you know, people forget that nothing anomalous was there. That's how it was, and then people were fighting it, and, and moving it forward. So this county has really been an evolution. If you want to study the changes in America, just study Prince George's, and study it from the standpoint of the good stuff that can come from the turmoil; the good stuff that can truly come from the turmoil. Story_ID: 100945 Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: So where did your family move? Speaker 1: We moved to a new part of Bowie [Maryland], at that time, Pointer Ridge. And at that time, everybody was fresh young faces, you know, and it was southern part of Bowie, down [U.S.] 301. And all the houses were contemporary, California contemporaries. And it, it was, it was just really interesting. It was, it was a time, you know, the early '70s [1970s], people were, you know, full of change and, you know, spit and vinegar and all of that, so, you know, it was very interesting. I didn't think anything of it, my parents were concerned and they said, "I don't want you living down there because it's dangerous." And I remember saying to my mother, "My license plate says Maryland, anyplace in Maryland, and I can live anyplace in Maryland I want to live and folk gonna have to deal with me and that's it." And, you know, that type of thing, so it was just very interesting. Speaker 2: Do you remember the breakdown, the percentage of African Americans in Prince George's [County, Maryland] in the early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 1: No, I don't remember that precisely, and I really should, but I really don't. But it, it, it had--the, the, the flow of black folks into the county had definitely started, had definitely started. And nowhere near where it is now, but it had definitely started. Speaker 2: And how are--because you had young children, eventually-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --they entered the school system? Speaker 1: Right. And the school system here, at that point, was absolutely wonderful in the '70s [1970s]. It was absolutely wonderful, and I am thrilled to see it coming back to that now. We went through some hard times. Speaker 2: Integration, was that a factor? Speaker 1: Desegregation. I make a distinction between integration, desegregation and segregation. And desegregation was really hard in Prince George's County, it was super hard. Prince George's County might have been the last place in the nation, seriously, to get from under the court order. That was just recently, actually. When, when was that? Maybe only eight years ago, ten years ago, something ridiculous. You know, because people went kicking and screaming here to that, I mean, seriously. Speaker 2: What was the process? What do you remember about that desegregation process? Speaker 1: Well, for me, I think most of the fighting--a lot of the fighting about the, the key desegregation had been done by amazing people, you know, like Sylvester Vaughns and, and John Williams, Hardy Jones. I mean, those folks and, you know, people like Cora Rice, Bonnie--oh, gosh, I--Bonnie Johns, Bonnie Johns, those giants had done tremendous work. You know, Lucy (unclear), I mean, they had done some work here; there's no question about that. So when I came, I was a beneficiary of the work that they had done. And so my children did not experience a lot of negative things, they, they really didn't. Story_ID: 100946 Speaker 1: It--and--however, the fight was still going on at a deeper level, in terms of the achievement piece. Speaker 2: What do you mean? Speaker 1: Making sure that the African American kids were performing and receiving the same quality instruction as the white kids; that opportunities were being made available to them the same as to the white kids. Speaker 2: Now, is this something-- Speaker 1: All of that. Speaker 2: --you fought on an individual basis? You hear the stories in the '70s [1970s] about moms taking trips into the classroom making sure that their kids-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --got the same instruction. Speaker 1: Well, our--you know, now that you mention it, our family has been so involved, at that point, of our children's lives, I didn't even think anything of it, so we, we were going to do that. We were blessed; all three of our children went to the Science and Technology Center-Roosevelt, Eleanor Roosevelt [High School]. So they got excellent education. Their elementary school education was wonderful, absolutely wonderful. The middle school-- Speaker 2: What were the el--names of the elementary and middle schools? Speaker 1: Well, Surratts--Surrattsville El--no, it was Surrattsville Middle School, which was a bit of a problem, but-- Speaker 2: How so? Speaker 1: Well, the--my daughter, I remember that specifically, my daughter's had problems not with the staff and the teachers, but she actually had a problem with other black kids because she was an avid reader, she was into her books. Speaker 2: They call her an "Oreo"? Speaker 1: They--that and, and--yeah, that and some other things, right. So that was a problem. Speaker 2: She was too white? Speaker 1: She was too--no, she was too academic. She was too academic. She, she wasn't interested in some of the things they were interested in, she was interested in reading, she was interested in the, in, in, in the learning piece of it. She, she just loved it, I mean, because that's what she got at home all the time. So she, she caught some stuff from them. The teachers were very supportive, and many of the white students were very supportive, and many of the black students, but there was a segment of black students that just really kind of resented her getting the good grades and all of that. And I remember us going down and seeing--I--you know something about foreign language. I want her into foreign language class, or whatever, and, and the, the principal--it, it really wasn't against my daughter, he just didn't see why a foreign language was necessary in the--you know, for the school. Say, "Hello? We live on the planet and there's more languages here, can you do that?" You know, so it was--it--that was interesting, you know, that was interesting. That was a pedagogical issue, not so much a racial piece. That was a change in, in the educational understanding. Speaker 2: So at this point, busing's a nonissue. I know in cities like Charlotte [North Carolina], busing was, was going on in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Well, busing--yeah. Yeah. We, we didn't have that, by the time that was there. Some places did, some places in the county because the busing stuff in this county got a little bit of confuse, so you need to talk with people who were there beforehand. What happened is the population took over, and so in a way, you almost ended up busing black kids to black schools. Story_ID: 100947 Speaker 1: And, and, you know, there are people much more aware of, of the, the, the nuances of this than I, because again, when I came, that kind of stuff was there. I mean, people were living with the judge and, and, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was on it. The NAACP in this county [Prince George's County, Maryland] never went to sleep on it. Speaker 2: Do you remember the leaders? Speaker 1: Yeah, Hardy Jones, [Sylvester] Vaughns, and all the people that I named. They were just fabulous. Speaker 2: And did you know them personally? Speaker 1: I knew Bonnie Johns personally; she took me under her wing as a mentor. Cora Rice, powerful woman. Speaker 2: What stories can you tell? Speaker 1: The wisdom from those women. This is what you do, this is how you approach, this is what you do. Bonnie Johns, I believe, was the first black on the board of education; she was amazing, a lady at all times, a force to be reckon with. Cora, a lady and a flash of fire that was not going to settle for anything less than what was necessary for our people to move ahead; took no prisoners. She--those two ladies were very instrumental in, in working with me. And then another wonderful lady named Lucille Johnson. Mmm. Mmm. Mmm. And Ms. Lucille is still alive. Speaker 2: And they mentored you? Speaker 1: Yes, they did. Yes, they did. They certainly did. They saw this young woman coming in here, being a part of the mental health advisory board, being a part of community work, working with the youth services bureau and doing all these things, and they saw something that, and they said I need you to, you know, carry on. Speaker 2: Carry the torch. Speaker 1: Carry the torch. And those women spent time with me. I loved them. I loved them and learned so much about how to change things in a catalytic manner without breaking a sweat and still do it with class; I learned that from them. Speaker 2: Did you attend meetings with them, NAACP meetings? Speaker 1: Yes. Well, not so much the NAACP meetings. For some reason, I had the opportunity to always meet with them individually. I don't know why it came out that way, but it did. Story_ID: 100948 Speaker 1: You also pursued a master's degree? Speaker 2: Yes, at Bowie State College [Bowie, Maryland] then. And Wade was a little fellow then, and Whitney and Bill were about eight and six. And-- Speaker 1: And this is 1972? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. And I finished in '74 [1974]. And did adjunct teaching out there for eleven years. Speaker 1: Now, you--well, the master's degree, first of all, tell me a little bit about what you studied? Speaker 2: Adlerian psychotherapy. I loved it. Absolutely loved it, which was a natural evolution now from an undergrad degree in, you know, sociology, psychology and social welfare from the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio]; three years of that have got to be given credit to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And then to move to the master's in psychotherapy made sense, and especially Adlerian in that the definition of mental health is the degree of social interest that a person has. And one of the leading Adlerian psychologists at the time of [Alfred] Adler, who was a, a student of Adler's who went on, Dreikurs, Rudolf Dreikurs, there were many letters between him and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and also, between him and (unclear), who was one of the leading black psychologists. The concept was, I remember one of the pieces was I find that everything you're doing--the gist of it was, to King--was I find that everything you're doing is correct, the only, the only change I would make is that you don't have to ask for equality, you already are, and that you would proceed from that foundation, which is very powerful. Very powerful. And so I did a lot of work with them and ended up teaching overseas, doing a lot of work overseas and teaching also. Speaker 1: With this philosophy, were you expressly interested in the issue of race and psychology? Speaker 2: I was specifically interested in the issue of social, social equity. This is--this was an applied social psychology, which I liked a lot better. I didn't have much time for [Sigmund] Freud; I just found that was ridiculous. Speaker 1: Interesting. Speaker 2: So--but--and, of course, Adler and Freud didn't get along too well either, okay? In the Viennese society, those two really split, okay? Speaker 1: And what was it about Freud's theories that-- Speaker 2: To me, they avoided the issue. I mean, you, you know, they were so psychosexual, and everything, you know, everything, the camera is, is, is, is a penis, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean, God, get over it, Freud, you know. And so it, it just, you know, it, it begged the issue. You know, you have to understand that that's the same one where the women were saying they were being sexually abused by their fathers and other people in the Victorian times and he decided it was hysteria. Okay, so that's there. Speaker 1: Dismiss Freud, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Right. So--but, but with, with Adler, Adler actually was a physician who got involved with the labor movement, with the tailors, to give them some power. And he started saying, you know, this is, this is an issue of social interest. This is an issue of a sense of embedded--a sense of social embeddedness. Do you recognize us? That people--what people want is a sense of belonging. That's what people want, a sense of belonging, and that is one of the main things that families must do. It is Adler who started the kindergartens. So, you know, all of that was very amazing. Story_ID: 100949 Speaker 1: So when I found it, and I, I know the first--one of the first presentations I made at the Barbizon in New York to the Adlerian Psychology Society there-- Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: Oh, this was in the '70s [1970s], around '76 [1976], I would guess. And the presentation I made was the, the comparison between Adlerian psychology and African American cultural values; it was very powerful. Speaker 2: What was your thesis? Speaker 1: My thesis was that the issue of you already are, first of all, you already are equal, and the issue of contribution, recognition of contribution, the sense of social embeddedness; all of those things. And that whatever you do, you continue to look at things, is this useful or useless? And useful is anything that enhances the wellbeing of the human family; useless are things that go against the overall wellbeing and comprehensive health of the human family. Speaker 2: So I hear a recurring theme, your interest in family-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and maintaining family. And also, it's-- Speaker 1: But a broadened definition of family. Speaker 2: Okay. Right. And I was gonna say, you've taken us definitely beyond the black family and you're interested in community. Speaker 1: You have to. It's an evolution that comes in. But when you do community, take your African-American gift to the table, that's the difference. See, what happened with some of my colleagues, because mine was the generation that went--that got into Vassar [College, Poughkeepsie, New York], that got into Wellesley [Wellesley, Massachusetts], that got into all those places, and some of us disappeared because some of us thought once you get in, you just disappear. My thing is when you are in, you are there to add your unique gift and flavor to the table, otherwise, why are you there? Why are you there? That is what enhances the human family. When I can talk to firefighters here about the concept of Sankofa and have them hear it for the first time and understand it, and say this is something that we need to embrace, that's what I'm talking about. Why would I not bring my African-American-ness and my femininity to the forefront? Why else have I been given those two gifts if not to bring them to the tables of power? Story_ID: 100950 Speaker 1: You were talking about the layering of those identities. So being an African American person and being a woman, that's part of your identity that you're going to bring to the table of power? Speaker 2: Yeah, you must do that. Speaker 1: Were you influenced by the women's movement? Speaker 2: Not much. The, the women's movement for me, when I came along, was basically a white women's movement. And so we were in, in, in, in its beginning stages, just diametrically opposed. I remember even addressing some of the women's movement things and explaining to them why you cannot assume African American women are going to go along with this, and let me tell you why. First of all, we need to get our relationship straight, okay? You cannot turn your head and not understand that we have some issues with you, okay? We have some serious issues with you, as it relates to the fact that we were the ones who cleaned your house, okay, and took care of your children at the expense of our own children, and you didn't think much of us at that time. And when the decision was made for blacks to have the right to vote, you told Frederick Douglass, "Forget it," because politically, it wouldn't sell; we'll just go for women's right to vote. So I said you can't separate us out like that, okay? We're both woman--women and African American. So you made some movement decisions. I said, so also, I understand you're angry with your men, okay, but I'm not angry with my man, okay? And so my thing is I want to embrace the family. I am not willing to be a part of any movement that separates, weakens the family, which means anything that removes the, the power, the leadership, the, the strength, even if it is co-leadership of the African American family. I'm not gonna do that. We've, we've survived. We've been fighting all our lives to find family roots. We've been fighting all our lives to find out where we're linked, who we are. It's a wretched thing when you take people from their roots; it's a wretched thing when you do that, and I don't know who was there. I, I look at people sometime longly, I can trace to such and such. Yeah, right. Well, I'm going to keep trying to trace too, that's why I really support the genealogy studies that are going on. Oh, thank God for that in the black community. I just think that is so important. Family was ripped from us and we had to make family. And the family that we made on these shores have to hold together, and they were ripped, and--but we've got to hold together. We have got to hold together. Family is just so sacrosanct. And so what has to happen, a women's movement that is anti-man makes no sense to me; it makes no sense to me. Why am I gonna turn against my brother, my husband, my son, my uncle, why--my grandpa, why would I do that? And so we have a deep psychological difference. And I'm for women moving forward, I think that's wonderful. I certainly don't want to see women mistreated in any way, however, I am defining--I don't know whether it was--who was it? It wasn't Audre Lorde. Speaker 1: Alice Walker talks about the womanist movement. Speaker 2: We--the womanist movement. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes. That's different. That's different. That's creativity, that's nurturance, that's inclusion, that's fighting for those things; that's very different. That, I can live with. That, I like, but the old time--see, when, when they were just starting back, they were burning bras and all this kind of stuff and everything. And you're talking about burning bras to a person who couldn't buy a bra in the store where you were selling them because you would've told me to leave the store because colored weren't allowed to try on clothes. So get through all that, you know, just, you know, understand. I'm a funny generation. I remember. I was there. So when you talk to the people who, who are younger, you run that on them. My generation's a funny generation. We remember it. We--it was not history for us, we lived it. We saw its ravages on our parents and our grandparents. And what--we were the golden group, the first breakthrough group that could go and try to do some desegregation in this country. I think they're doing something now with Ernie Green [HM Ernest Green] and the [Little Rock] Nine and all of that. So, so we're a funny generation. They talk about with the war, the greatest generation, I think we are a peculiar generation, and, and people need to capture our stuff that you're doing now because we may be the last generation that lived it. We not only lived it, but we lived the change. We were the ones sent out to do the change. Story_ID: 100951 Speaker 1: Now, were you--people in your generation, you mentioned some of the alliances that have been forming in Prince George's County [Maryland]. Earlier in your interview, you mentioned your household where people like Thurgood Marshall, Duke Ellington would actually enter your home, Leslie Uggams, people like this. When you made the return to this part of the country, were those alliances still intact? Speaker 2: Those alliances have always stayed intact because, you know, even if it's not those people, you know, because some of them have just passed away. I mean, my aunt, until, until Thurgood Marshall died, he was going to be a part of, you know, communicating with Irene Kirkaldy, Irene Morgan, okay? Speaker 1: Your aunt? Speaker 2: My aunt who her case, eleven years before Rosa Parks, broke down the Jim Crow laws in this country. It was called Morgan v. The State of Virginia [Morgan v. Virginia (1946)]. Fantastic, okay? Even the Freedom Rider songs in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] were, you know, "Get on the bus, sit anyplace, because Irene Morgan won her case." So all of that is there, okay? So those ties were always going to be there. The beautiful part, and this is what I hope is never lost, people can walk and chew gum at the same time, it is a straw man to say either you are African American or you are American, that's crap. You can be both and people are both all the time, and that's what make this such a wonderful place to be and the hope for this country is such a fantastic thing. I would find it extraordinarily boring if this whole country were African American. I'd know what to expect, what to do, what the rules are, nothing more to learn, blah, blah, blah, and all this, okay? It'll be wonderful, it'll be fun, but it also would be boring. I wouldn't learn anything, okay? And the universe requires us to learn because we are constantly presented with challenges. I love that I can go to an Italian festival and folk are still Italian. I like that I can go to Irish stuff and folk are still doing Gaelic stuff. I like that. Are they any less American? You wait 'till somebody questions this country and you watch the American come on board, okay? So it's a beautiful place. That is something that is, is there. My problem is when everybody else holds onto the rich soup that they come to, to make this country what it is, and for some reason, some of our people think well the only way to make it is throw away your part of the soup and just blend in. No, you have something so rich and beautiful to offer. Story_ID: 100952 Speaker 1: And I do make a distinction between African culture and African American; I make a distinction. Speaker 2: A la W.E.B. Du Bois, being American and African American at the same time. Speaker 1: Yes. Well, well, no, something even different. Part of my gener--I said we have a peculiar generation. Part of my generation decided that they were gonna be just African, okay? And that there was nothing called African American culture, or as--oh, what is his name? Mosante--Asante says-- Speaker 2: Oh, Dr. Asante [HM Molefi Kete Asante]. Speaker 1: Asante. (unclear) people, blacks of the United States of America. That's a whole culture, okay? That's who I am. People self-identify, I am African American, okay, and all that that means, and if you want to see the differences, you talk to people who are brothers and sisters from Africa, we have differences. We have some things that have really come together and have crisscrossed the ocean and stayed with us forever, good, good, wonderful things. And only those of us who hit that peculiar institution called slavery, and see I did a lot of my dissertation work on this, and I understand that of which I speak. The fact of the matter is the stuff that worked in Africa was the exact stuff that was gonna kill us here for survival. Women were down here in Africa, down here, okay? Did silly things like grow the crops, barter in the marketplace, while the men were doing the things of the religious stuff, the personification, the leadership and all of this. Here comes slavery. Those very things that were at the bottom of the social value piece became the survival mechanisms for our people. The men were not allowed to do what they needed to do; they could not do it because it would be an affront to the masters and the leaders of the slavery institution. As a result of that, a culture grew up. Story_ID: 100953 Speaker 1: Well, tell me how this connects with your work. You mentioned the Ph.D. work, but even before you got to the Ph.D., you were on the tenure track at Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland]. Speaker 2: That's correct. That's correct. Speaker 1: So tell me about that sojourn. Speaker 2: And I became a tenured professor at Bowie teaching in the graduate school at Adlerian psychology. It was wonderful. Took students overseas to Leibenhust(ph.) in the Netherlands and into Essex, the Colchester and Essex in England and got them involved in studying. And you really have quite a few African American Adlerian psychologists out at Bowie State; I don't think where people realize. Bowie State University, which it is now, is the first degree granting Adlerian Institute in the world. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And we're very proud of that. And the good work of people like [Dr.] Hal McAbee, God bless him. And with the blessings of Dr. Sam Myers [HM Samuel Myers], who was president there when all this was getting started; fantastic man. He's still alive today, God bless him. Love him dearly. Another mentor of mine. And, you know, Dr. Henry Raymond, Ida Brandon, all of those wonderful people who saw something for a historically black college to become the first degree granting Adlerian Institute in the world. Because of that, we attracted students from Israel, from South Africa, from all over. It was fantastic. And I believe it's still--I think it's still going on. I haven't been out to the school in a while. Speaker 1: And you were part of that institution building? Speaker 2: I was very much a part of it. I was on faculty at the Institute [Adler-Dreikurs Institute of Human Relations], yeah. Speaker 1: Were you being influenced--was it all [Alfred] Adler or were you being influenced at all by people like [Carl] Jung, or-- Speaker 2: Well, you studied everyone. You studied everyone. Because what you want to see is the common themes and so you studied everyone, but the practice was with Adlerian psychology. Basic things like birth order. People always hear about that, birth order, are you a first child, middle child, second child, you know, and all this kind of stuff, and the mistaken goals of children's behavior. You know, why children--is it attention getting? Is it power seeking? You know, is it perfectionism? Is it revenge? Speaker 1: Demystifying family structure. Speaker 2: Demystifying the family structure and, and understanding the role of equity and, and social embeddedness. Story_ID: 100954 Speaker 1: Were you influenced at all by the work of Kenneth Clark, Mamie Clark? Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought he did great work. Yeah. Yeah, I thought they did great work. And, and they were giving a clarion call to people about what you need to look at. People weren't paying much attention, unfortunately, and they keep talking about the study, but then again, you had, during my time, this rule about 70/30 in the school system, that if a school has 70 percent whites and 30 percent black, then you can consider it integrated, okay? And that, you know, you won't have separate, but equal. First, first of all, equal is a funny concept as it relates to human relationships. You maybe want to talk more about equity, which is different. Because equal means the same as you get six, I get six; well, no. Equity means you need six; you need three to get to the same place. You know, I mean, so we need to start looking at the equity issue as opposed to equality. And, and in the beginning, everything is evolutionary and it grows. And in the beginning, the movement was really about equal, okay? Where we stumble is on the equity issue. That's why people have trouble with quotas; that's why people have trouble with preferential appointment and that type of thing because that moves into the equity area. And people don't want to get into that because it's a little harder because some people have not the same memory that others have, and they don't have the same experience. Where some people time begins with their lifetime only; for others of us, time is an accumulation of some things that have been a deficit and what does that mean? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: And so the Clark study-- Speaker 2: The Clark study really talked about that because they said your children are still preferring the white dolls. He didn't want people to hate white dolls; he just saw that, he and his wife, saw that as a proxy for self-depreciation and that can never be a good thing. I-- Speaker 1: Self-hatred. Black-- Speaker 2: Self. Speaker 1: --self-hatred and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Self-hatred or, you know, self--I--that can never be a good thing because you're never gonna have any kind of civilization that is, is, is rich and vibrant if a whole segment of that civilization is consumed with denial of self and dislike of self; that's not healthy. That's very, very unhealthy, so he saw that, and God bless him and his wife for that. Story_ID: 100955 Speaker 1: Now, your work then at Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland]--did you, did you see any of that manifesting in students at Bowie or were these students evolved psychologically beyond that point? Speaker 2: No. Actually, the students at Bowie were very clear about who they were and their contribution that they want to make. I mean, they, they--those were some of the best students I've ever seen in my life. Black and white, didn't make any difference; they were really great. Speaker 1: So how did those trips to places like the Netherlands affect them? Tell me some of the highlights. Speaker 2: Well, some of the students--some students had never traveled before, and then to travel based on an intellectual study was absolutely wonderful, and they had a lot to contribute. When you sit in a class with people who have been through Holo--Holocaust, and people who have been through their countries being taken over, your eyes open up quite a bit and you begin to understand that, as corny as it sounds, we really are one human family that is completely dependent upon our diversity to make us greater than the sum of our parts. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of those key figures during those trips? People whose stories influenced you and the students? Speaker 2: Well, one situation was when it was an eye opener for me, they had booked too many students who were speaking German, and so they asked me to take one of the classes. Speaker 1: Because you did speak German? Speaker 2: Correct. And so I had to dust it off. And what the Americans had done was confuse the Dutch with the Germans and they put me in the class and I started the class and spoke to them in German. The German students who were there were smiling and they were very happy; the Dutch students didn't respond at all. And then I heard the Dutch students speaking to one another in Hollandish, and I understand it because the languages are very close and I couldn't understand what was going on and they were completely affronted. And as it turned out, to make a long story short, the Dutch had done a lot to fight the Germans during the war, hiding Jews, making sure that their country wound not turn over to what they considered the ultimate hatred. They had gone through a lot of hell, and therefore, German was the language of the enemy. Speaker 1: Oppressor. Speaker 2: Um-hum. And it was very interesting. So I took our small little class. I said, why don't we hold--because we were--I was teaching the (unclear), or drug counseling therapy, and you know, my approach to drug counseling is that, it's no problem being high, it's just how you get there, that's the problem. And so, you know, when, when that juice is not worth the squeeze, you need to find a better way, okay? And so, you know, the, the--that's why I was kind of successful with starting the first DICAP program here in the county, Drug Intervention Counseling Action Program, for the health department here in Palmer Park, and that was one of my second jobs that I had here [Prince George's County, Maryland], with the first job being Assistant Director for the Bowie Involvement Program for Parents and Youth, which is the Youth Services Bureau, which was a brand new movement back then. Speaker 1: And were you doing this while you were teaching or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Because I was adjunct teaching while I was doing that. And so what was very interesting though was to kind of sit down on the North Sea, and, and, and, and (unclear) said, "You know we're here because we believe in some of the tenants of Adler and the social embeddedness." And I understand what it's like to continue to fight a war after it's over because of the ravages of it and the cumulative deficit. And we all are here because we are committed to our clients and our patients, in terms of what we can do to help them overcome this addiction to drugs. So how do we come together and choose which identity we wish to relate on? Do we wish to relate as Netherland, as Hol--, as Dutch, German, African American? Do we wish to relate as therapists? We have a choice; what's the best thing? And we sat there and we walked. And the picture--I have a picture somewhere of myself and this real tall Dutch psychiatrist, and I'm walking the shores together with the class of the North Sea, determining that what we're going to do is to help the people who depend on us, and that maybe we'll even create our own language. And so we ended up putting together a pidgin language of English, Dutch and German, and somehow, we made it through. It was the most remarkable experience that I'd ever had. Speaker 1: Wow. So the-- Speaker 2: It was remarkable. Speaker 1: --the Bowie students must have been transformed as well? Speaker 2: Yes, the students that were there from Bowie. There weren't a lot because just the travel was sometimes exorbitant in price, so--for them, so-- Speaker 1: And students, they would pay their own way or there were fundraisers? Speaker 2: Sometimes they were scholarships, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 100956 Speaker 1: And so you remained at Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland] how long? Speaker 2: Eleven years adjunct and nine years full-time. So that was, that was interesting, yeah. Speaker 1: That's a long time. Speaker 2: That's a long time, yeah. It's twenty years. That's right. That's right, yeah. Speaker 1: When did the tenure track position begin? What year? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, it's hard to remember the date on that. I had probably been there--well, actually, I can remember because once I got my doctorate, which was in '91 [1991], probably about two years later, I became tenured. Speaker 1: So tell me about the Ph.D. You went to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Yeah, I went to the University of Maryland at College Park, and the School of Education. And the doctorate was in human development, and with a concentration in divorce mediation and dispute resolution. Speaker 1: How did you choose that subject? Speaker 2: Because of family counseling, family marriage counseling, and I thought that was--and they were, they were the only show in town on that, which was very interesting. I went to get the certificate, I didn't go for the doctorate, and some announcement had come in my mailbox that they were doing something on divorce mediation. Said, oh, this will enhance my practice and enhance my teaching so let me take some of these courses. And once I got out there, then the two women who were in charge of that program, really worked on me to just, "Why don't you just flip this on over towards the doctorate?" And it became, it became something that was worth doing. Human development is the ground theoretical foundation base for counseling because you, you have to work with the human entity across the lifespan, and you have to understand the spiritual, physical, and social, and emotional changes that happen with human beings, that's what counseling is all about. That's why I like counseling much better than psychiatry because counseling is on a wellness model, not a mental illness model. And counseling is about enhancing wellness, not diagnosing illness. And so the human development piece was wonderful. Speaker 1: What was your dissertation? Speaker 2: My dissertation was the relationship between--because dissertations always have these long titles--the relationship between childhood socialization messages, racial discrimination, and it was something else. Childhood social discrimination, racial discrimination, gender discrimination, and the self-esteem of professional black women. Speaker 1: Wow. Deep. Speaker 2: What we found out once I--what I found out was that most research is me search. And you have to find the right theoretical foundation base because in order to do a Ph.D., a traditional Ph.D., you better be prepared to persevere because it's something you want to find out about regardless, and it was very interesting. I ran through some wonderful women authors, and I think the book that does it for me is the one by Barbara Smith, which says all the women--I love that--"All the Women Are White, All the Men Are Black, But Some of Us Are Brave." Story_ID: 101579 Speaker 1: Who are some of the leaders in your program at the University of Maryland [College Park], key figures? Speaker 2: Okay. The key figures for me were Joanne Hunt, who has passed away now, and Joanne was one of my advisors. And Liz Copeman, who was another one of my advisors. Liz was a Quaker and lived her faith, still lives it. Social action lady. Oh, gosh, she is something. Liz has all this energy. And Joanne, very much the academic, but a--very much the academic and a social change person and, and very, very dedicated. She understood, she understood the academy and what it takes to bring change to the academy. Speaker 1: A lot of departmental politics? Speaker 2: A lot of it. A lot of it. Speaker 1: At Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] and at Maryland? Speaker 2: Yeah. I guess at, at, at, at Bowie, it was--yeah, the politics at Bowie, it wasn't so much departmental as it was, you know, the typical stuff, in terms of faculty administration and that type of thing. Departmental at Maryland, because Maryland is very much a research institution, it is the flagship for the University of Maryland system, and very traditional in the school of education. You know, change came slowly, and here these two ladies were bringing this amazing piece through with their certificate to program, which was wonderful, understanding that mediation was going to be an issue; it was going to be an issue and people needed to be trained, classically trained. Not 40-hour, 20-hour, 30-hour--classically trained over the years with internships, and the courts, and all that, and I served for a year, an internship in family court in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 1: Did you work with a particular judge? Speaker 2: Yes. Was it Rappaport? It might have been Judge Rappaport. It might've been one of those. And then there was another judge also. But that was quite an experience. And you talk about families again. I always, I always never wanted to be--there, there was another professor there, Ju--Judith (unclear), and she was an amazing researcher, absolutely amazing. I learned a lot about research from her. And I think had she had her druthers, I would have been a researcher only and gone out there and joined the staff as a researcher. Speaker 1: At which institute? Speaker 2: At the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. Story_ID: 101580 Speaker 1: You were also involved in hands-on counseling. Speaker 2: Yes, at the same time. Speaker 1: And tell me a little about-- Speaker 2: At the same time. Speaker 1: --those experiences? Speaker 2: Yeah. I ran my own private practice, as well as taught, because I don't think you can teach counseling and not counsel; I mean, how, how does one do that? So the whole time that I was counseling, I was also a professor of counseling, and I was also going for my doctorate; interesting. Okay. Now, that I look back, I was clearly crazy, but-- Speaker 1: And managing a home life, children, husband. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Right. Insane. But-- Speaker 1: Can you think of some pivotal moments, counseling? Speaker 2: Yes. I had a client who was abused, and working through domestic violence is a very important piece for me. It becomes very important because talk about the self-esteem and all the other stuff going down and going through the phases. And I was working with this particular client, and I just loved her. You know, she was just coming through, and very strong, but she had learned to, she had learned to say nothing and hide the strength and all that, but she was very strong. And I remember when she got to the point of anger, you know, I'm gonna give a false name to the husband. She came in one day, she said, "I'm ready today." I said, "What's up?" She said, "Well, I hate Eddie and everybody looks like Eddie." She says, "I guess I'm well." I said, "Well, not quite." I said, "Because you know, first of all, you know what we know, that anger is a flipside of hurt and hurt is a flipside of anger, so there's still something there. And also, sometimes anger passes, and if anger passes, then you're right back where you were, okay?" I said, "So we'll celebrate that you're angry with him, okay? We'll celebrate that, but we're going to have to move on." And she said, "Well, what could be--what could there be past anger, in terms of what wellness?" I said, "Indignation. Now, let's talk about that a bit because until you have attached to the preciousness of yourself, and that things that are precious are to be cherished, and you get indignant that someone, anyone, including yourself, would desecrate something that precious. Until you have that as an internal, an internal thermostat, for yourself that flips in automatically, we're not quite out of the woods yet, but we're getting there. But angry is a good step, okay? But don't confuse it for being the end because if I'm angry, I'm also very attached to you. There's power there, okay." So it was a very interesting process. And she went on to actually become one of the better counselors I've ever seen. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: She really did. She's very good. Story_ID: 101581 Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: So you were juggling academics, teaching, studying for a period--the Ph.D.-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --counseling. Ultimately, you became an administrator in the Howard County [Public] Schools; tell me about that transition. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was real weird. I had done, for many years, worked for the Maryland State Department of Education as a consultant, and believe that I have probably done consultant work in every school district in the State of Maryland, every one of them, Alleghany to Garrett, to Talbot, to Kent, to Caroline, you name it, I have been there and I've done it. And it was usually on education that is multicultural. Inclusion of all the family members to the academy and what do they bring. And the--and how culture informs cognition, and how we have differences in learning styles, and how they must be accommodated in the instructional process, okay? Speaker 2: Now, this--what period are we talking about now? Speaker 1: We're talking about from the '70s [1970s] until the '90s [1990s]. Really, a twenty-year period, now that I think about it, that's just amazing to me. That is absolutely amazing to me, but that is true; actually, to probably 2000, okay? And so what, what happened is, because I would go to Howard County on a regular basis to kind of open their school year, and this type of thing, I got a call from the then superintendent. Speaker 2: Who was it, at the time? Speaker 1: Mike Hickey. Dr. Michael Hickey. Fantastic educator. Great guy. And Mike called and said, "I would like to have a time for you to come up." And I thought it was strange because the superintendent really didn't have to talk with me, as a consultant, to come up and open the school, the head of human relations usually handled that, or whatever. Speaker 2: This was which county? Speaker 1: Howard. It was Howard County. So I went up there, and I said, "Well, what do I have to bring?" He said, "Well, actually, you're not auditioning for us, we're auditioning for you." And so little had I known, I didn't know that they had been on a search for the head of human relations for the county to report directly to the superintendent, with a system-wide responsibility and power. I, I had no idea. I hadn't followed what was going on in Howard County. There had been an incident where bleach had been thrown on an African student on the bus. There had been some other real kind of discriminatory, terrible things happening among the kids, then some complaints, a great deal of complaints from the NAACP up there. They have a very active, strong NAACP in Howard County, they really do. And it was, it was, it was very good and they were pushing it. So they had tried, I didn't realize, for six months to find somebody in-house, and he had asked for special permission from the board to go out and hire who he wanted. So he said it would--I said, "Well, I, I, I don't know about that, because to work for a school system, I just hadn't even considered that." And he said, "Well, it'll just be one year." Well, eleven years later, eleven years later, and so it was a very interesting evolution. To put it in a nutshell, we moved from under investigation by the state board of human relations to being the model program in the state for human relations. Story_ID: 101582 Speaker 1: I then switched the focus from human relations to academic equity because the power, as, as our wonderful superintendent here, our wonderful CEO, John--Dr. (unclear) says here, "Victory is in the classroom. Victory is in the classroom." I love that, you know. I love when John says that because that is so true. And what was happening is people were feeling good about each other, but when you desegregated the scores, they were not going to have anywhere near the same equity of quality of life because those academic scores were nowhere near where they needed to be on MSPAP [Maryland State Performance Assessment Program], where they needed to be on the functionals, where they needed to be now on HSAs [High School Assessments] and all the other ones that are here. So my question was if you're gonna--this--you know, the new civil rights movement for the 21st Century is in that classroom, that's where it is, it's in that classroom. And people who do not have a high school diploma in the 21st Century are tantamount to dead man walking because the bachelor's degree is going to be the 21st Century's high school diploma. So let's move it on now, and let's start looking at what's happening. So instead of--and that's when you started running into a lot of pushback, okay? Because I was asking adults to get out of their instructional level of comfortability, and to do differentiated instructional processes; that was a fight and that fight went on until I left. Speaker 2: So that meant catering pedagogy. It means being aware of the students in your classroom and adjusting for different populations? Speaker 1: Well, I would never use the term "catering." Speaker 2: Adjusting? Speaker 1: Well, you are--yeah, you're not catering; you are adapting your instructional process to the learning style of your students. And you need to do that in the beginning, and then once they can get it, then you talk about, "Now this is what it would look like this way; this is what it would look like this way; and this is what it would look like this way, but I have to let you see what it would look like first in the way you understand it." I mean, that's [Howard] Gardner's multiple intelligences piece, all of that. Speaker 2: So social intelligence and-- Speaker 1: Right. Right. Verbal intelligence, mathematical intelligence, musical intelligence, kinesthetic intelligence, naturalist intelligence, all those kinds of things; interpersonal intelligence, intrapersonal intelligences, all those things are there. And so you simply set up those multiple intelligence centers and you take the curriculum through all of those things because each of us has one or two of those that's real natural and strong for us, and we have the capability of mastering all the others too. And so what you want is a person, who has that universal cognition, but you have to do the adaptability piece first, and people weren't used to it. They were teaching one way, that's it, and they're teaching to the middle, and if you don't get it, basically, people were teaching themselves. People were teaching themselves. This is how I learned; therefore, this is how I teach. Come on now, that's not how you do it. And that's the part that was moving people out of their comfortability piece. You knew you--you always know when you're making the change, when you get your pushback, that means you're moving people out of their comfortability zone, and that's what growth and evolution are about. Speaker 2: So you revolutionized the Howard school system? Speaker 1: I tried. I tried. Story_ID: 101583 Speaker 1: At what point were you doing the drug counseling? Speaker 2: The drug counseling was when I was at Bowie State University [Bowie, Maryland] and had my private practice and counseling. Speaker 1: Were--did you belong to clubs--social clubs, professional clubs, at this time, '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. When I first came, I was very active with my sorority Delta, which was really getting a foot hold here. We had thirty-eight folk, thirty-eight good sorors of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Incorporated. We had thirty-eight sorors and we would meet at Peppermill Village [Maryland]. We have so many sorors here now, I have no idea, hundreds of them in several chapters, so it's, it's, it's very interesting. Very vibrant group. And then twenty-some years ago, I went into the Links, and been working hard with them ever since, both nationally and locally. Speaker 1: What were some of your leadership positions? Speaker 2: Well, in the chapter, I served as, as Chairman of Services to Youth, I was the head of that facet. Also, Vice-President for Programs, and then Chairman of National Trends and Services. Nationally, I was a trainer for Project Lead, High Expectations, which was a national signature program for the Links. And then I also served under President Marion--Marilyn Sutherland--Marion Sutherland, and I was her National Director of Services to Youth. So it's been, it's been very interesting. It's, it's, it's, it's been a very interesting and rewarding process to work with women who are so dedicated to uplifting their community. One of the things that we did so many times here, in Prince George's County, was to join with Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, in terms of doing things like the SAT prep programs, and those always went well. Those always went well. It was a great joint combination there. And then the sorority here still does the black college tours, so-- Speaker 1: And so you were maintaining your, your positions in these social organizations-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --doing community service. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You had a leadership position with the Howard County Schools. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What did you do next? Story_ID: 101584 Speaker 1: Then I was pretty much done and was intending to retire. I had gotten all my information to retire from the systems, and the good news is it's all one retirement system, all the state retirement system, didn't matter. It was great, so all that was accumulating. My husband [William A. Brown, Sr.] had retired from the [Army] Corps of Engineers and had designed and built for us a beautiful home on the water in Urbanna, Virginia, actually Saluda [Virginia]. And we are boaters, been boaters for twenty-some years and the boat was down there. And we were ready to go and a friend of mine had said, "Before you leave Prince George's," because I never moved to Howard County, I always lived here. I love Prince George's County [Maryland]. I love Prince George's County, everything about it, I love it; the good, the bad and ugly, I just love it. And, and so said, "Well before you go, could you serve on this guy's transition team for education?" Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: Two Thousand and Two [2002]. And I said, "Yeah," because you know, the movers won't be coming for a while. The house is sold and so that's fine, it'll work and that's a way to give back. She said, "Well, he looked at your resume and he would like you to chair it, the transition." I said, "That's fine, because it's nonpaying, it's a contribution. It's my last hurrah for Prince George's, and I, I would love to do that." And I said, "What's his name again?" They said, "[HM] Jack Johnson." I said, "Okay, because I had never met Jack Johnson, didn't know what age Jack Johnson was." And I found out later on he thought I was another Jackie Brown, okay? We had never, we had never met. We had never met 'till November the 11th, 2002. And I went to meet with him at the State's Attorney's Office because he was County Executive Elect, so he's still State's Attorney. And I went over there and we met, and I had given him the write-up of what I thought needed to happen with education with this new County Executive. I said, "You've got to have an Office of Education Liaison because you've got to be more than just a pocketbook to the Board of Education. You have the opportunity to embrace the educational programs and to do the piece once they're out of school. What's the role of government? What can we do as a catalyst? How can we help? How can we partner, not only internally with their mechanisms because some of the things are duplicative systems, but how else can we partner to move this county forward? And I know that anybody who is gonna sit in your chair should do that." And he said to me, "Well I'm not going to hire you to do that." And I said, "I don't remember necessarily applying for the job." I said, "But I will tell you this, Mr. County Executive Elect, that you will miss a huge opportunity to move this county forward with all of its wonderful diversity, if you do not establish the first County Executive Office of Education Liaison." And he said, "Well that's going to be up to you." I said, "Now why would that be up to me?" "Because you are going to run my government." I said, "Excuse me?" "I need you for my CAO." Story_ID: 101585 Speaker 1: I said, "Why do you need a Chief Academic Officer?" I did. Had no clue he [HM Jack Johnson] was talking about Chief Administrative Officer, didn't know what one was. He said, "I have been waiting and praying and asking God, please send me someone to run this government." He said, "This is the key appointment, and I hadn't found him." He said, "And here you are." He said, "I'm looking at this resume. What a waste of talent if we don't use this." He said, "Will you do this?" My house is sold. I'm getting ready to retire. "Would you do this?" And something happened, I don't know. And I didn't really answer him; it was something else that was talking with me, at that point. And I said, "I will do this thing." Those are the words I said, "I will do this thing." And when I went home my husband said, "So, how'd it go?" And that's when we began the Lucille Ball phase of my life. "Well, Ricky. Well..." He said, "So, how'd it go?" I said, "Well, hmm." He said, "So how did it go?" I said, "Well, I said yes." He said, "Okay." I said, "Well, no, I said yes to something else." He said, "What else?" I said, "Bill, you need to sit down, baby," and you know, "Do you love me?" And the minute you start saying that you know you're in trouble. "Do you really, really love me?" He said, "Yes." I said, "He asked me to run the government." He said, "What?" I said, "There's something called a CAO and he asked me to be it. What did you do? What did you say?" I said, "Oh, yes, I'll do that thing." And you know what he said? "Good. We'll figure something out." He is so pro me. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: He said, "Maybe people will come to see what I see." Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: That's what he said. That's why I've been with him for forty-five years. Speaker 2: That's amazing. Speaker 1: That's my best friend. So that's where we are now, that was-- Speaker 2: And at that point, --you made history with this appointment? Speaker 1: Yes. I had no idea. I mean, talk about no idea, like no idea. Met him November the 11th, Jack, November 11, 2002; December 2nd, I reported for work. Speaker 2: And why is that a history making moment? Speaker 1: Because I was the first woman in the history of this county to run the government operations; had no idea. Story_ID: 101586 Speaker 1: And from what I hear from the staff is you've made quite a difference in the way you manage. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I kind of love them into excellence, and we keep moving because failure is not an option. Speaker 1: What are some of your achievements in this role? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Charter for change; how we do interagency collaboration; how-- Speaker 1: What do you mean by interagency collaboration? Speaker 2: When I first came, there were twenty-seven different departments and twenty-seven different governments; now, we work as one and we collaborate one with another to get it done. We have a higher level of customer service than we've ever had before. We have executive institutes that we've never had before, in terms of training. We have a manager, executive management accountability programs. We directly tie budget to program productivity; loving that one. And we also have, I believe, one of the best community outreach and community relations operations here, and I have to give credit to Chris Osuji for that, who's the Director of Community Relations. That outreach program is absolutely amazing. And we have AAEI, which I love, which is the--one of the charter for change programs that came out of human resources management. Every Monday night, free of charge, people interested in jobs can come get orientation and training, free of charge, for any jobs, opportunities and things that are there in the county government. It is absolutely wonderful, so we've done good stuff. Story_ID: 100965 Speaker 1: So you've worked with some very influential people-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --including County Executive himself-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --[HM] Jack Johnson. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What has that relationship been like and can you document that with an example? Speaker 2: Oh. Jack and I are a really great team. I mean, it really has been amazing and both of us acknowledge that we really didn't have anything to do with bringing this team together; greater forces than us brought us together. He had people in his camp saying, "Oh, you don't want her. She's too bougie. She's got too many credentials. She's too--but you don't want her." And, and people telling me, later on after I had met him, "Well, I don't know whether you want to do that," and all this kind of stuff. Please. It has been one of the best things. Jack is free to do what an exec must do, and I am free to do what has to be done to keep this government rolling. It's been--it's like those Janus faces of the, of the thea--theatrical where one face is facing out and one is facing in, it's perfect, and yet, we have each other's back. And each other's back is really the issue of what is this county [Prince George's County] gonna be like when our grandkids run through it? And that's what Jack and I are concerned about. We are very conscious of the--how ephemeral our place in time is, we're very conscious of that. And so from the time he took office, his whole issue has been legacy. And you can always tell when you have a legacy person because they come in with a vision, and Jack has a vision, and I love his vision. I love his vision for this county, for the people of-- Speaker 1: And what's that vision? Speaker 2: --this county. The vision is a place where people can live and work and pray and play and grow old and learn in quality and excellence; that is a beautiful thing. Economic vibrancy, it's a comprehensive vision; we call it livable communities, and it's a wonderful thing. To be able to operationalize that vision, and to have it work and permeate through everything, every department here does, is the most beautiful thing in the world to watch. It is amazing. It is absolutely amazing to watch this. To watch this county move from almost an afterthought, regionally, to be one of the regional players and leaders that people have to come to in the Washington Metropolitan area is dynamite; is dynamite. This executive has taught me so much about government, governance, and how one has to do sometimes political management of operational things. He tells me I have taught him so much about organization, efficiency and effectiveness, measurement, moving from rhetoric to results and all of that. So we are a really, really good team. We are, we are really, an excellent team, and the thing that we both like is that nobody thought it would work. Story_ID: 100966 Speaker 1: And you are, as you stated, in a unique position here in Prince George's County [Maryland], vis-a-vis the region. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It is known and this county has gotten recognition as the wealthiest county in the country with an African American majority. Speaker 2: We are, we are the wealthiest and most highly educated African American county in the United States, and therefore, the world, and we know it. And by saying we know it, we mean we are aware of the awesome responsibility that we have to make it happen and to make it good for everyone. We know the responsibility that we have and that's what we live up to every day, every day, every day, yeah. Speaker 1: In addition to that, your proximity to [Washington] D.C.-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --means you have an awesome responsibility. Speaker 2: Tremendous. And because we are also post-9/11; this is a region that is tight. My colleagues and I across the region are in and out of each other's places all the time. Working together on joint projects for the safety and security all the time, understanding that if you have an issue with immigration, we have an issue with immigration. How do we do this? How do we do this with caring, with love, with equity, with concern, with quality of life issues? Understanding that when we bring in something huge like National Harbor, that means that Alexandria and I worked together arm and arm with water taxi services, fire services, the boats, the (unclear), all of that. It is fascinating. And for me, who is a perpetual student and learner, this is amazing. Speaker 1: Well, you stepped into this position a year after 9/11. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So preparedness-- Speaker 2: The first thing I did was set up an office of Homeland Security. We were the first county in the State of Maryland to have an Office of Homeland Security. And people didn't understand what I was talking about then, but they figured well, just let her do it because it's okay. I knew it would be what it is. Yeah, so we have, we have moved forward. We have the 700 MHz in. We have put in millions of dollars in preparedness and readiness for our first responders. And we have helped design the architecture for Homeland Security and Preparedness for the National Capital Region; it's been wonderful, absolutely wonderful. Speaker 1: You've worked with the Mayor of Washington D.C., Anthony Williams, and now-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Adrian Fenty. Speaker 2: Yes. Adrian Fenty, yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: You've worked with the heads of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the school board, now it's Michelle-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: --Rhee. So what has that, what has that been like, working with these key people? Speaker 2: Well, the--I have yet to meet with--to work with the school boards or anything because our position doesn't really require us to do that, but we will work with the elected officials through the council of government, we do, do that. Speaker 1: And you were elected, of course, we should say, in 2006. Speaker 2: Well, the County Executive was elected, CAOs are appointed, and the Chief Administrative Officer is an appointed position, not an elected position. And I was appointed by the County Executive in 2002 and confirmed by the County Council in 2003, so it, it, it allows us then--I represent the county on the Board of Directors of COG [Council of Governments]; I represent the County on the Board of Directors of WASA [Washington Association of School Administrators]; I represent the County as the President this year, of the COG Corporation. Speaker 1: Right, and that's, I think-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what I was referring to. Speaker 2: Right. And so all of that is there, so I get a chance to interact with Vince Gray [Vincent Gray], and Carol Schwartz, and all of those wonderful people. Gerry Connolly [Gerald Connolly], all the wonderful folks. Jay Fisette, all of--I mean, they just--this region has some of the best leadership in the world, really dedicated folks. My colleagues who are CAOs, Tony Griffith, the former CAO for Montgomery County, Bruce Romer, the present one, Tim Firestine--Firestine, Dan Tangherlini, Ron Carly from Arlington, and my buddy, Jim Hartman from Alexandria, and Craig Gerhardt from Prince William. I mean, we, we have some talented--if this region can't make it then it can't be done because we've got some real talent. Now, you heard me name all the men; it's it--that's it. And if it really weren't for Mercury with Manassas Park and Barry Stanton as Deputy Manager at Frederick, wouldn't be very many African Americans either, but we're moving along. We're moving along. We actually have many more African Americans in elected positions than we have in appointed positions. Story_ID: 100967 Speaker 1: Interesting. At this point in your life, as you look back, what would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: For Prince George's [County, Maryland]? Speaker 1: For Prince George's, for the region, for your family, for posterity. Speaker 2: I really think that Mary McLeod Bethune said it best with her legacy. Of all the things that are there, if you can take care of one another, if you can take care of one another and never ever forget to see the beauty and the strength that can be utilized for the greater good in each and every human being, you have made this old lady happy; that would be my legacy. Story_ID: 100968 Speaker 1: What would you name as your greatest contribution in the world of education? Speaker 2: The education that is multicultural, network, and the Black Male Achievement Program from Peril to Promise. That was a wonderful thing; that was a wonderful thing. And the Office of Academic Reform in Howard County, and I say it like that because I understand it doesn't operate anymore, but it was a good thing; it was a good thing. Speaker 1: What is your greatest contribution in Prince George's County? Speaker 2: I think the greatest contribution in Prince George's is the execution of livable communities. That is my greatest contribution here and all that that encompasses. Story_ID: 100969 Speaker 1: As students throughout the generation review your biography, what would you like them to take away? Speaker 2: She saw the good. That she saw the good in people. And she saw the good and wouldn't let it die, and would never let it die, that would be it. She saw the good and never let it die, even if it killed me. Speaker 1: Any advice for those students? Speaker 2: I guess what, what my minister says, "Love God and do good for others," I think that would be it. And, of course, right now my five greatest legacies, my five greatest legacies overall are the world that will be blessed by the beauty that comes from William Augustus Brown, III; Riley Grace Montague; Brianna Michelle Brown; Ellis Wade, Ellis Wade Brown; and Miss Cheyenne Elizabeth Brown. I think those five children represent the best of a twenty-one-year-old guy and a eighteen-year-old girl who decided to fall in love. I think that's what they do, and I'm fascinated to see what the next phase is gonna be with them. Speaker 1: Dr. Jacqueline Brown-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --thank you for this fascinating interview. Speaker 2: Okay. Thank you. Okay...