 Story_ID: 495885 Speaker 1: --I'm the interviewer. Matthew Hickey is the videographer and I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: My name is Les, L-E-S, Brown, B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: What about Leslie Calvin Brown? Speaker 2: No, [HistoryMaker] Les Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay can I have your birthdate? Speaker 2: February 17, 1945. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: October the 17th, 2007. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: 701 South Wells [Street], Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a professional speaker. I'm an author. I am a speech coach and entrepreneur. Story_ID: 495886 Speaker 1: I wanna start out--we start out with five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, sweet potato pie. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: New York. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Stand up for what you believe in because you can fall for anything. Story_ID: 495887 Speaker 1: Now I want to start out asking you about your childhood. And you, you know you were born as a twin so I'd like to ask you about what you know oh wow you were adopted. Well why don't we talk about your adopted mother Mamie Brown. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, my, my mother adopted us when we were six weeks of age. Wesley [Wesley Brown] and I we were born in an abandoned building on a floor and he's five minutes older than I am and when he went out I heard a slap, he yelled and I looked out to see what was happening and they pulled me out so that's how I got here and I came here looking after my brother and I'm still doing that to this day. My mother, she was forty-six. She only had a third grade education. She decided at forty-six that she wanted to adopt some children and so she adopted us and then a few years later, she adopted five additional kids and we were raised in the poor section of Miami, Florida, called Liberty City [Miami, Florida] and Overtown [Miami, Florida] and my mother was a domestic worker and she was also a cook and we followed her around. Wherever she went we were always there. Sometimes when she would go and do domestic work on Miami Beach [Florida] making up beds and cleaning homes or went to the M&M Cafeteria when we were out of school and she a person who was a great storyteller. While my brothers and sisters were outside playing, I would rub my mother's ankles. She had arthritis and so she would tell me stories and I think I developed that gift from her just listening to her stories and be the same stories and I said, "Mama tell me again." She said, "I told you that boy." I said, "I know but it was so interesting Mama, tell me that story again." And had no idea that those stories that I listened to prepared me for what I do as a professional speaker and really enabled me to travel around the world and touch millions of people's lives. Story_ID: 495888 Speaker 1: What were some of the stories of her [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] growing up? How much do you know about her background? Speaker 2: I know very little about her background. She told me things that she did. She used to love to ride the back of a horse. She loved riding horses. She had a, a alligator that she used to feed and threw chickens to this alligator and her mother--her father whipped her with a buggy whip. She told me that experience and it was very fascinating story because when she told me that story, I had her tell me again and again and again because she told me that when her father whipped her with a buggy whip and, and it was very, very brutal and had whelps all over her body, that she was on the couch and she was wimping and, and crying and all of a sudden she said the door opened and the front door and a dog came in and just looked at her and then after that a lady came past the dog with a bouquet of flowers and went in the room and was talking to her father. She couldn't understand what the lady was saying but she could hear her father saying okay, all right, all right. I won't, I won't, I promise I won't, I won't. I'll never do it again. I'll never do it again. And then at that moment the lady came out, never looked at my mother and then the dog that was looking at her she said he felt like she was paralyzed, she couldn't get up and go see what was happening with her father and the dog left and at that moment her father came out of the room and said, "Did you see that lady that came in?" And she said yes. She [sic. he] said, "That was your mother." Said, "She told me to never to whip you again," and he said, "and I won't." He said, "You can go now." And she left home at thirteen, went to the city where that was near Stuart, Florida and she started working as a waitress and singing in bars. Now what's fascinating about that is that her mother was poisoned and so that was the ghost of her mother. So as a kid she loved ghost stories and I said, "Mama tell me that again," and I would ask her all kind of details. In fact I think one time I taped these stories about two to three different times and she told it the same way. So I, I enjoyed those kinds of stories. Speaker 1: Now did she have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: She had one brother that she heard that her father had but she never met him. His name was James [ph.]. Speaker 1: And did she share any other stories of growing up? Speaker 2: She shared stories about how tough it was in Stuart, Florida. There was a killing of black people in that area where she lived and it's a remote area. They did a movie about this area. I can't think of the name right now and she said that she'll never forget when an older woman told her that one of the things that she should never do as a black person is allow yourself to be isolated and be surrounded by white people because you never know what they might do and that was something that really grabbed me because as a kid, I saw a lot of things living in the South. Mama worked on Miami Beach [Florida] during the time we [Brown and his twin brother, Wesley Brown] came along. There were signs up that said Jews, niggers and dogs not allowed and so my mother she had a lot of fear for me because I was outspoken person. I would be the one to run to drink at a water fountain that said you know for whites only and I said, "Why can't we do that?" She said, "You can't because you're black." And so she would then tell me stories that she experienced of racism when she lived in Stuart, Florida and so she wanted to prevent me from getting in trouble or getting hurt or thrown in jail because I was a kid who was very curious and asked a lot of questions and you didn't ask Mama questions. I used to say to her, "Mama when I become a man I'm gonna let my children question me and ask me questions. I'll allow them to communicate," but I now understand why Mama doesn't do that (laughter). Story_ID: 495889 Speaker 1: Now what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: I think the--I had a great childhood, it's a fun childhood. The only thing that I perhaps did not understand and appreciate the impact of was this, this, the naivete of a kid, when I was in the fifth grade I was labeled educable mentally retarded, put back in the fifth grade to the fourth grade, fail again when I was in the eighth grade, but to me school was fun. You're in special education, you go to cafeteria, you do drawing. They don't give you any subject matter to work on and so I had a lot of fun. I was a kid that made everybody laugh. And I looked forward to going to school and so I failed twice in school but I've had a very exciting childhood. It was a very interesting time. Story_ID: 495890 Speaker 1: But Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown], let me take you back to what is your earliest memory? Speaker 2: Of my childhood? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I think my earliest memory is living behind Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida] where I ultimately went to high school there, and climbing over the fence to watch a man named Mr. LeRoy Washington work with kids in drilling them and how to prepare for the Elks oratorical contest and being fascinated with his oratorical skills and how he transforms kids working with them and I would get a milk crate and stand on it and look through this wooden portable where he taught and trained these kids and watched him and, and studied his techniques and fantasized about one day being able to teach and instruct students on how to use their communication skills to speak and to compete like he was doing them because wherever he moved in the State of Florida, he was always the one who had the student that won and so I said I wanna be like this man one day. He's the first man I saw with a shirt and tie, first black man, and so I admired his, his arrogance, his confidence, his eloquence and how he carried himself and he always looked like a businessman. And I said one day I'm going to be like him. Story_ID: 495891 Speaker 1: Now describe family life too Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown] 'cause it's Les and Wes [Wesley Brown]. Speaker 2: It was Leslie and Wesley and then Margaret Ann [Margaret Ann Sampson] my sister. She was, I'll never forget, I was around ten years old no I was six years old and I heard a sound at the door, a knock on the door and I went to look out at the street and there was a basket and a blanket and I saw a little movement in there and I, I opened the door and there was a little baby there. And I said, "Mama [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] come look, look there's a little baby in here." And that's when I saw my sister Margaret Ann. Her father, we did not know then was laying sidewalk in front of the house and this lady that he had impregnated had several children by different men so he took his kid because he observed my mother raising Wesley and I and and left her at our doorstep knowing that she would be taken care of. And so Mama took care of her and he came probably when Margaret Ann was about fourteen or fifteen years old. When he came to the door and he knocked on the door and said, "Ms. Mamie here?" We looked at him, we knew exactly who he was because she looked just like him. And so Mama then adopted the four other children, other brothers and sisters that she had. This lady had eleven kids altogether so Mama got five of the eleven kids. This lady was an alcoholic and was constantly abused. Story_ID: 495892 Speaker 1: And so Mama [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] doing days work working at M&M Cafeteria and then after that she started selling moonshine and home brew and she could no longer work at M&M Cafeteria because of arthritis and she wrote numbers and then one of the most difficult periods of my life when she was arrested. I had to become a man at the time. I was ten years old. The other--my brother [Wesley Brown] was always a very quiet one. I was always the outgoing one so I sold bottles and I probed in garbage cans looking for carpenter--not carpenter but copper and aluminum like ice trays and we would bend those up and old motors and we put them in a wagon and drag them to a place called Pepper's Junkyard [ph.] and sell that for about four or five dollars and that would be able to provide food for our family. When I was a kid, you could for twelve dollars, fifteen dollars or twenty dollars you could buy enough groceries for a whole week and I did spot labor. I was very strong as a kid so white men would come by in trucks say "Hey come here boy, you wanna work?" And we would have to move heavy equipment and I would do that. Speaker 2: Now what age did you start working like when you're describing that? Are you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was ten. Speaker 2: Ten. Speaker 1: I was ten years old. Story_ID: 495893 Speaker 1: Let me ask about--you were born in Overtown [Miami, Florida]? Were you born in Overtown? Speaker 2: I was born in Liberty City [Miami, Florida]. Speaker 1: Liberty City. Now-- Speaker 2: Liberty City and Overtown they're--both of those are in Miami [Florida], they're just the poor sections of Miami. You have, you have different sections. You have Opa-locka [Florida], you have Miami, you have Overtown, you have Brown Sub [Brownsville, Miami, Florida] and, and Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida]. So those are just little pockets like you have the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] and the East Side [sic.] of Chicago. Speaker 1: Now did you--now where was Stuart [Florida] in comparison to-- Speaker 2: Several miles away. I never went there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah it was north of Miami. Probably about four or five hours. Speaker 1: Do you know she [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] happened to go from Stuart to Miami? What brought her? Speaker 2: No, I don't no. She never told me that. Speaker 1: Now, what was the community? Can you describe the community you grew up in if you take yourself back (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was all black community. The only thing and perhaps the greatest mystery in my life right now is my godmother Marge Dale [ph.], who looks white. If you saw her you'd say this is a white woman. I'm still trying to figure out why she and my mother were friends. My brother [Wesley Brown] believes that she is our birth mother or the sister of our birth mother. Because there's just no reason anybody that looks white would be in Overtown or Liberty City during that time. We were born in 1945 and there was no reason for this woman to be friends with my mother given the difference in their lifestyle and she was married to a guy who was a jazz player and every holiday, every Christmas and every Thanksgiving, every special holiday when I would go home from various places that I might be traveling she would always come and be there. We only see her around the holidays and so my brother believed to this day that Marge Dale is either our birth mother or knows our birth mother. But I don't know, I tried various things to find out, clippings of her hair and took to some place to be examined. You give them $250 and they'll let you know and they said, "Bring us another, bring us another sample." And so I went in her garbage can and got cotton (laughter) we found nothing out you know. So, so but it was--I had a real good exciting--we were poor but we didn't know it. Speaker 1: Now let me ask with you said that their lifestyles were different, describe you know was your, was Marge, was she you know you said she was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was a domestic worker but she was--she used to take me places and people would ask her, "What are you doing with that little nigger boy with you?" And she was a very strong tough woman, tough as nails. And but her lifestyle because she was, she was light, so she was accepted and she could go into places and be embraced by whites where we could not. You know I could go into places with her but couldn't go by myself and Mama could not go so she--people thought that she was white and so they treated her so she had access to places that we ordinarily could not go and plays that we could go to or various stores we could go in that we could not go if we weren't with her. Story_ID: 495894 Speaker 1: So that was, that was interesting as a kid I always had a challenge with that. My brother [Wesley Brown] was not. He was a kid who went along with the way things were. I was more curious and, and more militant if you please and challenged things because I observed during that time a gentleman by the name of Father Federal Gibson [ph.] and another minister that--Father Graham [ph.], who I admired their courage in speaking out and both being incarcerated for refusing to give up the identifies of members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], they were accused of being Communists. I admired their defiance and, and standing down--standing up to the NAAC- to the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] and the white city fathers of that particular time and I always admired and say one day I'd like to be like that. Story_ID: 495895 Speaker 1: Now you, you're saying at age six is when your other brothe- brothers and sisters came and said what you're saying-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --so up before age six, what is life like you know with the two of you and you know and you know Mamie Brown? What is-- Speaker 2: It was pretty much mother going to work and, and our coming home after school and receiving her. We had neighbors that looked out for us, Ms. Catherine [ph.] who lived on the right and Mr. Walsh [ph.] who lived on the left and so we lived in a neighborhood that people talk about today that when you came home from school the neighbors looking out for you. If you did something bad, they would tell you. In fact during that time, they'll put a switch on your behind and then you run home and you tell mama and then she'll find out what you did and you get whopped again. You know it was truly a connected neighborhood. We had our own theater, the Morton Theater [sic. Modern Theatre, Miami, Florida] and the Capitol Theatre [Miami, Florida]. We had our own little shopping stores because during this segregated time, we could not go places. We could not go to the white theaters and literally when they did have some theaters where we could go, they would--white people sit downstairs, black people sit upstairs, very segregated. And something funny happened. White people laughed and they ring a bell and black people laughed (laughter). Speaker 1: Now what was the street that you grew up on? Speaker 2: 4th Avenue. Speaker 1: 4th Avenue. Speaker 2: And 9th Street. Speaker 1: Can you describe that street? Speaker 2: Yes, it was single family homes and I enjoyed there because we had a back door. Some of the houses were on four blocks and they were what we call shotgun houses. You can just shoot through the front door, go straight through and hit nothing and then they had apartments that did not have back doors. We felt that was like having a doghouse because doghouses don't have back doors and it was an area where you--we had our own hotel, the Carver Hotel [Miami, Florida] and the Sir John Hotel [Miami, Florida] where performers like [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt and Satchmo [Louis Armstrong] and Jackie Wilson and Sam Cooke performed in Harlem Square [Harlem Square Club, Miami, Florida]. It was--everything was in that little area and then when integration came and the black performers could perform in Miami Beach [Florida] and could stay at all the various hotels and then they had something that they ran an expressway through the heart of the black community because it was a tremendous political bloc. It was a strong black vote and that destroyed the fabric of that community. People began to scatter and they still to this day Overtown [Miami, Florida] has not recovered from that and we did not know at that time--did not have enough political knowledge or power to understand what the consequences of that would be. They had different other areas they could have taken that expressway but now as we look back in hindsight they deliberately brought it through the black community that destroyed the black businesses and they never ever recovered from that and then you had to now go to white businesses. Integration came along and so that was the way in which they were able to get those black dollars. Story_ID: 495896 Speaker 1: Now can you, I'd like to know if you take yourself back to that time, what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: I--what I--the sights that remind me most of growing up, the sights I saw in Miami Beach [Florida] when I would go to work with my mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown]. I was fascinated with the beautiful hotels, the Fontainebleau hotel [Fontainebleau Miami Beach, Miami Beach, Florida]. Hotels that cost three thousand dollars a day. To me as a kid that was a lot of money. Jackie Gleason and June Taylor Dancers and seeing that kind of wealth and then coming across the Venetian Causeway and seeing the beautiful water and then coming into Overtown [Miami, Florida] and we would be on a bus and said, "Mama why can't we stay on Miami Beach?" And she said, "Because we don't have the money to do that." Story_ID: 495897 Speaker 1: And so one of the good things that happened for me that one of the families that she [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] worked for, I think that, that's really where my life really began to take a dramatic turn because I began to--I was living in two worlds. One of the homes where we worked, the guy that she worked for, he listened to motivational tapes and I had the responsibility of cleaning his, his office and shining his shoes and making sure his ash trays were clean and so I would stay in his office for long periods of time to listen to what he was listening to and I remember constantly being argued at, "Leslie [HistoryMaker Les Brown] come here, did you not see this dust?" "Oh I do apologize, I did not see it." He was very meticulous. "Get this over here, what about this?" "Oh, I do apologize, sir." And he did not know I deliberately missed things so he would have to call me back so I could listen to what he was listening to these motivational messages. Our guide of Chicago [Illinois], Earl Nightingale he was saying we become what we think about. All of us are self-made but only the successful will admit it. Always strive to get on top in life because it's the bottom that's overcrowded. So unbeknownst to me I--my mind was being programed and I had developed a thirst for becoming successful for a larger life and as we were going back on the Venetian Causeway on the bus, my brothers and sisters would look out of the window and say "That's my Buick" or "That's my Edsel" or "That's my Ford" or "That's my Cadillac." And I would say, "Mama that's my mansion. I'm gonna buy you something just like this." "Boy where you get these thoughts from?" "I don't know Mama, but one day I'm going to." And that was a dream and a passion of mine and I bought her four different homes before she passed but that's when I began to become I would say inundated with personal development materials. I couldn't pass tests. It was interesting, I was reading existentialism like Alan Watts, called 'Who' [ph.] and the, the 'Taboo of You' [sic. 'The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are,' Alan Watts] and listening to all these motivational tapes and failed tests that they would give me and they kept me in special education. But that affected my attitude and my confidence and then when I met Mr. Washington [LeRoy Washington] he told me the value of developing your mind and developing your communication skills because once you open your mouth, you tell the world who you are so watching and growing up in Miami [Florida] seeing the wealth and having a yearning that one day I'm going to do that and, and my passion to want to become wealthy because of a television show. I was a kid, there was a program called 'The Millionaire.' John Beresford Tipton and he had a guy that he hired named Michael Anthony that gave people each week a million dollars for some reason and every week I would watch that program and say one day I'm gonna be a millionaire and I'm gonna do anything you need Mama. I'll buy anything you want. When I turn eighteen you'll never have to work. I'll take care of you. And so that became my magnificent obsession reading the autobiographies of wealthy people and, and focused in that particular area while other kids played and had fun, I didn't have that much fun in that regard. My fun, the books that I read, the stories the people that, that I read about because they fascinated me. Those were my friends and I fantasized being those people. Story_ID: 495898 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to just--you, you described sights, but I'd like to know smells and sounds? Speaker 2: My mother frying catfish and brims, which she loved to go fishing and we used to go fishing with her. So and my mother was a great cook. So the smell of I used to hate the smell of when she used to clean chitlins, oh my god, I hated that but we ate them after she finished. (Laughter) It last a long time but I hated that I could smell them now. And my mother loved music. (Singing) "Fly the ocean in a silver plane, see the jungle when it's wet with rain," ['You Belong to Me']. She loved Sam Cooke and she used to sing. That was her favorite song, "Just remember darling you belong to me" and I would say, "Oh sing that again Mama," because she used to sing in nightclubs. So those and she loved Ruth Brown and Dinah Washington and Nat King Cole so listening to that music coming up and being around her and James Brown and The Midnighters all of that's--music was a very strong part of my life as well and my mother used to love to dance. She would dance all the way up until she was eighty-nine and she danced. She would break out a dance at any time. She was mischievous and the music that she played when she was selling home brewed moonshine and when the people that came over and buying some of them stayed late or get drunk and mama would look at television and a guy named Mr. Gen [ph.] in particular that my brother [Wesley Brown] and I used to have fun with he get real drunk and fall out on the floor and we'll push him around and talk to him because he would not remember the next day and sometime we'd beat him up you know. Like little kids, we slap him around and say, "Gen do you hear me talking to you? Answer my question," because I would be Perry Mason, "You are now on trial. Did you drink today?" You know how kids do things and I think also what was funny as, as I think about some of the things you just asked me about sounds of the sounds of neighbors saying, "Leslie [HistoryMaker Les Brown] is that you over there cursing?" Because when my mother would go fishing I would put on her wig and her high heeled shoes and one of her dresses and tell my brother and sister [Margaret Ann Sampson], "Y'all better get up and wash these dishes or I'm gonna whip every ass in here." (Laughter) And the neighbors would hear me and say, "I'm gonna tell Mamie [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] you in there cussing and you had her wig on today." (Laughter) I was a crazy kid. I was always getting into stuff. Story_ID: 495899 Speaker 1: Now tell me what was happening inside your head Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown], as a kid? Speaker 2: There, there was something in me that said I was different, I was different. One of the people that fascinated me was Frederick Douglass and Marcus Garvey. I used to walk around with a note that said I was the world's greatest orator because Frederick Douglass was a great orator and I was fascinated with his words, the fact that he was once a slave and he taught himself to read and Marcus Garvey, rise up you mighty people and so and Booker T. Washington he was a very good speaker. He had great content but he did not have the emotion of those two individuals and so that, had fascinated me and that I had that vision of myself doing that. I wanted to be Father Graham [ph.] and I wanted to be Father Federal Gibson [ph.], these community activists that I saw. It's interesting how my twin brother [Wesley Brown] went just the opposite. He's day and I'm another planet and I don't know whether or not people show up for certain things but I always felt different, that I was exempted from what other people had to go through that I was not supposed to be poor, I was supposed to be wealthy. That was my destiny and so all my time and my energy was focused on reading the stories about people who were wealthy knowing that that was me and it's just a matter of time. Story_ID: 495900 Speaker 1: The two of you, did you grow up knowing you were adopted? Back in those days they didn't necessarily you know-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: How did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't find out until I was eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When we had to, when we had to sign the papers that we were legally adopted by my mother [Mamie Brown], we were foster kids up until we were eighteen. I did not know. Speaker 1: So you have no knowledge of that? Speaker 2: No knowledge. Speaker 1: Okay. So when these other you said four or five kids? Speaker 2: We knew they were adopted because we were there when they came. We were older yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what--tell me school wise what--well first of all can you give me everyone's name? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: There's Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown] and Wes [Wesley Brown]. Speaker 2: Leslie and Wesley yes and there is Margaret Ann [Margaret Ann Sampson]. There is Sharon [Sharon Devilla], there is Leonard [Leonard Delvilla], there is Angelo [Angelo Delvilla], there is--I told you Sharon, yeah Angelo. I think I said yes, there's Sharon, there's Leonard, there's Angelo, there's Linda [Linda Devilla] okay and Margaret Ann, Wesley and myself. Story_ID: 495901 Speaker 1: Now, when you--tell me school wise you--where did you go to elementary school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Douglass Elementary School [Frederick Douglass Elementary School, Miami, Florida] and then from Douglass Elementary School, I went to Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida] and that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. So Douglass went to the eighth grade? Speaker 2: Douglass went to the sixth grade.-- Speaker 1: Sixth grade. Speaker 2: --Booker T. Washington started at seventh grade all the way through the senior high school. Speaker 1: Now when you, you said when age ten your mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] was arrested, is that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay and you said that was somewhat traumatic for you? Speaker 2: Yes, because we had to fend for ourselves. As often as the neighbors could, they would look in on us and bring us food, but that wasn't always a guarantee and so I had to go out and work. I had to do errands, wash clothes, go to the store for people, clean houses, cut yards. I did a variety of things in order to earn money to be able to bring food home for the kids which I was a kid myself but I saw myself as an adult. Story_ID: 495902 Speaker 1: So that was a traumatic time at the age of ten, really (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And you are--you--so you're not really school is not a foref- you know forefront in your mind really? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And did you know that you were in special education at the time? Speaker 2: Oh yes, I knew I mean because you put you back from the fifth grade to the fourth and you have a twin brother [Wesley Brown] who's in the fifth and you're in the fourth and they start calling me DT, I was the dumb twin. So you know very well and you know and your special education they call that the dodo ward so that was a part of the process, the taunting but I was un-phased by that. I knew that what I could do was if they asked me questions I could answer them but if you told me to write down the answers that's where I'd get stuck and it would take me much longer. Writing is a frustrating process even the books that I write, I first do them verbally and then have them transcribed and then I work on them. So that was always a challenge. Paper just frustrates me to, to no end and but I knew that I had the answers. I could express them but you could not take a test verbally. People have different learning styles and I have that. Speaker 1: Now so describe the so ten to--you're still in elementary school, you're at Douglass Elementary [Frederick Douglass Elementary School, Miami, Florida] when this happens. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who else is influencing you at this point though? I mean is it-- Speaker 2: Just friends you know, the older guys in the neighborhood. My mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] was a driving force, I admired her tenacity. She had an extroverted personality. She never met a stranger. She loved to teach. She--when I'm going through the airport right now, whenever I travel, I think about my mother because I'm ticklish and so when they start patting me down I said, "Let me--please understand I'm about to crack up." You know they start patting me down and I start laughing like a little kid and it just, it just startled the people at the airport. I'm perhaps the only one to enjoy that because my mother would come in the room say, "Giggity, giggity, giggity" and she'd make that sound I would say oh my god because I knew she was gonna get me and start tickling me. So my, my background, my experience as a kid we were poor and didn't know it. I was in school. School was no big thing. It was a place where you went to physical education, you went to the cafeteria, you had fun. I was a jokester I kept everybody laughing. I was not interested in the kinds of things they were teaching us there. I don't know common things but I can give you all type of quotes but I can't remember last week. But words always fascinated me. Statistics and studies always fascinated me. Information about the mind fascinated me. Everything else I just left that alone and became just focused to this day. I read around two to three books a week because it's, it's an obsession, I love it and to be able to express oneself. I remember as a kid I heard an interview with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and this interviewer was able to shoot questions at him and Dr. King was a, he was a orator but he was not a communicator. He was--the difference between a Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] and a Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] that he could not respond and this guy just talked circles around him and confused him and I said that after seeing 'Meet the Press' with Malcolm X I said that's the role model for me. I wanna do it like that. I wanna be like this guy. I wanna have a lot of information and be like a shotgun and can just rattle it off the top of my head and have a command and good experience of how to handle questions when I saw an interview with him at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] that captured my attention as a kid and so that became my mode of operation ever since then and has carried me through life. Story_ID: 495903 Speaker 1: Now what got your mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] in trouble? Was it the moon-- Speaker 2: Selling moonshine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Moonshine. Okay. Speaker 2: --and homebrew yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how long was she, she-- Speaker 2: You know I have to ask my godmother [Marge Dale (ph.)] how long? It seemed like forever for us as kids but I think that she was sentenced for several months, probably nine months to a year. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were literally on your own? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Church sup- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't have any relatives. Speaker 1: So you weren't really a church family at that point? Speaker 2: No we were not a church family. But Dr.--but Reverend Graham [ph.] at different times brought us food baskets. In fact years later when I was a disk jockey in Columbus, Ohio, and I had a talk show and found out that he was in town to preach, I invited him to the show but he didn't know me and I knew him and his wife was one of my instructors in high school. And then I reminded him when I first saw him. When I walked to the door when he left and had left a basket of food, a box of food and I said, "Mama who's that man?" And she said, "Reverend Graham." I said, "One day I'm gonna be just like him." And I told him this story, he just cried. He was about 6'2", very eloquent man and loved Henry David Thoreau and he often quoted Churchill [Winston Churchill] and so I, I admired him and would go hear him speak. Mama was a person who took us to church but she was not a constant church goer. Speaker 1: Now so in the--so was there anything in this you know between the te- you know those two years until you went to Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida]? I'm just trying to understand who your friends were you know what--? Speaker 2: Just a little neighborhood friends that a lady named Ms. Margaret [ph.] that perhaps the only thing that stands out to me that took me to see plays of the Coconut Grove Playhouse [Miami, Florida] to and to the Ruth Forman playhouse [Ruth Foreman Theatre, North Miami, Florida]. Just that--she was a friend of my mother. She dated a guy named Slim Bannister who was a numbers man and so he could not take her out in public. He was married and so she would take me with her. I was her escort. She played golf and she would do all of these very ritzy parties and things and she would take me as an escort as a kid and so that was had some experience in terms of creating a thirst for the good life. But other than that, no other person other than my mother at that point in time until Mr. Washington [LeRoy Washington] came into my life and my junior year in high school I was in a class waiting on another student and he said, "Young man go to the board, work this problem out." He was a substitute that day and I said, "Sir, I'm not one of your students. I'm just here waiting on MacArthur Stevens [ph.]." He says, "It doesn't matter, do what I'm telling you anyhow." And I said, "I can't sir," and he says, "Why not?" And I said, "Because I'm in special education. I'm educable mentally retarded." And the students started laughing and so he came from behind the desk and he looked at me and he said, "Don't you ever say that again. Someone's opinion of you does not have to become your reality." And that was a turning point because the kids stopped laughing and I thought about that. One hand I was humiliated but on the other hand I was liberated because as I was reading something by Goethe [Johann Wolfgang von Goethe] who said, "Look at a man the way that he is, he only becomes worse but, look at him as if he were what he could be but he comes what he should be." So that was a liberating moment for me. It was a breakthrough moment for me. And then from that day on I began to follow him wherever he was going, whatever plays or students that he was coaching, I would always come to volunteer to work behind the set, to turn on the lights, to pull the curtains, to work on set designs anything to be a part of his class. Speaker 1: So he was in theater? Speaker 2: He was in theater yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So because I was in special education I was not permitted to be one of his students so I hung around as often as I could, watching and observing him and just literally being a sponge. Story_ID: 495904 Speaker 1: So tell me about--because this is let's see in the '50s [1950s] right, '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Right and what is--I'm just trying to get a sense of what Overton-- Speaker 2: Overtown [Miami, Florida]? Speaker 1: Right Overtown. Speaker 2: Some call it Overton (laughter). Speaker 1: I do I don't know why I call but Overtown, what was it like? What is happening in that community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're isolated. You couldn't go across the railroad track but you knew where you were supposed to be and you stayed on that side of the track. Speaker 1: But what was that side of the track like? Describe that to me? Speaker 2: It was, it was poor. The, the part where we lived is poor. On the other side that's where the whites were and so you couldn't go across the railroad tracks. If you saw a mango tree right across the railroad track, if you went up to that mango tree, you would be arrested. You're talking about a time when walking on Miami Beach [Florida] if a white person is coming towards you and you're on the sidewalk you have to get off and let them come by. A time when you're driving and going from Miami [Florida] to Tallahassee [Florida] to pick tomatoes or peanuts, you could not pass a white person. If they're driving sixty miles an hour, the speed limit might be sixty-five, then you would have to drive fifty-five because if you pass them you'll get a ticket. Speaker 1: So you were very aware of your limitations? Speaker 2: Very much aware. Speaker 1: And very much living within those limitations? Speaker 2: And very--well I lived within them but I was also very militant and very vocal and did not like it. It didn't bother my brother [Wesley Brown] but I was very resentful. I remember once they had to send me away for the summer because a white kid came to the side of a fence where we were playing basketball at Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida] and there was, there was the railroad rack was right there and so he came across the track and he start taunting us and, and calling us all kind of racist terms. And so I said, "Why are you doing that?" And he kept doing it and he said, "What you gonna do about it?" And he was, he was standing on the other side of the fence and, and the fence went into a corner, corner like this and so you could go over the fence by putting sticks in there, you create your own little ladder. So I said, "Don't call me that again." And he called the N-word again so I went up to the fence and I pulled the stick out right quick and jumped up and hit him in the head. And unbeknownst to me at the time that I did it so quickly there was a nail in there and so hit him right in the head and blood start coming down his face and he looked and saw the blood and just started screaming and yelled and went home to tell his mother and so they called the police and so fortunately for me the policemen that got the call first, was Jimmy Wilson [ph.] who my mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] used to keep him as a kid and so he was the closest patrol car in the area and so when they came to arrest me because I ran home and they said it was one of the twins and so everybody said we know which one it was because they had us both come out and at that time we looked a great deal alike and so they said it's the bad one and this Ms. Curry [ph.] saw me running in the house and said, "It's Leslie [HistoryMaker Les Brown]," and so this man he said, "Are you Mamie's boy?" I said, "Yes sir." He said, "I need you to come with me." And so he took me to downtown to the M&M Cafeteria and went and got my mother and told her what happened and said, "You need to get him out of here because the boy whose head that he hit with a stick, you know he's, he's at Jackson Memorial Hospital [Miami, Florida] right now. His father is a very wealthy man and he might have something done to Leslie." And so they took me, they had me taken a man named Mr. Alford [ph.] drove me to Tallahassee to stay out there for the summer until things cooled down and we moved from Overtown to Liberty City [Miami, Florida]. Speaker 1: So what year was that? Speaker 2: I don't remember years. Speaker 1: Okay you don't? Speaker 2: I remember quotes and statistics. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I got you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: But do you--were you sixteen you think? Speaker 2: Probably about fourteen or fifteen. Speaker 1: Fourteen or fifteen okay. So that's really probably 1959 or 1960. Story_ID: 495905 Speaker 1: A couple things: were you good at sports? You, you mentioned playing basketball. Speaker 2: I went out for football and a friend of mine named Larry Littles [sic. Larry Little] who also went out for football at that particular time, they had something called you had to put on this wooden slate and you had to knock the other person off. And so unbeknownst to me, the guy, the coach said to Larry Littles, he was a very large guy, said, you know, "Is your mother named Hubba Hubba?" And he said, "No." "Well," he said, "Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown] said your mother's name is Hubba Hubba. And he said that he's gonna knock you off this board. And, and he taunts you. He said he could make you angry by calling your mama Hubba Hubba." He said, "My mother's name is not Hubba Hubba, my mother's name is Marjorie [ph.]." Whoa, wow so he's angry. Then he comes down to me. He says, "Here's what I want you to do. I want you to say Hubba Hubba. When you say that, that just conjures up all your strength and energy and you go down there and knock his big behind off his board." And I weighed like 176 pounds. Larry Littles we in the same age group. We had juniors, Larry weighed about 200 and about 40 pounds and so I had no idea he told this man that. So he said, "Go ahead Les." I said, "Hubba Hubba." Larry just getting hotter and hotter. He said, "Go it again, get your energy level up." I said, "Hubba Hubba." So Larry said, "I'm gonna get you for that." I said, "Hubba Hubba." He came down there and knocked me out. When I finally gained consciousness I said, "Can somebody get this helmet off my head?" And they did. And I said, "Listen do y'all have anything else I can do?" So they said, "We need an announcer." I said, "I need to do that." (Laughter) And so I cried as they pull all this equipment off me and I became the announcer for the football games. I--sports was not my thing. So that ended. Larry Littles went on to play professional football at the Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Ohio] and then for San Diego Chargers [Los Angeles Chargers] and then for the Miami Dolphins and retired as an all pro offensive guard and inducted into the Hall of Fame [Pro Football Hall of Fame, Canton, Ohio]. He ended my promising football career (laughter). Story_ID: 495906 Speaker 1: Now you talked a lot about your brother, what was he like? You know you said opposites? Speaker 2: He's quiet. Wesley's [Wesley Brown] a quiet kid, never missed a day in school, never got in trouble. It just didn't make any sense from elementary school [Frederick Douglass Elementary School, Miami, Florida] to senior high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida], never missed a day, never played hooky, never had the board put on his butt, never had any complaints, teacher never came home. I used to say, "Wesley, do something, they think I'm crazy." He said, "You are." I ask him a few weeks ago, I said, "Why didn't you get in trouble when we were kids?" He said, "The way Mama [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] beat you he said that was enough to make me good." (Laughter) He never got in trouble. He was an introvert and a guy who followed orders. He went--after high school he went to the [U.S.] military. I failed the test. We were gonna go in as buddies and as brothers. My looking out for him, I really wanted to go because see you don't know how to fight. I'm the one. I can fight. I'm the one that needs to go but I'll go look out for you and pass, I mean failed the test. You gotta be really dumb to fail the [U.S.] Army test. One of the saddest days of my life we cried so hard 'cause we had never been separated and he went and spent twenty-six years in military. He's a soldier. He's a guy who do- he does what he's told to do. Speaker 1: So you were, you were--were you fraternal? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're fraternal twins right? Speaker 2: Yes fraternal twins yes. Speaker 1: Because he came out, you know, came out after you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he's heavier than I am and, and slightly shorter. Speaker 1: Do you, so at that--you don't really feel that fraternals don't feel like they don't necessarily think the same? Speaker 2: When we were younger we felt and I would know something was happening to him. We were very connected. I would know and I could pick that up if something happened to him. If he was in trouble, if he was grieving, he was angry, I would know and, and we, we connected like that. Not as we got older. It doesn't happen like that. Story_ID: 495907 Speaker 1: So he [Brown's twin brother, Wesley Brown] goes off into the [U.S. military] service? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You don't go off in the service? Speaker 2: I take care of Mama [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] right. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Became married right after high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida]. Speaker 1: Who'd you marry? Speaker 2: I married Madeline, Madeline Williams [ph.] and we had two kids Calvin [Calvin Brown] and Patrick [Patrick Brown] and then I became involved in radio. I was working for Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] as a salesman and I was doing door-to-door sales from ten years old. I also sold copper, sold aluminum and I did door-to-door sales selling television sets and so then I auditioned for and got a job as a disk jockey and it really wasn't an audition, was the guy became drunk and I was the only one there and they asked me would I take over the controls? A guy named Rock and Rolly Rogers [ph.] a Saturday afternoon and I had been waiting on that opportunity because he would drink every Saturday and I would know when he was drunk because he would always start talking about fried chicken. It was like it triggered something in his brain and then this Sunday--this Saturday he took it too far. He started stumbling and slurring his words and he almost fell off the chair. The general manager heard him, called the station [WMBM Radio, Miami Beach, Florida] and asked me to call someone else in. I waited for about twenty minutes. I called my girlfriend and my mother and other friends said, "Turn on the radio I'm about to come on the air." I called the general manager back and said, "Mr. Klein [Alexander Klein] I can't find anybody." He said, "Young boy you know how to work the controls?" I said, "Yes sir." He said, "Go in there and work the controls, segue the records but don't say nothing here." I said, "Yes sir." Couldn't wait to get Rock out of the way. Went in there, escorted him out of the room. Said, "Rock they need you to go in the room here and lay down on the couch, get yourself together and I'll segue the records." He said, "Okay Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown]." And I came in the room, I opened up the microphone and said, "Lookout this is me L.B. Triple P, Les Brown your Platter Playing Papa. There were none before me and there will be none after me and therefore that makes me the one and only. The young and single and love to mingle certified, bona fide, indubitably qualified to bring you satisfaction and a whole lot of action. Look out baby I'm your love man." And that was the beginning of my career. Story_ID: 495908 Speaker 1: Now what--well how did you go from doing announcing for the team to you know to, to working for a radio station? I'm just--you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I was fascinated with a guy named Ed Cook [Edward B. Cook] who went and came on the radio and went to Chicago [Illinois] and a guy named Milton "Butterball" Smith-- Speaker 1: Is this still in Miami [Florida]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Where? Speaker 2: Oh yes, that's in Miami. I thought you asked if he's still in Miami. Speaker 1: No, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah no. Yes that's still in Miami. I became a disk jockey in Miami on WMBM radio station [WMBM Radio, Miami Beach, Florida] which is still in existence and I became the afternoon personality after that, perhaps the youngest disk jockey at that time during the afternoon show. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: I was just out of high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Miami, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay so you just-- Speaker 2: I was eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So now talk about that radio station and who owned it and you know-- Speaker 2: Clyde Killens owned the radio--not Clyde Killens, it was a gentleman named Allan Margolis owned the radio station. Just about six years ago jumped out of a window in Manhattan [New York]. He was worth $55 million. I wish he had talked to me. I would've motivated him. Blanche Calloway was the, the program director, sister of Cab Calloway. Hi De Hi De Ho. And Milton "Butterball" Smith, a guy named Bob Terry, the Nighthawk. I came up under some incredible disk jockeys. A guy named the great Montague [Nathaniel "Magnificent" Montague] who went out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Burn baby, burn. They attributed the riots to him. Those are the people who influenced me. I'm listening to a guy out of Chicago. "Hi, this is Sid McCoy." Had the most incredible voice I've ever heard in radio. Those were the people that listening to radio, radio was real radio then. It was personality driven. I was captivated by those voices, by those personalities and I wanted to become a disk jockey and I did. And did that for several years from Miami, Florida to Columbus, Ohio from Columbus, Ohio to New York [New York] where I was on there. Speaker 1: Yeah, so let's go to, let's, let's talk about the name of the station again? Speaker 2: WMBM radio station-- Speaker 1: WMBM. Speaker 2: --on Miami Beach. Speaker 1: WMBM okay. And so what was that whole experience like? And what part of the day were you know on the air? Speaker 2: I was the afternoon disk jockey from three o'clock until seven. It was a very great time. I was a very electrifying speaker on radio and I was always motivational because I'm listening to these motivational tapes so I always had a show that's called, yes we can and yes we will, so I started my show like that encouraging people in between the records as well as coming out of rap as a natural born champ. You know put more dip in your hip, more cut in your strut, more glide in your stride you know. A guy named Frankie Crocker out of New York who had those, those kind of rhymes and so we stole from each other so I was that kind of rhyming disk jockey and a disk jockey that also did demonstrations and editorials and commentaries. Story_ID: 495909 Speaker 1: Now this was the early '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: So you're--and you know you're up in age that you're aware of you know the world behind you and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know we're in the Civil Rights Movement. Now what is, what is going around you know that the Miami [Florida] area? What are things are happening? Are you mainly, your program is it more talk and you know and, and I won't say ramping or are you commenting or is it music? Speaker 2: Mine is more music then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then by two years into it, I was tricked by one of my mentors to to apply for a job in Columbus, Ohio [at WVKO Radio]. So-- Speaker 1: Now who is your mentor? Speaker 2: Bill Moss, and he-- Speaker 1: Oh Bill Moss was your mentor? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Bill Moss ended up in Columbus, right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay but did you met Bill Moss? Speaker 2: Well because he worked in the radio station in Miami. So he went to Columbus, Ohio. So he and another friend named Lawrence Hargrove [ph.] colluded, they came together said, "Look, Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown] is young and dumb, he's adventurous. Why don't you invite him up to Columbus and I'll get that afternoon slot and then he can work there for a few months and then fire him. And he'll go someplace else." So they did so I--that happened and so but you know I think when I look at my life, my favorite song has always been Frank Sinatra, I did it my way ['My Way']. When I look back I did it God's way because he's always looked out for me. So sure enough I was there about three months I came in and I took Columbus literally by storm. Speaker 1: So what year do you come? I know you say you don't know years, but (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in the 1970, well I remember that 1974. Story_ID: 495910 Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-four [1974], you c- so you're basically on the air, you're talking about maybe eight years on the air before you go to Columbus [Ohio] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes and just straight disk jockey. Speaker 1: Just straight--so let me ask you what kind of music are you playing? Speaker 2: We're--we were playing Motown [Motown Records] and regular rhythm and blues and Ray Charles, hey I got a woman way over town whose good to me, you know all those types of songs, Hank Ballard and The Midnighters-- Speaker 1: But, but, I wanna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Wilson Pickett. Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna ask a question because I know that now at that point in time, disk jockeys become their own personalities. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay so are you do--getting out in the community? Speaker 2: Out doing record hops, doing nightclubs, emceeing in nightclubs. I did all of that and promoted concerts and I used to drive entertainers around when they first came to town, I was an errand boy for the disk jockeys then I started becoming the emcee and I was invited to emcee a lot of events and then I was also the person, the board person for a talk show. I worked the boards for Larry King when he was down in, in talk shows. A guy named Sam Gyson and all those guys. I was the board operator for for many of these talk shows. All of the talk shows at that time were white. Unbeknownst to me I had no idea just sitting up there listening to this night after night being bored to death, that that was preparation for a show that I would ultimately have and so after leaving Miami [Florida] went to Columbus, Ohio, and started a show called 'The Voice of The People' [ph.] the first talk show in Columbus, Ohio. And unbeknownst to me I had the gift to do it and did extremely well. Story_ID: 495911 Speaker 1: Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown] I just wanna know what skill sets did someone have to learn? I mean it's much different nowadays but if you were a deejay what you know what did that mean and what were the things-- Speaker 2: The skillset to me to make it in life basically three things. Number one you gotta believe in yourself. You have to have unconditional belief in yourself and continue to work on that belief because as you listen to things, train yourself. I read ten to fifteen pages of something positive every day to, to turn down the negative voice in my head. The second thing is you must have a command of the English language. You've gotta be an effective communicator and very convincing and being able to communicate with people at all levels. Speaker 1: But the--but the other--I don't mean to cut you off with the number three, but you know being a deejay can be very solitary. You don't have--it's a totally different thing than being (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a totally different thing yes. Speaker 1: --being a motivational speaker where you have people so how would--what is happening-- Speaker 2: It's fascinating. You live as a blind person. You live out of your imagination. That's the fascinating thing about it. You can connect with people you know when you're connected and you know when you're not connected. Speaker 1: How do you know that? Speaker 2: You feel it, you sense it. I think that has created in me a capacity to do and be impactful with an audience that most people--speakers who have not had that experience could not do. There's something that you develop in you that I don't know what that is that you can sense you know when you're on, you know when they're listening, you know when you have turned them off. And the phones will also give you an indication if you're in the zone. You can feel it and so there's a dimension about us that you feel that you have that connection with the audience that you know when you, when you have them there and they can't move. Story_ID: 495912 Speaker 1: Now was there ever an organization of black disk jockeys? How are you knowing about whoever else was around the-- Speaker 2: Just word of mouth. They didn't have an association at that particular time there and I don't even believe that they have one right now. They have some conventions but not serious ones that enhance your craft. Speaker 1: But just word of mouth you know of-- Speaker 2: Word of mouth. Speaker 1: --Crocket [sic. Frankie Crocker] up in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: That's right New York. Speaker 1: Do you know the Chicago [Illinois] deejays at that point? Speaker 2: Yes some of them came from Miami [Florida] like Ed Cook [Edward B. Cook], the Nassau Daddy. So you know about the reputation of the people that are good and what they're doing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what was your name? Speaker 2: I was [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, the man about town. There were none before me and there will be none after me. Story_ID: 495913 Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now when you come to Columbus [Ohio] in 1974 it's a different place than-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you know the Miami [Florida] that you've left, what is different--you know you're talking about the South you know versus the Midwest, what--how does this town differ? Speaker 1: Very conservative town. It was a town of Woody Hayes the time I was there. The coach of Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] football team and I--they used as a reason to fire me was because Aretha Franklin had a song out called 'Respect' and at the end of the record said, "Sock it to me, sock it to me, sock it to me, sock it to me." Well when I say that on the air you are not allowed to say sock it to me on the air. You couldn't play the song 'Let's Go Get Stoned' by Ray Charles. Very conservative community. So Ray- so, so Bill Moss said, "You're fired because you said sock it to me on the air." I said, "But it's on the record." "No when that came on I told you to turn it down." I said, "But it's good." "I told you turn it down. You're fired." Fortunately for me the vice president of the station [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio] was coming to the station to fire me named Ed Saunders [Eddie Saunders] and when I was out in the parking lot putting my things in the car and my records, he said, "You're fired." I said, "I know Bill already fired me." "He already fired you? He doesn't have the right to fire you. I'm the only one has the right to fire you. You're hired." So they had an ego trip going there between the two of them. So Bill fired me. Eddie Saunders hired me back saying you don't do that. You don't overstep my boundaries. I'm the only one that can fire anybody. So I had to take my things out of the car, come back in. I had my job back because he wanted to fire me personally and Bill beat him to the punch. So I had my job. (Laughter) Is that crazy or what right? And so as a result of that two weeks later, the president of the United States, Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], came to town and said "Sock it to 'em" on the statehouse steps so I was vindicated because if it was a bad word, the president would not have said it. God looks out for babies and fools okay and so I continued my position as a community activist on the station and then they fired me for editorializing about police brutality. Story_ID: 495914 Speaker 1: So Mike Williams, he was the station's news director at WVKO [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: It was WVKO right? Speaker 2: WVKO. I, I went to hear him speak. I was a groupie of Mike Williams. He was a militant from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], drop-out from Ohio State from Coshocton, Ohio, but was a great communicator and I just admired his communication style. So I hired him as my newsman and in between records, he transformed me from [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, the man of our town, to Les Brown the community activist and as a result of his influence interrupting the story in my head of what I saw about myself and what I believed about who I was, and he always talked about having a larger vision of yourself beyond just entertaining people with your wit, with your music, with your personality, but educating them, teaching them how to become an active force in their lives, talking between the records, tripping my mind. Eventually started doing editorials and became a community activist and used to lead demonstrations of five to ten thousand people. Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] came to find out who is this guy? He had an African relief drought in 19--I think it was 1978 he came to Miami--to Columbus, Ohio, and they were raising funds for a drought and in Africa and he raised fifty-one thousand dollars nationally and I raised fifty--forty-five thousand of that. No, there are fifty-five thousand dollars. I raised fifty-one thousand of that fifty-five thousand dollars in Columbus, Ohio. So he came three different times and said, "How do you do this? What are you saying to get, get people to give?" I said, "I have a gift and that's how I use it." So I had the ability to mobilize the community. I had something called black Monday where we closed the school district down and thousands of people showed up down at the board of education to protest racism in the public schools and I remember when they were going to arrest me and they said they were going to charge me because a riot broke out with all the damage that took place downtown and I had a news conference and I said, "I'll be happy to pay as long as Woody Hayes will pay for the all the damage that the Ohio State students committed when they beat Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]." And so that stopped that conversation. And so I continued to editorialize on various types of things and pretty soon had to send my family back home because the threats in the police department, they used to use my picture as a target practice and then they fired me from the station and I barricaded myself in the studios. Story_ID: 495915 Speaker 1: But Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown], let's talk about that, that period a little bit more and the reason I wanna do it, I wanna understand what is sort of happening with you-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --as you're sort of growing and maturing-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and then I wanna understand also the context of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what Columbus [Ohio] was like you know besides Woody Hayes. So what is the black community like? What is the white community like? You know besides just umbrage of this conservative town? Speaker 2: Police brutality was very, very flagrant and very bold. They did not hide it then. I mean people could stand around and they would beat people publicly. That infuriated me. So I was the first person to do editorials on that and held demonstrations and demanded that the cops be fired. Brought enough pressure to get them fired and then they would go before a review board of other police officers and they would be reinstated. But we, we knew that we were fighting a losing battle but we said we need to fight anyhow because this is the Gestapo of our community. And they knew how to intimidate people and they knew they had carte blanche. All they had to say as they do today, I thought he had a gun and they would kill people. And that so, that was, that was a very tough issue and even to this day I have to walk away from some things that I see because it number one, people feel powerless in the face of it which I think is crazy because nobody is invincible although they're very powerful, they're the only licensed assassins in our community, but it's a very difficult situation because you need them to protect you from criminals and then at the same time there are many of them 35 percent of them are mentally ill and are criminals themselves with a badge and a gun you know. Look at the newspaper coming through the airport. Young guy was arrested for nothing and a cop struck--I mean stuck a screwdriver up his rectum. I mean that's that's sick and that's just the tip of the iceberg. What has happened--so that's that's been one area of my life I had to shut down. I've seen it most of my life. I have a strong passion about it and perhaps one of the reasons that I'm leaving Chicago [Illinois] because of the, the feeling of powerlessness that people have for the past twenty years police have used cattle prods on the gums, the lips, the penis and testicles of African American males to extract confessions and for crimes they did not commit. It was proven by a panel and they sat on the findings of that panel until the policemen could not be prosecuted and the city could not be sued and the statute of limitations ran out. Story_ID: 495916 Speaker 1: But Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown], what's--I mean that's Chicago [Illinois] but I want to understand who is in charge in Columbus [Ohio] and who were you railing against? You know it wasn't just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A guy name Bert Charles was a general manager. We were fighting all the time and the only reason that he tolerate-- Speaker 1: Now is he white? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and the only reason that he tolerated me and I had the morning show was because I was very popular and I had a lot of sponsors, had a lot of commercials and had the number one show in the morning and very popular. So he tolerated my activism because of the dollars it brought in for the radio station [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio] and the potential outcry that would happen if they fired me. They fired me, I left the station, went on a strike and they closed the station down and the community did, the jocks [disc jockeys] all left and they brought me back and then I editorialized on something else about three years later and he left town. They had talked with the owners of the station, said we need to get rid of him because election was coming up. Dr. John Rosemond was running and I was on the air and that was the first time in history of Columbus that a black man was running for mayor and I was able to influence the community to turn out of over 95 percent of the vote and the way that I did it was I told all the jocks they could not come to the station on election day, that I would stay on the air all day long because I knew that they had been paid not to promote the turnout for the election and so I had them all take off and I was on the air from six o'clock in the morning until seven o'clock at night and over 95 percent of the black vote came out in every precinct unprecedented in a non-election--non presidential election year. So Dr. Rosemond won the primary. The first time a black man ever did that. Then two months later, they fired me. Bert Charles left word that I was fired and left town because he didn't have the guts to face me himself. So when I came to the station that morning, the door was locked and they had one of the jocks I had trained on the air, Mike Reeves. So I drove my car up to the side of the building and knocked on a window where the engineer was. I said, "Nick Bode [ph.], do you know me?" He said, "Of course I know you." "Do you know that I'm crazy?" He said, "Yes." I said, "Then open the door. You have nothing to do with this." He said, "I will. I will." He opened the door; I went in the front door. Mike Williams saw--Mike Reeves saw me when I came in and he ran out of the studio and I came into the studio and I moved all furniture out in the halls into the stairs and barricaded myself in the studio. I said, "This is Les Brown. This is my last day on the air and there will be no music today. I will talk to you until Bert Charles comes." So they had to fly Bert Charles back in town and they had the Upper Arlington [Ohio] police come to the station to come to break into the studio to arrest me. I barricaded myself in the studio. I talked about why they were firing me, all of the issues dealing with police brutality, that you cannot allow these people to stamp--to trample you and intimidate you. You got to fight back. And so fortunately for me, God looks out for babies and fools. There was a lieutenant that was listening to the show from Columbus, Ohio, a policeman who now is the chief of police and he came out to the station-- Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: --is Jackson [James Jackson], Jackson and he came out to the station and said to these Upper Arlington police when they finally moved all--they had to break in the door because I wouldn't move it. They told me to come out and I said, "I'm fired; it's too much work to move this. You want me, move it yourself." And so they broke the door down and came in and got me and they handcuffed me. And so he said to them, "You can't take him out there in handcuffs." And they said, "Why not?" He said, "Because have you looked outside?" There's over two thousand people that packed the Upper Arlington, this is a very white area. They packed that place and they said, "These people are not gonna let you take him out of here." He said, "Promise me Les, you won't come back." I said, "I won't come back. My work is done here." He said, "Then take the handcuffs off him." So they took the handcuffs off me. I told him goodbye and I left and I never went back. Speaker 1: Now let's, let's talk about that though because sometimes we don't know you know what's in front of us. You talk about it as well it appears to be a defining moment but were you upset you know I mean that day and I want you take me back there. Speaker 2: I was, I was angry because I felt that people have a right to defend themselves. I was, I was infuriated because people who are authorized to protect life was taking life and using their badge, hiding behind a badge to take advantage of us because of our paint job. And I was also angry with our taking it passively or not fighting back. That bothered me that just to me you have to fight back. It's better to go down in a cause that will ultimately win than to just let people trample over you. I'd rather--even, even I know that someone can take me out, they will know they been in a fight and so that the fact that we have developed an addiction to powerlessness then we are powerless in the face of them and that the only thing that we can do every time policemen abuse the use of deadly use of force, that we decide to get together collectively and break windows and burn up businesses in our community. That's crazy. Story_ID: 495917 Speaker 1: Wasn't there something also else happening Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown] in this what you came to Columbus [Ohio] you said in 1974-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and then your last day at the station [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio] was what day? Speaker 2: It was September the 22nd I remember that yes. Speaker 1: September 22nd-- Speaker 2: I don't know what year that was. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it like--were you on the air there for eight? Speaker 2: Yeah I was there for nine years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nine years so that would have been 1983? Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983], '84 [1984] yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So what--don't you think there's something else happening in that? Hadn't you really sort of found your voice and you were enjoying that? Okay. Speaker 2: Enjoying it very much and and felt invincible. I used to go to the Fraternal Order of Police meetings and sit on the front row. I dressed in black every day. I was very militant and outspoken and enjoyed being the person that wouldn't mind speaking my voice. I said I wanted to be the person that could make people listen and act and not tolerate what was going on. I enjoy that. Speaker 1: So that was a much different-- Speaker 2: Les Brown than man about town Les Brown. Speaker 1: --right and a much different Les Brown than the child who was you know who was a sort of a jokester-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but you know so it was a different--because you know you're influencing people. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: These are important issues-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: So let me ask in that you know in that context, I wanna understand also I mean wasn't John Day [ph.] around that time? Was he-- Speaker 1: Yes. Johnny Day. Yes Johnny Day became one of my disk jockeys from Dayton, Ohio. He had a theme I go around all day the young ladies would say with nothing on but John Day. Yes, he had a great voice. I loved Johnny Day. Great personality. I always hired the best disk jockeys. Jocks who were better than I was. I was one of the few program directors that did that. I'm a very com-- Speaker 2: Well when did you become program director? Speaker 1: I became--Bill Moss left the station-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and a guy named Horace Perkins said to me, "You should become the program director." And I changed all the programming for the station to become an activist station. He left the station and to go into the barbecue business. And I became the program director and did all the get out the vote efforts and registrations and editorials and all types of things. Talking to the mayor and the governor, interviewing them and, and engaging people in the political process. Story_ID: 495918 Speaker 1: And fortunately I did that because when I was fired [from WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio] then this same guy Horace Perkins who told them that I should be the program director which I would have never suggested that, I didn't even know I had it in me, came to my house with petitions. God looks out for babies and fools and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Les Brown you should run for office." I said, "Run for office, do what?" Because I couldn't get a job in Columbus [Ohio]. I, I was considered a militant and so no one would give me a job in radio or any place else. And so he said, "You ought to run for office." And I said, "Doing what Perkins?" He said, "Run for a state representative." I said, "I don't know anything about politics." He says, "Neither do the people who run." He said, "I've gotten the petition signed for you. All you have to do is sign your name here. I'll take it down to the board of elections and you'll be in the race." I said, "But I don't have the microphone." But he said, "But you've done enough good, people will vote for you." And so I ran against an incumbent who'd been there for twenty-two years. Speaker 2: Who was the incumbent? Speaker 1: His--the incumbent was Bob Cupp, Robert Cupp. Speaker 2: Can you talk about who he was? Speaker 1: Robert Cupp was a UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers] representative. He represented organized labor and he was in a district that was 65 percent white. Two black attorneys ran against him and lost. He had the endorsement of the organized labor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was white? Speaker 1: --he's white yes--organized labor, The Columbus Dispatch, the Columbus Call and Post, the black newspaper and all of the black leaders except one. So when I ran against him all of the people who used to support me when I was on the air that I supported, they said you're off the air now. We would love to go with you but we can't because we can't go against the party and you can't win because you don't have the money nor do you have the microphone. So a community leader named--he was a city councilman named Jerry Hammond called me to his house on Sunday afternoon and various community leaders came there. Dr. Charles Taylor [Charles E. Taylor] was the former president of Central State University [sic. Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and the Academy for Contemporary Problems [Columbus, Ohio] and he--and I came with my two boys [Calvin Brown and Patrick Brown] and, and they're all these various community leaders were there from organized labor, John Scales [ph.] and the Democratic Party saying don't run against Bob Cupp, you can't win and if you don't run we can help you find a job in Miami [Florida], why don't you just leave. And so when they all finished, Jerry Hammond said, "They've asked me not to endorse you because the Democratic Party will not support me for my reelection, but given what you've done for this community, I'm willing to sacrifice that. I'm willing to stand with you." And I said, "Jerry, judge a man not by what he does, but what he does that he doesn't have to do and to judge a true quality man what he does when no one's looking you didn't have to do this. I appreciate you but I don't want to put you in that position." I said, "I'm gonna win. I'm going to win." He said, "You can't you only have $650. He has over $40,000 in advertising." I said, "I'll find a way to win." And so I left and I said I didn't need their--Jerry's endorsement. Went to the station had--it was a Friday afternoon. I had six hundred and- yeah $640 so I said to Perkins, I said, "Perkins," I said, "this is all I've got." And I was--I went knocking door-to-door throughout the district and said, "Hi, my name is Les Brown, tell everybody that I'm still standing" because my theme on the air was stand up for what you believe in because you can fall for anything. And I said, "I just need to take a nap here just to think. Whenever I get ready to speak, I get sleepy or to think I get sleepy." I went in the middle room and I took a power nap for about thirty minutes and I woke up. I said, "I know what I'm gonna do." He said, "What?" I said, "I'm gonna call my mother." I used to talk about my mother on the air a lot so I said what can you give me for $640? He said, "I can give you about fourteen spots but they have to be thirty seconds. You can't talk long." He said, "One minute spot they won't last that long because the cost." I said, "Okay." I called my mother, I said "Mama," I said "I need you go say something for me." She said, "What boy"? I said, "I'm running for state representative." "State representative?" I said, "Yes ma'am." She said, "What you want me to say?" I said, "Just tell people to vote for me. You don't have to talk long, just tell them in your own words." "All right. All right tell me when you want me to do it." I said, "Now Mama." And she said, "Hello, this is Mrs. Mamie Brown. When I raised my boys I raised them to be good boys and when they got out of hand, I beat their behinds. Please vote for my son, he's a good boy." And I won. Usually in a state representative race you get around two or three thousand votes, I got twenty-six thousand votes to his two. I won hands down. So Les Brown was back again. I was elected to the high legislature [Ohio General Assembly]-- Speaker 2: And that's in 1985, '86 [1986]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I became the chairman of the human resource committee, passed fourteen bills my first term in office. Story_ID: 495919 Speaker 1: Now, so you're young and brash relatively-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and let me ask it's a different--so you go in to be a change agent, now I wanna understand what is the Ohio--what--how many, I mean-- Speaker 2: The Ohio legislature [Ohio General Assembly] there was blacks represented 10 percent out of the 110 representatives. Speaker 1: So who was serving, do you remember who was serving back then? Speaker 2: Oh yes, C.J. McLin from Dayton, Ohio. Very, very powerful brother that everybody respected. I remember when I came there and I was very militant coming there and he, he really he groomed me. He took the edge off. I wanted to humiliate the white legislators who would embarrass the black ministers. Most of the elected officials are black ministers who could not debate well and so I watched them the--many of these white attorneys are white legislators were attorneys so I studied them, I watched them and so I remember going to the defense of one of the representatives who had introduced a bill and they were trying to make fun of him and so this guy had a bill coming and then I challenged this bill. C.J. said, "Let him go Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown]." I said, "Why?" He said, "Talk to him privately." I said, "Why? He humiliates you guys all the time. Today he will pay." He says, "Les, if you can get a man's attention by tapping him on the shoulder, why knock him in the mouth? If you knock him in the mouth, he will get in a fight with you and he might get in a lucky punch. Tap him on the shoulder, talk to him. Let him know why you feel like you do. Ask him to apologize to you and not to do it again." And he said, "You never know when he might be an ally of yours." And this is very true. I talked to the guy. I said, "If you ever humiliate one of our speakers again," I said, "I will take you out every time you bring up anything. I'll follow you around to committee to committee." I said, "C.J. spared you today," and he said, "I won't do it anymore but I need this bill for my district." I said, "Okay." And so I learned the value of compromising you know. I learned the value of not arguing with the press. He said, "Les never argue with people who buy their ink by the gallons. You can't win." He taught me a lot. He taught me to feel the fact that anger blows out the lamp of the mind, that you must be a thinker. You must--you can't be emotional. Get the emotions out of it. You have to outthink them and outwork them. Story_ID: 495920 Speaker 1: Now you served on the Illinois--I mean, sorry, the Ohio legislature [Ohio General Assembly] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ohio legislature. Speaker 1: --for how long? Speaker 2: I was elected to three terms. Speaker 1: Three terms? Speaker 2: Yes and midway on my third term, my mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] became ill. She was diagnosed with breast cancer. So I resigned from the Ohio legislature to go back to take care of her. I refused to allow her to be committed to a nursing home. I just couldn't understand how one woman could raise seven children, who couldn't take care of themselves but seven children couldn't take care of one woman. That didn't sit right with me. Speaker 1: So you had--you, you're talking about your time in legislature that it was also--how many now you said 10 percent. How many total? Speaker 2: One hundred ten legislatures. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Blacks represent for the between the-- Speaker 1: The house [Ohio House of Representatives] you were on the house side (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on the house side. The Republicans and Democrats and I was a Democrat and, and we were like ten and the--but we are the majority. Speaker 1: So who were the ten? Speaker 2: The C.J. McLin, John Thompson [John D. Thompson, Jr.], Ike Thompson, Bill Mallory [William L. Mallory, Sr.]. I remember some of them. I don't remember all of them. Speaker 1: Okay now was there any on the senate [Ohio Senate] side? Speaker 2: Yes. Bill [William F. Bowen]--yes. Yes there was one. I can see his, I can see his face right now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's okay, it's okay. Story_ID: 495921 Speaker 1: Now the other thing I wanna know, was it a full time working legis- [Ohio General Assembly]? I mean, 'cause that-- Speaker 2: It was, it was a part time job. It was a part time job. I did that during--when it was in session and then when it was not in session, I came to Chicago [Illinois] and I studied under Dr. Johnnie Colemon [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Johnnie Colemon] at Christ Universal Temple church [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now how had you gotten to know Dr.-- Speaker 2: I read about her in Ebony magazine in 1980. I was fascinated with that she had in a non-traditional approach to religion. She built the largest church in Chicago and I was fascinated with one of her tapes I heard. She was an electrifying speaker and so I wanted to be around her, to be under her leadership, to be taught by her. So I came to Chicago. I was going through a divorce and I came to connect with my spiritual self and studied and stayed with one of the board members named Cora [ph.], washed her car, cleaned her house and stayed here during the summer and studied every summer here in Chicago and graduated from the Universal Center for Better Living [sic. Universal Foundation for Better Living, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: You did that in what year? Do you remember? Now is that after your mother's [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] passing? Speaker 2: No before. Speaker 1: Before, okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But this is after--while you're serving on the Illinois [sic.]? Speaker 2: Yes in the legislature, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When they adjoined, they adjor- they adjourned in the summer I would come here in Chicago and go to the Christ Universal Temple church, Universal Center for Better Living. Story_ID: 495922 Speaker 1: Now what are you learning about the political structure? Because it's a much different thing like Bill Moss never, he was always an activist, he didn't-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know go to the next level. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's different when you-- Speaker 2: You gotta learn how to-- Speaker 1: Compromise (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. You gotta learn how to embrace people. You've got to learn how to state your position and not be rude, be sensitive of why the other people are where they are, understand where they are and do it respectfully and strategically. But also deliver your message in such a way that they find it hard to go against you. I remember when I argued against the death penalty and the guy who had introduced the legislation when I was the highest vote against the death penalty in the history of Ohio legislature [Ohio General Assembly] that was a pro-death penalty group. I said, "Mr. Speaker I'd like to introduce the amendment onto this bill." And they said, "Yes sir." And they were surprised. I said, "I--this bill, this amendment says sir if someone is convicted of vehicular homicide that what we will do is authorize a state employee to become intoxicated using a state car and we will run them over and let them know what it was like being intoxicated behind the wheel and have somebody run over you. The other thing is that if parents are convicted of child abuse, we will tie them up and let the kids beat the living hell out of them. Let them know what that's like. And finally sir someone is convicted of rape, we will strap them on a table nude and we'll have a state employee repeatedly rape them so they will understand what it's like to be violated and controlled." And I said, "Ladies and gentlemen, the reason that we don't do that is because we know that that's not right. Duplicating an injustice does not make it right. We must hold ourselves to a higher standard." Speaker 1: Now did you, Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown], in in your--in this transition into you know from activist to you know a legislator, did you--what other things are you learning about dealing with people and and also you know there's the campaigning-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and then there's the running of the office you know so-- Speaker 2: What I learned about the value of observing people and getting to understand how they think and what is it that drives them to make the decisions that they make. I spent a lot of time conducting as I train speakers now, communications intelligence. I tell speakers never let what you want to say get in the way what the audience needs to hear and find out, pay more attention to the listening. Find out who they are, what keeps them up at night? What drives them? What is it that they value? What is it that that turns them on and speak to that. You've got to know who they are in order to get them to see things from your point of view. But if you don't know them and take the time to study them, you'll never be able to influence them. So when I went to the legislature, I spent a lot of time understanding the other legislators, the whites, the Democrats and the Republicans. I invited them out to lunch. They were shocked when I would spend time with them. I found out legislation they were interested in and I would show up at a committee to testify on behalf of their legislation if it was something that I was in agreement with. I taught my philosophy as you in politics give before you ask. So when I introduced a bill, I always had support because I had already helped others get their bills passed. I studied their legislation and when they would have lobbyists, the legislators have a habit of introducing a bill that say I yield any questions to my experts. They would have the lobbyist that gave them the bill to argue so I always entertain my own questions because I did my own research. Then I decided I will be research on their bills without them asking me and show up at their committee and said I believe in this bill and they would now raise--, "Anybody else want to testify?" "Yes, I'd like to come up Mr. Chairman." And I would testify on behalf of their bills and so they liked that. Wow he came and helped my bill get passed. He didn't have to do that. Republicans or Democrats, conservative or liberal, if it was something I agree with and we can always look for the common ground. And that gave me an advantage and I think even now I believe that that's an advantage in my, my business as a speaker. Story_ID: 495923 Speaker 1: So each time you, you, you know, you ran, you're learning more about the white-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --community also. Speaker 2: Yes and studying their psyche, how, how they think. When I was running for the state legislature [Ohio General Assembly] to neutralize how the press saw me, I went to meet the Taft family. I went to meet the Wolfe family all those so-called power brokers in that city. A friend of mine named Ed Blunt-- Speaker 1: Can you talk about the, the Taft family? I need to know who they were. Speaker 2: Yes, they were very conservative and Republicans in the State of Ohio traditional you know several presence in that family so I went around to meet them and I--Ed Blunt who was a black executive at Ohio Bell [Ohio Bell Telephone Company; AT&T Ohio], he did a profile on their personalities to see if they were interested in golf, if they were interested in chess. He said, "You wanna go in there and you need to know who they are." And their background if they were in the [U.S.] military, what college did they go to, how many kids did they have. So when I went in meet them, I would ask them about their kids and I knew their kids' names and they were impressed. He took the time to know my kids' name. I talked about what they did in college. According to how the room was set, I would move the chair. If it was sit in front of them like I'm sitting in front of you now, I would move it to the right and so he taught me this guy because, I'm coody, I'm cornbread. So here's a refined M.B.A., very brilliant brother who took the time to refine me and to teach me how to speak their language and proper etiquette and how to address them and how for them not to demonize me because they feared me because of how I was on air and now they saw this different guy who was not talking about the police and had the threat of death in his voice, but this guy who's eloquent, who's knowledgeable and can speak on utilities, on the environment, on introducing legis-- Story_ID: 495924 Speaker 1: Can you talk though about your, your first campaign, your second campaign and then your third campaign? 'Cause you were--you would serve two year terms, right? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My first campaign was very challenging because without any knowledge and experience of how to run for office except for when I supported other candidates was interesting because what I did was I had grassroots campaign. I went door-to-door. I would get on one side of the street and I had my two sons [Calvin Brown and Patrick Brown] get on the other side of the street and we would knock on doors. And said hi, they would say--and I say, "Just go and tell them say hi, I'm Les Brown's son and I want you to know my father is running for state representative in the 29th House District. He's still standing. He's not on the mic, but he's still standing." And I would knock on doors, "Hi my name is [HistoryMaker] Les Brown." "Les Brown I remember you on the radio on WVKO [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio]." "Yes. I want you to know I'm still standing. Get on the phone and call your friends and let them know I'm still standing. I'm running for state representative in the 29th House District." And I did that all over the black community because what I was looking for was to be able to--my election was in the primary. If you don't beat the front--if you don't win the primary, there is no general. So there was a strong black pocket of people that I had to cover going door-to-door without having all of the stuff that other people have in terms of their, their posters. I didn't have that type of budget for that and all of the campaign money for television and for radio. Story_ID: 495925 Speaker 1: And then in the white communities what I did Dr. Charles Taylor [Charles E. Taylor] and Mike Williams, they grilled me. They had something in Columbus [Ohio] called the Academy for Contemporary Problems and so they told me that I should go down to the legislature [Ohio General Assembly], sit in the galleries, watch the process, go to the various committee hearings and see how they're conducted, do some study to understand how the process work when you introduce a bill and it goes to the reference committee and then the reference committee sends it to another committee for it to be debated upon and there's different views are expressed. And so I learned and observed that process and then I went out into the white areas. I decided this area called Whitehall [Ohio] and because it was Whitehall because it was all white people and so I went there to meet him head on to debate him in his district, Robert Cupp, the white representative and so I felt that that was very important because they had tried to demonize me particularly the Fraternal Order of Police as a result of my editorializing on police brutality. And so when I went into Whitehall one of the things that I did and how I fed my mind was that I had convinced myself that I was the state representative. I was operating off a principle called as if and so when I went before them and I was the only the black person in there, I said as your representative, here are the things that I'm going to do and I studied the things that they were concerned about and people in London- Linden area [Columbus, Ohio] were concerned about things that people in the Windsor Terrace area [Columbus, Ohio], they weren't concerned about and then I found out what were the top issues in Whitehall and I spoke to those things and I spoke with such conviction about those things that Robert Cupp the incumbent, he said, "Representative Brown [HistoryMaker Les Brown], may I ask you a question please?" And I said, "Yes." And the audience cracked up because he called me Representative Brown. He was convinced that I was a state representative even before the election and I answered the question. I said, "Yes." And I said that "I want you to know that as my constituent I will continue to represent your interest that after the election the fact that I've replaced you will not block me from doing things for you as your representative." So the audience cracked up. White lady stood up and she said, "Mr. Brown, you obviously are a very effective debater and a very knowledgeable young man and you have done your homework and I admire your charisma." She said, "But remember one thing." And I said, "What is it ma'am?" She said, "You're still a nigger." And I said, "Thank you very much. I never would have known that if you hadn't told me," (laughter) and cracked up. The audience sat there stunned and then everybody started laughing after my laughter. And then they came up to me afterwards and said, "You have my vote. If you can laugh after that, you have my vote." Because I remember instantly hearing something in my voice saying learn to be graceful in an ungraceful situation. The worst thing I could have done is to allow that to register and to become insulted. I heard the guy said that nothing can happen to you until it happens in you. And so I was not going to allow that to happen in me. I decided to deflect it with laughter and that it was--I was un-phased and because I was not embarrassed and was not humiliated and was not angry, the audience they took it on, they came out in defiance of all the negative things the Fraternal Order of Police mailed to them. All of the racist material they, they sent in the district, they became outraged because we met this guy and he's a nice guy and he loves his mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown]. So I think that my personality and my ability to communicate helped to offset a lot of the racism and the negative things that one would have encountered in running in that kind of district [29th House District] that was 65 percent white and catapult me to the Ohio legislature, being able to know how to relate to people to communicate with people regardless of their paint job. Story_ID: 495926 Speaker 1: Now you had been let go--I wanna know what editorial was the cause of you being let go from WVKO [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 2: There was a demonstration for--called the Ka- Kahiki incident. There was a black couple that were in this restaurant called the Kahiki [Columbus, Ohio] and so the-- Speaker 1: Which is a Polynesian-- Speaker 2: --a Polynesian restaurant and so there was a dispute about the bill and the police were called. And the father was holding their new baby and the mother's name was Barbara [ph.] and so police came in and there was a dispute about the bill and then a second backup car came and this young cop for some unknown reason came up as he was arguing with the husband and he clubbed him like how dare you talk back to me and he clubbed him. And the--no, no he hit, he hit the mother and the mother dropped the baby. The father was a Vietnam veteran caught the baby right before the baby hit the ground and, but the mother was so enraged, she was a very small girl about 120 pounds but she had adrenaline rush and they could not restrain her and she beat those four policemen. She went berserk like a super human so they called for backup and they were able to subdue her after clubbing her many times and they put her in the back of the cruiser and they handcuffed her and her legs and they stopped on Champion Avenue and Broad Street and different cops went in the paddy wagon taking turns to club her and to beat her while she was there on the floor. A white guy named Tom Catton [ph.] followed the paddy wagon all the way to the police station, witnesses this; it was on election day. I was on the air. I had all those jocks [disc jockeys] were not allowed to come into the station and so he called me and said, "Mr. Brown [HistoryMaker Les Brown], something took place that you need to know about what the police did." And I had him to come out to the station. He was a very compelling storyteller. And I had him to come out to the station and tell the story and I'm on the air in the afternoon and [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni had a, a record out that she did poetry over and they had a song called 'Peace Be Still' ['The Great Pax Whitie (Peace Be Still)'] and there was at the end of it that she said, "All black people, don't we have any pride, don't we have any pride?" And I used that as a theme. I said, "How long are we going to allow them to come into our community and brutalize us? Don't we have any pride? Let's show that pride not by going out throwing rocks, let's show those, that pride not by burning down stores in our community, let's show that pride, that that pride by organizing ourselves, going to the polls and voting in strong numbers. I want everybody listening to me right now to call everybody you know. If you're working, I want you to call the people that you know and go to the polls and vote. That's how we're going to express our anger in an organized way. They will never forget. We're going to vote in strong numbers. Let's make a statement for Dr. John Rosemond. Oh black people where is your pride?" And that turned out the vote. People were listening. It was a level of passion and energy they were not accustomed to on the air and people responded and came out and voted and Dr. Rosemond won the primary election and then two months later I was fired for becoming involved in that and taken off the air so I would not be a factor in the November election and so I was not because they would not put my spots on the air, they would not allow anyone to use me as a voice on the radio. Said my voice is not allowed on the air until after I ran a year later. I was able to buy my own commercial time to put on the air. Speaker 1: So you--they did. So you came back and actually advertised--I mean W- on VKO? Speaker 2: For myself a year later but I could not--they would not allow me to cut any spots for Dr. John Rosemond when he was running for office. Yes. Speaker 1: So were they afraid or did they think that you would cross the line (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they knew the influence that I had on the election and that I could turn out the vote. He had a very good chance at winning and so they had to take me out. That was the pivotal role and, I played a pivotal role in that election and so they silenced me and they didn't have anybody else to rally. One of the reasons I don't believe in personalities as leaders. I think that you have to train a variety of people. You have to have a system rather than personality. A system driven movement rather than personality driven movement. They take the personality out then people are left without a leader. Speaker 1: So but I'm just wondering from the station side, now who was head of the station? Speaker 2: Bert Charles was the general manager, very conservative Republican and they owned the station and so they controlled what got on and what did not get on. Story_ID: 495927 Speaker 1: So that was your first election work. Were--did you--and you ran against-- Speaker 2: An incumbent. The second time I had very weak opposition so it was no problem getting reelected (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So and then the third? Speaker 2: The third time weak opposition, no. Speaker 1: Okay. So what made you--did you leave them because of your mother's [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] illness? Is that what happened? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I was not willing to allow my mother to be committed to a nursing home and so I resigned from the Ohio legislature [Ohio General Assembly] to go back to take care of her and so when I went back then I had to find something else to do to earn a living. I don't have any college training and so you can't switch from one state as a representative to another state so I had to start all over again from scratch and be available to my mother. So that's when I as I walked the beaches of Miami Beach [Florida] listening to motivational messages trying to figure out what I was gonna do, I was walking one day right in front of my mother's house and something said pick up that paper. And I stopped and I picked the paper up for some unknown reason and it had there Liberty City [Miami, Florida] youth enrichment seminars and they were looking for a volun- a youth coordinator for this program after the Liberty City riots. So it was like eight blocks from where my mother lived. I went to interview for that particular job. While I was there a phone call came in for the New Horizons youth program [New Horizons Youth Ministries] where I was and they said to the director there's a small cubicle and I could hear the person on the other phone. "Listen there's funds, federal funds that will be sent back tonight after midnight that's not given to programs. You need to come down to Dade County Auditorium [Miami Dade County Auditorium, Miami, Florida] and apply for some of these youth funds." Well before she could hang up the phone, I had left her office, got on the bus, went down to Dade County Auditorium to see this process. I'd never been before this committee before. I just resigned from the Ohio legislature, I'm new in Miami [Florida]. I don't know anybody there. And so I'm watching, observing people going up submitting proposals to get some of the funds that were making available to various community groups after the Liberty City riots and so I decided that I was gonna apply for one of the programs, the youth programs, and I didn't have a proposal and they had--and I needed it that night. So I remember saying to myself something I read about Robert Schuller [Robert H. Schuller], there's never a shortage of money, just a shortage of ideas. So I started walking around. I started yawning. I always get sleepy when I start thinking and I went outside to get some air and I saw a drugstore. So I went into this drugstore and started walking around and said why am I here? And then I said whoa, I went in the stationery department and I got five hundred sheets of typing paper and then I got a folder, folders, vanilla folders, and then I went up to the cashier and I said, "Do you have a rubber band please?" And she said, "Yes." And I said, "Do you happen to have a marker?" She said, "Yes, I do." I said, "May I borrow it a moment please?" And so I opened up those sheets of typing paper, put it inside the folder, put a rubber band around it and wrote on there the Les Brown Youth Enrichment Seminars. Story_ID: 495928 Speaker 1: And then I put my name on the, on the register and they called, the Les Brown Youth Enrichment Seminar. "Members of the committee thank you very much for this opportunity to speak to you today." I said, "As you can see here I have five hundred sheets of paper and it would not be cost effective to duplicate this and give it to each of you because you wouldn't have time read it anyhow. So let me tell you about the Les Brown Youth Enrichment Seminar. We have gathered here as I have listened to you to provide funding for programs that will help kids to make it through the summer. The Les Brown Youth Enrichment Seminar is designed to give kids the tools to make it, not only during the summer, but during life. So I believe that we can have Little League football teams and baseball teams and basketball teams. We can also have little league dermatologists and cardiologists and that's what this program is designed to do. To let our kids know they're molding now what they will be in the future." So they said, "Whoa." No one had ever come up there and they talked about it from that perspective. They said, "Well, how much will your program costs?" I didn't know. I played bid whist and I'm very good and we always say come high or stay home. All the other programs like one hundred thousand, two hundred thousand dollars, so I said, "$350,000." And they said, "$350,000?" I said, "Yes." And they spoke among themselves. They said, "Mr. Brown [HistoryMaker Les Brown], what about a hundred thousand dollars? It's the first program?" I didn't speak immediately because I didn't want to speak in unknown tongues. I was excited. I said I can't believe this. So I paused. I said, "That'll be good to start it off." And they said, "Very good, go to the clerk and they will cut you a check tonight for thirty-five thousand dollars for startup. Mr. Brown?" "Yes." "Go to the clerk, he's to your left and they will cut you a check tonight for thirty-five thousand dollars as startup." I said, "Yes." I went over to the clerk. They asked for my name, my address, my social security number. I gave it to them and they gave me a check. And I'm saying oh my god. I became paranoid as I'm walking into the elevator. I thought that somebody was following me so I wouldn't get on the elevator with anybody for fear that somebody would rob me. And then when nobody was around, I got on the elevator, I went downstairs. My heart is beating real fast. I go to a payphone booth and called my sister. I said, "Margaret Ann [Margaret Ann Sampson], come get me quick." She said, "Why?" I said, "I'm at Dade County Auditorium [Miami Dade County Auditorium, Miami, Florida] and they gave me thirty-five thousand dollars." And she said, "For what?" I said, "For a youth program." She said, "You don't know anything about training youth." I said, "I know but we can go to the library tomorrow." (Laughter) And so my sister came by there. She said, "Where will you be?" I said, "I'll be in the payphone booth." She said, "Why?" I said, "I just feel like somebody's watching me." So she came by there and she said, "Leslie? Leslie?" And I was in this payphone booth. I had (unclear) the payphone booth and I, and I opened the door a little bit so the light would be on. She said, "Leslie?" I said, "I'm down here." She said, "Where are you?" I said, "Here." She said, "Look at you sweating. Why are you in there?" I said, "I don't know. I just felt like somebody was watching me." She said, "For what?" I said, "I got a thirty-five thousand dollar check." She said, "Why?" "To train to some youth." She said, "You are kidding." I said, "Yes." I said, "Could you take off from school tomorrow and go to the library with me and help me find a program so we can start?" She said, "Yes," so she took off the next day. We went to the library to find various programs that was existing across the country. We got the best ideas and put that program together and then I started doing that and I did a youth training in Miami, Florida and that was a new beginning in a special kind of way because the activist in me went down in Miami and became politically involved. Story_ID: 495929 Speaker 1: Now I'm back home a second time taking care of my mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown], witnessing police brutality and all types of other things that's going on in Miami [Florida] and now I get a microphone. I go to a radio station to volunteer. I said, "Can I do some editorials for you? My name is [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, I'm from Miami. I used to be a disc jockey years ago here and I've been a state legislator. I'd like to volunteer to do commentaries and editorials about issues in the community." And they said yes. And so I started commenting on things and-- Speaker 2: Now what radio station? Speaker 1: --this is a radio station in Miami in Liberty City [Miami, Florida]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --yes so WL- WEDR, WEDR so WEDR radio station [WEDR Radio, Miami, Florida] and so I became very controversial in Miami. Speaker 2: Now this is 1981, '82 [1982]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Became extremely controversial editorializing my things because that was not done since S.J. Pines [ph.] was on the air when I was a kid. No one did editorials then and so here I am new voice in town doing commentaries which is just unusual in black radio. Story_ID: 495930 Speaker 1: When had the Liberty City [Miami, Florida] riots been? Speaker 2: That was during that, that particular time. Speaker 1: Now why--can you talk about the reason that--or what was the events that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes the reason that the Liberty City riots erupted because of of McDuffie, Ivan McDuffie--Arthur McDuffie was an, was an insurance executive. I went to school with him and he was on a motorcycle and cops were chasing him to give him a ticket and he outran them and they finally caught up with him. They beat him to death. And so these eight cops went on trial and they were allowed to go free because they couldn't determine who struck the death blow. And that's how the riots erupted. So I went to school with Arthur McDuffie. He graduated one year behind me. Story_ID: 495931 Speaker 1: Janet Reno was the state attorney at that particular time. So a lady named Georgia Ayres [Georgia Jones-Ayres] a community activist from Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida] who felt that the funds that I had gotten for my program [Les Brown Youth Enrichment Seminar] were taken from her program. She and Janet Reno were very good friends and so she said, "Listen this boy [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, he will defeat you in the election. He has the ear of people. You need to conduct an investigation of his youth program." So Janet Reno used a old mafia law that allowed the state attorney general's office to investigate the mafia who came down from New York [New York] to Miami [Florida] during the winter months and they can investigate them even if they had not committed any wrongdoing. And so they conducted an investigation of my program. So [HistoryMaker] Jerry Rushin of WEDR radio station [WEDR Radio, Miami, Florida], they took me off the air when the investigation came so that I would not be able to speak out and defend myself on the air. So what I did as a result of that, I became extremely angry and decided that I was going to defend myself. I had nothing to hide. So I went down to--I did a lot of reading on how to represent yourself in court and I went down to the federal courts and to argue my own case. I went to the federal court asking for an injunction against the investigation and asking for a speedy culmination of it for them to question me for what wrongdoing I have done. And the press said what wrongdoing has he done? And her response was he hasn't done anything wrong, but we're just investigating to see if he's done anything wrong, has he misappropriated any funds. And so they couldn't have this investigation that went on for several months. So what I did, I got up one morning and I was reading scripture and read about Joshua marching around the walls of Jericho so I put a sign on that says indict me or set me free. I went down to the state attorney general's office inside on the sixth floor. When Janet Reno would get off the elevator in the morning at eight o'clock, my voice would rain down the hall, "Janet Reno, my name is Les Brown. You know me. If you got something on me, prosecute me to the full extent of the law. If you don't, get the hell off my back." So that was in the newspaper and they would send various community leaders down there and said, "Les don't do this. You're gonna make the state attorney general mad." I said, "Hell, I'm mad. My name is all I got. She can do whatever she wants." And so then they brought in over three hundred different people and interrogated him. He--everybody has something in his closet you know, "Does he drink?" "No." "Does he smoke?" "No." "Has he ever done drugs?" "Where'd he get his money from?" "We don't know." And so they investigated and so then they had--I had to go down and to I had a CPA [certified public accountant] who represented me too as they did an auditing of my books and every week and they said, "Okay this is good, but we need this." "And if we bring that, will that be enough?" "Yes." "Is there anything else you need?" "No." And when I would come back, they'd have a different investigator. "Yes, oh well you did bring that, well, but we need something else." "Wait a minute the last person said that once we brought this it was over." "I'm sorry that person was wrong you need this." "And then once I bring this, it's over? Then that's all you need?" "Yes." And then the third time I came back another person's there and they would do the same thing and so the CPA said, "Les, you're paying me five thousand dollars a month. You have a good memory. You don't need me. They don't want these books, they want you. You have a memory, defend yourself. I'm telling you, you're wasting money. You have a good memory, use it now." So then I came back the fourth time, they had a different person. They said, "This is good, but we want you to bring something else." I said, "Listen to me clearly and tell Janet Reno and the city, you're not getting anything else. Prosecute me to the full extent of the law if I've done something wrong." And so after eleven months, the press continue to pressure them to come to a head and they issued that I had not done any wrongdoing but I was a sloppy bookkeeper because I spent $114,000. The city gave me a hundred thousand dollars, I spent fourteen thousand dollars of my own money and they said I couldn't account for it. And I said to them you don't tell me what to do with my money. I spend it as I choose. When kids came to be trained because their friends told them, I would not turn them away, so we paid for them--paid for it myself out of the money that I earned as a speaker. And so that was unusual they said and they felt that it was perhaps drug money that I was using for my youth program. Story_ID: 495932 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about that what was the program that allowed for this money to be disbursed? Were they federal funds that were-- Speaker 2: Federal funds that they allocated to the city (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Under what like time--I mean-- Speaker 2: --for this was for to prevent the Liberty City [Miami, Florida] riots and they gave that fund--those funds to the City of Miami [Florida]. Speaker 1: But you don't know what the source of the funds came? Speaker 2: No, I don't know that yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: But that can be researched through the Miami Herald in fact they have an archive with all the newspaper articles in there of stuff that I'm telling you. Speaker 1: So, so you had just convinced people and like sometimes with these programs, they were just trying to give the money away? Speaker 2: They're trying to give the money away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I actually did training. I did programs that because of my fascination with self-development and empowerment, my program was interactive which was unusual that they never had a program that dealt with kids' minds and teaching them how to make decisions, and teaching them how to resist negative peer pressure. Most of the programs were sports, basketball, football, recreational types of things and I was talking about having a larger vision of yourself, exposing them to messages that decrease their level of unconscious self-hatred and things of that nature. Speaker 1: Where were you running the program out of? Speaker 2: I ran it out of the the Calebs center [Joseph Caleb Auditorium, Miami, Florida], it's a center in Miami on 54th Street and 22nd Avenue and so kids loved the fact that we had talent shows, we had fashion shows, we had elections, we taught them how the process worked, all the things I experienced as a state legislator. I taught them how to introduce legislation, how to amend it, how the process work and why you have to be a participant every time you buy something they paid taxes, you pay taxes and that your taxes pay the salaries of these elected officials so therefore you determine if someone is gonna represent your interest or when you don't vote, you can perhaps can get someone there who will not represent your interest. So we work with them helping them have a total view of how to function as a contributing member of society. Speaker 1: Now had you incorporated as a non-profit? Speaker 2: Yes, we had the Les Brown Youth Enrichment Seminar. Speaker 1: Okay. But it was you incorporated as non-profit? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what happened then, let me ask you did that for how long Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown]? Speaker 2: I did that one summer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then they came back after I was vindicated and the city commission authorized another allotment of a hundred thousand dollars for me to continue. So I looked at my mentor Mike Williams, who has been my advisor for thirty-eight years and I said, "Do we need to do this?" And he said, "No." And so I went up to the podium and this is the first time this has ever happened and since that time and I said, "I wanna think you Mayor Maurice Ferre and the committee for your willingness to give me a hundred thousand dollars for another program. However, I respectfully decline. I will leave Miami, I will go speak. It'll take me about three years, three to five years, I'll earn a million dollars more as a speaker and I'll come back and conduct my own program without government money." And I walked out. And then caught a Greyhound bus from Miami, Florida to Liberty City to the National Speakers Association that was going from Miami to Orlando, Florida where the National Speakers convention was going on to join the National Speakers Association to become a professional motivational speaker (simultaneous). Story_ID: 495933 Speaker 1: Where was Mike Williams at this point? Speaker 2: Mike Williams was in Columbus, Ohio, but he came down. I continued to use him as my advisor and he came down to be with me and say-- Speaker 1: What was he doing at that time? Speaker 2: --Mike Williams he is a strategist, he's been my mentor, he is a strategic. He is a strategic thinker and marketer. Speaker 1: How does he make--he makes money? Speaker 2: As that, as a consultant. Speaker 1: As a consultant. Speaker 2: But I'm his number one client, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And but he was-- Speaker 2: This [HistoryMaker] Les Brown that you see you see because of Mike Williams. I did not know this Les Brown existed. I did not know there was anybody beyond, the man about town, L.B. Triple P, I did not know. I had no awareness of this. Speaker 1: Now but Mike Williams was running the radio station [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, he was not. Mike Williams was the newsman that I hired. Speaker 1: He was the newsman that you hired. Speaker 2: Who talked to me between records. Speaker 1: But what was his background before then, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: He was a dropout from Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] from Coshocton, Ohio. He had no background in marketing. He was, he has been to me what W.E.B. Du Bois has attempted to be to Marcus Garvey. So he was--he's a, he's a--I'm an Aquarius, he's a Virgo, very thoughtful guy. Never read a motivational book but he's one of the reasons that I truly believe there's a God because everything in every area where I'm weak, he's strong. He's been an advisor to me. He's been a person that says listen you've gotta do this and he's not only told me this, he has modeled that. So he's, he helped to cultivate because this Les Brown existed for several years he was telling me and finally, I, I came to a conclusion that sometimes you have to believe in somebody's belief in you until your belief kicks in. And I said I know he would not set me up to fail. He said to me one day, "You can be more than just a disc jockey, you can speak to people and help them to achieve their dreams, give them a larger vision of themselves." And I said, "Me?" Because I used to wear tennis shoes and black every day and a t-shirt. I said, "Come on Mike." He said, "You could." Story_ID: 495934 Speaker 1: Okay so let me ask you at the time so you meet Mike Williams when you--were you program director at that-- Speaker 2: I was a program director of the radio station [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay and so that's-- Speaker 2: And he was a community activist from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. This is during the time when students were taking over the black students were taking over the student unions and shutting down the libraries on campuses. And so he was coming out giving speeches and I admired his communication skill and his style. He was so cool. We called him Treetop because he had this huge Afro like [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and I would go hear him speak and then one day he called me on the weekend and, and I--we talked about him being my news director because we didn't have a news director of the station at that time. And I hired him. He was the first news director of the radio station and in between records he talked to me and said you know, "You can do more than this you know. You have the ability to connect with people in a special kind of way. People listen to you. You have an effective voice." And, and he trained and cultivated this vision that he had of me. Story_ID: 495935 Speaker 1: Now what role did he [Mike Williams] play in your decision to run for office? Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: None okay. Speaker 2: Horace Perkins a salesman who was a brother that worked there [WVKO Radio, Columbus, Ohio], he, he talked to me and he convinced me that I could do this and so he's the same guy who fought for me to become the program director unbeknownst to me. And then he's the same guy who brought by the petitions and said, "[HistoryMaker] Les Brown you ought to run for office." Speaker 1: That's Horace? Speaker 2: Horace yes. So he did all the stuff that he knew I would not do. He got them signed. I would not have taken that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was Horace a community activist too? Speaker 2: No, he was just an older guy whose father was a Garveyite. He was from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], his father ran with and traveled with Marcus Garvey and so his father's influence impacted him. He was never an outspoken guy but during the--our days at the radio station, there was a middle room where we came in and we listened to what we call Perkins. He was built like Archie Bunker. He was a big guy and he had a very strong personality and he was always schooling us about life and this is some of the most memorable times. He passed recently but he was a very strong brother who gave me very good advice and over the years but he believed in you but you never knew, you never knew how he felt about you because he would never compliment you but he only talked to you if he didn't--I mean if he liked you. If he didn't like you he wouldn't say anything (simultaneous). Story_ID: 495936 Speaker 1: So how were you maintaining contact with Mike Williams and what was he doing during that period that you were runni- working for the legislature [Ohio General Assembly] and then-- Speaker 2: He was still advising--Mike, Mike Williams was still advising me when I got elected. I said, "Mike what do we do now?" He said, "Brownie [HistoryMaker Les Brown], I don't know you wanted to do it." And, and so he said, "We'll just figure it out." (Laughter) And so when I would be on the floor of House of Representatives [Ohio House of Representatives] and I had an argument or something coming up I did not understand, I would call him and say, "Mike, are you keeping the universe busy?" "Yes what's wrong?" "Well they're talking about this. Tell me what the other side is saying?" "Well they said this, this and this." "Okay and what are the Democrats?" And said, "This is where they are." He said, "Okay. You ask these questions and you're gonna confuse them and this is the position you take." I said, "How do you know these things?" "Because I keep the universe busy go do it." Hang up. And I go do it and they would think I was brilliant. Everybody needs a Mike, everybody. So he has been a phenomenon person in my life. Speaker 1: Is he on your staff when you were a legislator? Speaker 2: No, no he was working for Jerry Hammond as a legislative aid. No. He's--I've always hired him as a consultant to work for me over the years. I paid him when I didn't pay myself. He still works for me now--works with me. It's been--he's been like an advisor, a brother, he's been like a father. He's only two years older than I am, but he's the most brilliant man I've ever met in my life. Speaker 1: Now he grew up in Ohio? Speaker 2: He grew up in Coshocton, Ohio. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so he-- Speaker 2: Has had the greatest influence on my life. Speaker 1: But wait, did he come down to Miami [Florida] to spend or was he still in Ohio? Speaker 2: He would come down as a consultant to help me when I was doing my community activist work, when I was working in the community. Whatever projects that I work on Mike Williams comes in and if Mike says okay, I'll do it. If he doesn't I won't. Speaker 1: Let me ask that's a unique relationship really. Not many black men have that relationship don't you--do you think? Speaker 2: Everybody who knows me, know if Mike doesn't say yes, I'm not going to do it. Speaker 1: But not many black men have that relationship, do they? Speaker 2: No and everyone needs that. I, I see some very brilliant men who really need to have somebody who know them better than they know themselves and who they respect whose voice is more important than their own voice because many times you can't see the picture when you're in the frame especially when ego gets up in there. And so that has been very, very important to me. That I've only gone against his advice twice and was successful. He told me that I could not get a PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] special and I did and he said, "Whoa, I didn't think you could do that Brown, but you did and I'm proud of you." And I did do that. He didn't tell me to run for state representative, but he helped me one time make the decision. I ran and I won. Speaker 1: So those were the two instances? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but everything else I ever--he ever told me to do that I went against I lost. Story_ID: 495937 Speaker 1: I wanna ask about the Miami [Florida] you came back into-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you know how it differed from the Colum [Columbus, Ohio]- you know--? Speaker 2: It was the same players. When I look at Miami, Miami is like the Dead Sea. It is-- Speaker 1: For the black community? Speaker 2: For the black community. Yes nothing comes in everything is going out. You only come to Miami because you're going to Jamaica, you're going to Nassau [Bahamas]. So it does not--it was, it was not like a Detroit [Michigan] or Chicago [Illinois] where people are coming in. The cultures of other black communities the largest city is Atlanta [Georgia] that's comparable in terms of black size and numbers so it's like a Dead Sea and so the people who've been in office unless they're dead and old and you know they're still there and they'll just push up you know other people who they select replace them and it's not a community that has grown intellectually, black intellectuals, progressive in terms of entrepreneurship when the Haitians came in and the Cubans came in. Cubans really dominated the market. When I was on radio in there I used to do a lot of battles with Cubans and, and I used to orchestrate elections and do things that you just--you just did not do. You never talked about the fact that Cubans are for Cubans. That was extremely controversial. U.S. News [U.S. News and World Report] and New York Times [The New York Times] wrote about my taking that position. They said I was polarizing the community. But it proved that I was right that when they took over jobs that they would come in and work for two dollars if the company was paying four dollars to blacks and then after the Cubans fill all the positions then they would ask for more money and they would not hire blacks and so they went so far as to expecting black people to come to city hall and speak Spanish. I said excuse me. You're in America, you expect me to speak Spanish? You have an attitude because you don't understand me and I can't communicate to you in Spanish? I take exception to that and I think that there's a level in, in life where your mind can only accommodate so much defeat, so much disappointment and that you at some point in time you become conditioned and you surrender and I think that has happened in communities across this country in our community and I call it, call it addiction to powerlessness that we've become addicted to it. It's okay we embrace it unconsciously and we settle for the crumbs of life and I--from my perspective you have to constantly fight, you have to constantly look for ways to win. In fact Frederick Douglass said we won't get everything that we fight for but truly everything we get is gonna be a fight and I think many of us have lost our fight. Speaker 1: Now see there you go pontificating again, the record, on the record, on camera. Speaker 2: Okay. Yes. Speaker 1: Discussion we have off camera (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But let's talk about the fighter that tells you who I am. Go ahead. Speaker 1: But I'm just-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I'm trying to understand how you grew and how Miami was you know you found (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Miami was stagnant. Miami and it's still stagnant to this day yes. Speaker 1: Because clearly Hispanics are a much more potent force there right? Speaker 2: The Hispanics are more potent force and Haitians are a much more potent force. Haitians have--blacks have one radio station. Haitians have seventeen radio stations and three television stations. Blacks have never had a television station and the Cubans dominated. And so Miami now, most of black Miami and Overtown [Miami, Florida] and Liberty City [Miami, Florida] they're moving north to Fort Lauderdale [Florida] and if you go in Miami just driving around they're very few businesses that are thriving in the black community. There is about there's one black restaurant in Overtown, there's one small little small hole in the wall restaurant in Liberty City. There are over 150,000 black people in Miami so the level of deterioration, the mental deterioration, the not fighting back, not having a vision of who you are, not having a way in which how you see yourself showing up in life. It's, it's affected the collective psyche of Miami, Miamians and so but I see this going to different areas across the country and, and so as I look at Miami right now that I just got a call recently from a major insurance company that want to invest in a movement that I call Wake Up Miami, that's designed to give people a larger vision of themselves beyond their circumstances and mental conditioning and engage them in an ongoing process a minimum of five years before looking for any changes. Story_ID: 495938 Speaker 1: But Les [HistoryMaker Les Brown] so this really what you found because we're in the 1980s, President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is, is president right? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The 1980s right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay when you're there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. You--is there some sense of--now who is mayor of the city at that time? Speaker 2: Mayor Maurice Ferre. Speaker 1: Okay. And are there any black political leaders of any note that-- Speaker 2: You have Congressman Meek [HistoryMaker Carrie P. Meek] and-- Speaker 1: Carrie Meek. Speaker 2: --Carrie Meek, though she's no longer there. Her son took her place. Speaker 1: Yeah I know but at the time you were? Speaker 2: Right at the time she was there. Yeah Carrie Meek was there. Speaker 1: Was she in office at that-- Speaker 2: Yeah she was there and she was-- Speaker 1: She wasn't a congressman though was she? Speaker 2: No. Yes she was. She was a congressman. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty--in the 1980s? Speaker 2: She's been there, she's been there for a while-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --and her son took her place and then you have other state legislators. You had Art Teele [Arthur E. Teele, Jr.] who committed suicide at the Miami Harold he was a strong city councilmen but he was Republican and then you have Freddie, Freddie Wilson [Frederica Wilson] she was on the board of education she was a downstate senator. I believe as I look at Miami [Florida] and, and look at myself and being a child of that city that the whole movement that we had in terms of creating a yes I can and yes I will attitude is so very important because our vision of ourselves is so blurred and, and looking at people who are walking, breathing dead. You know someone said many people died aged twenty-five and don't get buried until they're sixty-five and I think that many of us are like Bigger Thomas who said the impulse to dream has been slowly beaten out of me through the experiences of life. Story_ID: 495939 Speaker 1: So now you were, now I wanna also just ask the question about the relationship between the Haitian community and the black community. Speaker 2: Very bad. I had a, a series of seminars that I did initially when the Haitians came down and orchestrated a demonstration with Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. Speaker 1: Now what year is that? Speaker 2: This is in the 1980s around 1984, '85 [1985] had Reverend Jesse Jackson come down to go with three thousand African Americans to the Krome Detention Center [Miami, Florida] because I was editorializing the fact that this country embraced the Cubans but they put the Haitians in the Krome Detention Center. They said that the Haitians came to this country for economic reasons and that the Cubans came for political reasons and so Jesse came down and was--it was a life changing experience just watching him speak to these Haitians who, men who were depressed and demoralized and couldn't understand the language but the interpreter had the same passion as Jesse, the same rhythm and to see these men hold their heads up as Jesse squared his feet and held his shoulders up. People talk a lot about Jesse. Say Jesse is for Jesse but there he never has to run in front of anybody. He's the guy that shows up. I admire his guts, his tenacity and his willingness to show up and make a difference. None of us are perfect. So it was--I had conducted a training with kids, African American kids and Haitians kids to teach them how to interact with each other and so-- Speaker 1: Now is this part of your youth empowerment? Speaker 2: That's a part of my youth empowerment but also I did something beyond that because I saw African kids, African American kids doing the same thing to Haitians kids that white kids did and so I knew it was not enough to say you don't do this so I asked this school to allow me to train these kids, take these kids to a training situation and so I did this youth enrichment training process with them and I would ask then I said I want you to look at this orange and I said, "All oranges are what?" And they say, "Orange." "Very good." I said--I will pass out oranges. I said, "Look at this orange, look at the orange that you are, that you have and become familiar with it. Look at it very closely. What are the features, what are the things? Would you possibly know that orange if you saw it again?" And they said, "Yes." And I said, "All oranges are what?" And they said, "Orange." And then I said, "Let me collect these oranges," and then I would throw these oranges on the floor and I said, "Find your orange." And they would get up and run they look at all the oranges and--, "No this is my orange had a hook--had a hickey on it." "But my orange had this on it." And most of them would find their orange. And then I would have them sit down and I said, "All Haitians are what?" They said, stank, can't drive and they would have all of these stereotypes. All black men are what? Pimps, thieves, murderers. That's what Haitians are saying about them, they're going at each other. And then I would bring them back to their orange. I said, "Look, you first said orange was orange," and I said, "Look what you're saying about Haitians and look what you're saying about black Americans? Can we make that blanket indictment of each other? Is it fair for us to indict people like that?" And then to see the lights come on in their heads in how they whoa, whoa them coming to that conclusion to build. So they begin to build relationships and said, "You have to be the catalyst. The worst thing you can do is allow Haitians coming here to feel isolated. They are just like us." Story_ID: 495940 Speaker 1: So you are doing this youth motivational and let me ask, and Mike [Mike Williams], he, he comes down? Speaker 2: He comes down. Speaker 1: And why, why is he coming down? Speaker 2: He advised me what to do. He develops the training design. Speaker 1: No, but what he had said that you should do what? Speaker 2: Mike told me that I should do the youth program because he said that kids need not just be told what to do. Speaker 1: So, so it was not just Mike. I mean it was not just your sister [Margaret Ann Sampson], Mike got involved in the youth motivational-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: And so he helped put together the design because we had been working together over the years and so while in Miami [Florida] oddly enough God looks out for babies and fools, I get called upon by a guy named Clarence King who lived in Columbus [Ohio] and Washington, D.C. and he had gotten funding from Mayor Marion Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry] in Washington, D.C. to do training with kids. He saw me in the legislature [Ohio General Assembly], he admired my oratorical skills and he was a master trainer so he asked me to do some work with him during the summer. So Mike and I went to work with him and that's when I was introduced to the technology of experiential training. If I tell you you can do something you may or may not believe me but if I can facilitate a process with your interacting with other people, and you come to that conclusion, now you know it's not based upon what I say. So this gentleman, his technology as a work--as a result of my working and becoming one of the lead trainers with him, I brought that back to Miami and I came back now more armed to do training with kids with a different kind of technology (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what training did he do you said? Speaker 2: He did the mayor's Youth Leadership [Marion Barry Youth Leadership Institute] in Washington, D.C.-- Speaker 1: I see. Okay. And that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) under Marion Barry. So wonder why he keep getting elected, those people are now adults now whose lives he touched early on. Story_ID: 495941 Speaker 1: So now you are--so really in many ways Janet Reno you need to thank her in some respects. Speaker 2: Yes oh absolutely. Speaker 1: Because you would have maybe been running a you know a large sort of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Had that not happened, I would not have been, I would not become [HistoryMaker] Les Brown. Had Bert Charles not hired me, have my mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown] not became sick, had Janet Reno not investigated the program [Les Brown Youth Enrichment Seminar], all of those things led me to who I've become. Speaker 1: So that happened and so you're needing to find another way of making a living in some respects? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know because-- Speaker 2: Right and that's what, that's how motivational speaking came in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when I left to speak I went on a Greyhound bus to Orlando, Florida and joined the National Speakers Association. Speaker 1: But I thought that now this may be part of more you know lore I'm trying but what about Zig Ziglar, was that Mike [Mike Williams] or you know that's what I had read? Speaker 2: You know Zig Ziglar is a motivational speaker. Speaker 1: I know but I'm just saying had you 'cause it said you had a chance encounter or he Mike Williams had a chance encounter with Zig Ziglar. Speaker 2: No, no, Ziglar-- Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: Nothing. Well I saw Zig Ziglar speaking at an event and the guy who opened for Zig Ziglar was very boring and I said when I dozed off and I heard people with polite applause applauding him. I said man that guy is boring so happened his brother-in-law is sitting next to me and he said, "You ought to be that boring and make the kind of money he made." So I said, "How much money he make?" He said, "Five thousand dollars." I looked at my watch and say, "He only spoke for thirty minutes." He said, "That's the kind of money they make." I said, "I can do that." I said, "Some of that money's got my name on it." And I decided-- Speaker 1: Now where were you? Speaker 2: In Miami, Florida at a motivational event where Zig Ziglar spoke. Speaker 1: So you, oh so you were at the event and you went to the-- Speaker 2: I was at the event. Speaker 1: --event with Mike Williams or-- Speaker 2: No, I went by myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah Mike Williams is not there. So I called Mike and said, "Mike, I'm gonna become a motivational speaker. I'm gonna speak just like you told me I could." He said--I told him, I said, "I'm ready." He said, "I can hear it in your voice." He said, "I told you Brown you can do it." That was fourteen years I didn't do it. Fourteen years he told me I can do it and I convinced myself I couldn't because I don't have a college education. I never worked for a major corporation and I didn't do it. There's an African proverb that says if there's no enemy within the enemy outside can do us no harm. And so he said, "I will, I will work with you to develop your own program and your own philosophy and your own principles." Speaker 1: Who said they would work-- Speaker 2: Mike Williams. Speaker 1: Okay. But this is what I'm a little curious about. Okay. So you--I don't have fourteen years here. Where do you get fourteen years? Speaker 2: Because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because I have you, you came back to be with your mother in 1986--I mean 1981. I have that in 1986 that you entered the public arena speaking on a full time basis that you formed Les Brown Enterprise [Les Brown Enterprises, Inc.] in 1986. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then 1989 I have you receiving the National Speakers Association award. So it wasn't fourteen years. Speaker 2: Well it's time from 19--when I went to Columbus [Ohio] '74 [1974]? Speaker 1: Right. I met Mike Williams. Speaker 2: So he was encouraging you at that point is what you're saying? Speaker 1: Yes. Saying you can be more than a disk jockey. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: You're more than a man about town. Okay. Okay. So you're, so you--but how does someone know? Were you aware of public speaking as a career I mean until you went to--how did you--I'm sorry I mean motivational which is different from public speaking I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --okay. Were you--when did you become aware that as a career when you heard-- Speaker 2: When I heard Dr. Norman Vincent Peale. I used to go to these seminars in Miami before coming to--Mr. Washington [LeRoy Washington] used to take us to events to hear motivational speakers in Miami. Dr. Norman Vincent Peale-- Speaker 1: But I think of him more as a religious leader. Is that right? Speaker 2: No he wrote the book 'The Power of Positive Thinking' [Norman Vincent Peale]. Speaker 1: Okay that's true. Speaker 2: He was the dean. Speaker 1: Okay that's right. Okay go on. Speaker 2: So Dr. Peale was the guy that I admired so Mr. Washington used to take us to see him. He is a great speaker, spoke from his diaphragm and I admired him, gave me goose pimples. "You, you have something special. You have greatness in you. Don't allow your negative thoughts to hold you back," and so my dream was to open for Dr. Peale. Years later I was in Kankakee, Illinois. Dr. Peale was appearing--no I was in Chicago [Illinois]. Dr. Peale was appearing in Kankakee, Illinois, Og Mandino who wrote a book called 'The Greatest Salesman in the World' could not make an engagement and he called and said, "Could you possibly open for me?" I said, "Who's the speaker?" "Dr. Norman Vincent Peale." I said, "You've gotta be kidding." I said, "Yes that's a dream of mine." So I left Chicago, went to Kankakee, Illinois and opened for him and then we became friends. The next morning the newspaper said it was a grand old master and a young rising star. Story_ID: 495942 Speaker 1: Now let me ask, the reason I'm asking about this the motivational speaking is that it's one thing to do it or wanna do it but it's not like you know being a lawyer or doctor you know, how do you train, you know, because there's a thing that you have a natural gift but people have, some people have you know have speaking ability but that doesn't mean that they can pursue it as a career. So what did you learn--I mean you that his [Zig Ziglar] brother or brother-in-law told you know he's made five thousand dollars so you saw that there was potential. Speaker 2: I saw that there was money there. Five thousand dollars for thirty minutes impressed me greatly. And you're talking about somebody who was not making ten dollars an hour so that's what I call a Greyhound bus and said some of that money's got my name on it. Went to Orlando [Florida] to join National Speakers Association. Now God looks out for babies and fools. The guy who I thought was boring came in to teach the class. I was angry. I had an attitude. I came there on a Greyhound bus, the lady sitting next to me eating chicken all over, must have been about 450 pounds and I'm thinking about this, my last little money I borrowed to get there and this guy comes in and he is so boring the room is just quiet as a graveyard between funerals. Everybody sleeping but me. I got an attitude. I'm about ready to snap into overtime in Liberty City [Miami, Florida] and jack him up in the parking lot. And then he said something that was life changing. He said, "Wake up the people near you. There's something I wanna say. And if you get this, you will not have to go to another session here. You can walk out of this room and you can go and build a financial empire changing people's lives if you get what I'm about to say." Well I start touching, hey wake up, wake up, wake up, I wanna hear this. I hit me like an adrenaline rush and he said, "I know the majority of you probably have more energy, more personality and charisma than I do and I'm standing up here. And I earned over $10 million last year speaking. And I submit to you even though that you're better than me, the reason I'm standing up here and you're seated out there is because I represent the thoughts you have rejected for yourself." Whoa, when he said that, that hit me like a ton of bricks. I said oh my god. I convinced myself for years I couldn't do this and look at this guy. I know I'm better than this guy. I've been rejecting myself. I'm gonna do this now. And I told him I said, "Thank you." And oddly enough this guy just did a movie called 'The Secret' and he invited me speak on stage with him two weeks from now. He doesn't know I'm gonna tell this story but he was the reason because he was so boring that I decided to become a motivational speaker and he's still boring (laughter) to this day and he's probably over $200 million wealthy now. Story_ID: 495943 Speaker 1: So you went to the National Speakers, Speakers-- Speaker 2: I joined the National Speakers Association. Speaker 1: What is that association? Speaker 2: It's the largest group of professional--it's the largest professional speakers organization in the world. Where people go to learn how to develop their careers as speakers and learn the business of speaking. I left Orlando [Florida], went to Atlanta, Georgia on a Greyhound bus to speak for a lady named Barbara King [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara L. King]. God looks out for babies and fools. A guy became lost while driving in Atlanta and decided he wanted to go--Carridy [ph.] is his name. He wanted to go to a black church. He came in and I was speaking that morning. At then of my speech he ran from this audience up on the stage. He said, "Who are you? I'm one of the founders of the National Speakers Association. You need to be nominated for the CPAE Award [Council of Peers Award for Excellence]." I said, "I just left the National Speakers Association. What's the CPAE Award?" He said, "It's the highest award that we give out. Who are you?" I said, "I'm [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, Mrs. Mamie Brown's baby boy." He said, "My god I've never heard a speaker like you." So he nominated me but I had just joined. You had to be in three years to receive the nomination and so he continued to do that and then the next year my second year in, they invited me to be the keynote speaker and then the third year I was nominated. I became the first African American to win that award and then Toastmasters [Toastmasters International] selected me among the top five speakers in the world. Speaker 1: Now you, you had met Dr. Barbara King through Dr. Johnnie Colemon [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Johnnie Colemon] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dr. Johnnie Colemon yes, yes. I met her through there yes. Story_ID: 495944 Speaker 1: You're a motivational speaker, right? Speaker 2: I know but you gotta talk about what you've seen. You gotta tell that story. You got--that's a story that's a product. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, it is true. So let's, let's talk about okay you had natural born talent? Speaker 2: Natural born talent? Speaker 1: You had natural born talent as a speaker. Speaker 2: When people tell me that I have natural born talent, here's what I say. I think I have a voice. I've had a voice. But the voice that I have is not the voice that I was born with. The voice that I have is the voice that I acquired. I heard Mr. Washington [LeRoy Washington] speak and so I patterned myself after him. I learned a long time ago, if you wanna be successful, watch and study wealthy and successful people and do what they do, number one. Number two, study poor people and don't do what they do. Speaker 1: But what I meant by that is that--well where I was trying to go with that, let me put it that way, is that you--what did you learn about being a motivational speaker and the business of motivational speaking, because it's one thing to want to do it. You know first of all you've got to have an audience and you have to--not just an audience 'cause a minister is an audience, but you have to have an audience, well I guess they pay too, but you know you have to have an audience that's going to pay and it's a whole different proposition and you didn't necessarily have-- Speaker 2: No, it's--I'm not here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a roadmap. Speaker 2: --because of my skills as a speaker. I'm here; the easiest thing that I do is speak. The most difficult thing I've ever done and it took me years to do was to believe that I could do it. That's why when I work with speakers I work on the messenger then the message and then the money. That I had to convince myself that in spite of the fact that I don't have the complexion of connection, in spite of the fact that I don't have a college education, the spite- in spite of the fact-- Story_ID: 495945 Speaker 1: Once I was convinced that I could do it, then what we had to do is to gain access. So part of the strategy was to create a pull strategy rather than a push strategy sitting in four color brochures to get into the front door. So I would do research to find out what conventions were going to be going on so if I want to speak to the sales association [National Association of Sales Professionals] or the human resource national association [National Human Resources Association], that would be a target for me because those people from the human resources department from all over the country, they're part of the decision making process that brings speakers in. If I wanted to speak to a sales organization, I would find out where would the national direct sellers association [Direct Selling Association] would have their convention. I would find information out, what their vision was, their goals and objectives of why they have the convention. I would call and offer to speak for them and incorporate in my presentation over the telephone that I wanna speak to what it is you're doing at your convention to help to increase the sales and the professionalism of your, your profession. I would like to come and give a speech and so they say, "How much you charge?" At that time I didn't know how much to charge. Said, "How much have you allocated for the speaker?" They said, "Five thousand dollars." I said, "Okay that'll be good for the first time." And so that's how I started speaking to the various associations of various industries and then those individuals who heard me they would go back to their various companies and say, "I saw this guy and we need to bring him in." I received using that strategy over three thousand requests a year to speak. Plus I have speakers bureaus now book me and this is before I had celebrity status by having the talk show or having the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] specials. So that's, that's the most effective way speaking for associations. Speaker 2: Okay but this is--what associations did you begin with, were they black associations? I mean how did you go-- Speaker 1: The first one, the first company that I spoke for was Michigan Bell [Michigan Bell Telephone Company] and I spoke for a Michigan telephone company. Once I spoke to them, then they recommend me to Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company] and I spoke--came here and spoke in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Is this the black part of the black-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --employees or just the whole? Speaker 1: No this is everybody and then I never targeted black employees. I don't speak for affirmative action. I mean occasionally I'm invited to do those but I speak 97 percent of the people in the audiences that I speak to are white and so then I then was referred to Ohio Bell [Ohio Bell Telephone Company; AT&T Ohio] and so I stayed in the telephone industry for a while and then I spoke for the [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory Bahamian diet which people in the multilevel marketing industry represent all types of industries and then those people then started asking me to come speak to their company. So I went into the real estate industry. Then I would speak for the insurance companies and I spoke for corporations and I spoke for education, I lectured at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] so it, it came from everywhere because I developed--Mike [Mike Williams] gave me a formula to speak from that he said that if you use this formula and you do research on them and you custom design the presentation for them, then you'll create special moments and so the strategy of using in your speaking to an audience as a market tool, I became the living brochure. So rather than just speak to the issues that they had and what they were concerned about, I would incorporate their theme, then I would talk about you know when we do training and people who are in our sales training, I remember a guy talked about why his sales went through the roof and we taught him the strategy of being unstoppable. And I want to talk to you about what he got from that. So that was a commercial inside of my speech so then people say I want that training that this guy had because now there's a strategy called social proof. Because he earned that year over one hundred and fifty additional thousand dollars. So now they got a person in their head who made over $150,000 using my strategy called social proof. So now those people are saying I want that. How can I go get that? And so they would go back to their human resource director, through their event planner say, "I saw this guy [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, he can spike our sales tremendously. Let's bring him in." So I used my speaking and the association as a marketing tool to get people to bring me in as opposed to my trying to get in by sending them brochures. Story_ID: 495946 Speaker 1: Where were you living at the time? You start 19- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was living in Miami [Florida]. Speaker 1: You were li- so in 1986 you're still living in Miami? Speaker 2: Yes in Miami taking care of my mother [Brown's adoptive mother, Mamie Brown]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then now how long do you continue to live in Miami because 19-- Speaker 2: For several years and then I moved from Miami to--I went--I came to Chicago [Illinois]. I lived, but I don't know the years. I came to Chicago and I lived in Detroit [Michigan]. I lived in Detroit in the Penobscot Building in Detroit after I left Atlanta [Georgia], went to Winston-Salem, North Carolina spoke for Dudley Products [Dudley Products, Inc.] and then I came to Detroit (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you spoke for Dudley Products is that one speaking engagement? Speaker 2: One speaking engagement I spoke for them and then I left there, came to Detroit to speak for the [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory Bahamian diet and a guy named Bud [ph.] from Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio], Dr. Talmadge McKinney, an orthodontist, heard me speak. He thought I was humorous and motivational but most of all I made him laugh. His mother had died. He said he had not laughed in six months. So he asked me to come stay with him and his, his fiance at that time Doris [ph.], and he asked me the next morning, "What do, what do you do?" I said, "I speak." "And what is your goal?" I said, "Becoming known nationally as a speaker and internationally." He said, "Do you have a business plan?" I said, "No, I don't." "How you gonna do this?" I said, "I'm not sure, but I just believe that things are gonna work out." And so he told me to come to his office the next day and he gave me ninety-five thousand dollars cash and said, "Will this help you?" And I said, "Yes." And I said, "I'll give you my word, I'll pay you back." Three years later, I earned my first million. I came back to give him his thirty-five thousand--I mean his ninety-five thousand dollars plus and additional thirty-five thousand, he wouldn't take it. He just wanted his money back. He says, "Nobody that I've ever given money to ever came back and said thank you more or less pay me." Speaker 1: Now who is this person? Speaker 2: Dr. Talmadge McKinney. Speaker 1: How did he make his money? Speaker 2: I met him--he's an orthodontist, an entrepreneur in Detroit, Michigan, so I met him there and so at first he had a phone, he put a phone in his--under the staircase in his office. I have a, a callus on my ear. I made over a hundred calls a day calling corporations. "Hi, my name is [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, I'm a motivational speaker. Do you have any need for a speaker?" "No." "Do you know anyone who does?" "No, I don't." And I would call every day over a hundred people. Story_ID: 495947 Speaker 1: And so then I met a lady named Pat Johnson [ph.] that we would go for walks around Belle--Belle Park [Belle Isle Park], this park big park in Detroit [Michigan] and so she said to me, "I moved down to the Penobscot Building [Detroit, Michigan]." I said, "You're kidding." She got this small office there. So I said, "You can't leave me," you know you gotta keep up with the Joneses so I called down there and they had an office seven hundred dollars, hers was three fifty. So I said I can't afford it, but I can't afford not to do it. So I moved in this big office. After I got there, everybody from the floor left and went to another building and she packed up my things and took them too on the truck. I came back off the road after three weeks and the building was empty, nothing left but the phone. I said, "Oh my god." So I called this office and I called her at home and I said, "Hey," I said, "what happened?" She said, "We had to leave and we decided we were not gonna pay the extra rent and we went to another building and we're taking you with us." I said, "But all my stationery has this address. I can't go. I don't have the money to start all over again." She said, "Well your stuff is on the truck, it won't be off for like a month so you might as well come." I said, "No, I'm staying." So I went to the management of the Penobscot Building and I said, "If you would give me three months, three months, I will generate enough business to fill this whole place up. I don't want an office. I want the whole space on the twenty-first floor." And he said okay. So he gave me a desk and a chair and I started calling businesses every day. I slept on the floor of the Penobscot Building, me and Boo, my, my friend from childhood and he and Larry DiAngi who was--wanted to become a motivational speaker heard one of my tapes, came here from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and wanted me to mentor him and so we slept on the floor. They had mats. I slept on the floor. They said, "Why don't you get a mat?" I said, "Because I don't wanna get comfortable. If I sleep on this cold floor, I will become so uncomfortable and through the inspiration of desperation I will get us out of here faster." Story_ID: 495948 Speaker 1: So what was your business plan? Speaker 2: I didn't have a business plan. Speaker 1: No but you had some way--you were making phone calls. Like I just was looking here Robert Cavett [sic. Cavett Robert] said that he spent more time trying to solicit business than you know earning you know, business-- Speaker 2: Yes, I was on the phone calling people. That's my business plan. I call, "Hello, my name is [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, I'm a motivational speaker. Do you have need of my service?" That's, that's how I did. I've never had a business plan. Speaker 1: So one, one speaking engagement led to the other, led to the other (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Then after I speak I would get four to five other recommendations for all the organizations of other companies. Speaker 1: So, how much were you earning your first year? Speaker 2: At that time a thousand dollars an hour. Speaker 1: Okay. A thousand dollars an hour. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you would go on and speak for an hour and you would make a thousand dollars? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay. And then now how much were you making on an annual basis? Speaker 2: The--I was averaging over a hundred thousand dollars a year. I did over a hundred speeches and then my third year I did one million six hundred and something dollars. I knew exactly because I was tracking it and I was so excited about making my first million. Speaker 1: So what are you learning about that--you know the process and the money? I mean how are you handling that? Speaker 2: The persistence and determination can help you make the money. Financial intelligence help you to keep the money and to grow the money. Speaker 1: So where were you getting your financial intelligence from? Speaker 2: Through reading and through other people and, and learning how to invest it, how to save, how to purchase product, how to negotiate contracts for training which was different than negotiating for speaking and but I, I would rate myself on the business part, even though I've earned just over $55 million on a scale of one to ten I'll rate myself three on the business part. I'm gonna become better at that because my asset has become my liability. The demand of me as a speaker and not ever giving the same speech, kept me focused on speaking, working in the business and not working on the business. And so I, I never had anybody around me who had the level of professionalism to study the business and see where the various trends were going. Now, what I--what it took me twenty years to do it would take me one year to do with the right business partner who knows how to switch from 90 percent of my business being speaking to 90 percent of it being products and 10 percent speaking or 25 percent of a hundred speakers and 100 percent of myself. Or online courses of the Les Brown speaking and presentation course, where I can teach from my living room, they call that pajama money, rather than going up and down on airplanes from hotel to hotel. So the business has changed and because of the Internet what it took me twenty years to do you can do in a fraction of the time with the Internet and not ever leave home and that's the transition that I'm in, pulling out of the business to work on the business rather than in the business. Speaker 1: I see. So you were essentially the product and you were-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and so now that's interesting to me. Story_ID: 495949 Speaker 1: Are you saying--because don't motivational speakers prepare a very good speech and they adjust it but it's really pretty much the same speech they give all the time? Speaker 2: Ninety--100 percent of motivational speakers prepare one speech and they might allude to a theme or say something about a company to give the appearance they're custom designing it but they're not. I'm the only speaker without exception, all of them will tell you that, that I don't have a clue how I'm gonna deliver the speech when I get there. I've never given the same speech. I don't have a memorized speech. I send out a needs assessment for the client to say, here's what we're facing, here's what we're up against. Here are our challenges, here are our opportunities. Then I interview them on the telephone and then when I go there I interview the client again in detail because things they will say to you in person they will not take the time and write. And then I will go out unbeknownst to them and I will interview the audience because the audience has a different perspective and then when I stand on stage I will marry those two concepts because you wanna be a plus for the person who wrote the check and you want to be a plus for the people who are listening to the message and how they see it is far different than management. So your languaging style has to bring the two of them together. That's what I bring to the industry that has not been done before that has caused my reputation to explode in addition to that when you're speaking, speakers never talk about their shortcomings. So when I talk about my shortcomings and I'll say I went through a divorce from someone I loved very much, I was embarrassed, I was humiliated, how could I teach people how to live their dreams and I couldn't make a marriage work? How many of you ever made a mistake and you beat yourself over it? Raise your hands. And so that kind of honesty caused tongues to wag. I can't believe he said that. Wow. I can identify with that and then I talk about the beat down to this day none of the speakers talk about it. Then when you have a goal, life is gonna beat the living hell out of you. You can have a positive mental attitude, you can visualize it, but you will get a beat down and it's not personal. Story_ID: 495950 Speaker 1: If we look at you know because you were talking about the last twenty years if we look at the last twenty years, the fact that you won the Peer-- Speaker 2: Council of Peers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Council of Peers Award of Excellence [sic. Council of Peers Award for Excellence] was a big deal right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now the National Speakers Association, how large was the black membership when you joined? Speaker 2: It was very small probably around out of three thousand members maybe around ten. Speaker 1: Okay. And but si- in the last twenty years, there's been a big move-- Speaker 2: The number has been growing and they have probably maybe around seventy-five or a hundred-- Speaker 1: Now. Speaker 2: --out of three thousand, yes, that's strong. Speaker 1: So how did you tran- are you saying you always started with the, the white community? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you never had to work your way in? So was there any--are you--you're saying you never experienced any racism or any pigeonholing or? Speaker 2: I've never experienced racism or pigeonholing, never. The only thing that I've ever experienced that work against me is that I've had people to come see me and say we can't bring him. Why? Because who will we bring after him? I've experienced that. Most recently I was rejected for a speaking engagement which blew my mind. They sent someone in to audit me from the organization that was considering flying me to Maui [Hawaii] and because I said my favorite book says lead not into thine own understanding, that there're things that your heart can envision that your mind can't see and when the lady asked me later what is your favorite book and I said the Bible. Oh, she said oh, and so she said, "We don't want you as a speaker." I was shocked by that. So, but I have never ever experienced racism and I am not some person that would not see it. If it happened I would tell you. It has never happened. Most things that ever happen is that I had a guy waiting for me with a wheelchair when I arrived in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]. He thought I was Les Brown and His Band Renowned [sic. Les Brown and His Band of Renown]. Several white audiences when I come out they are silenced when I walk out because they see Les Brown, they automatically think of Bob Hope and Les Brown His Band Renowned and then when I come out I say surprise (laughter) they crack up and break the ice and go into my speech. Story_ID: 495951 Speaker 1: So I think you won the award [Council of Peers Award for Excellence] in 1986, 1989 you won that award? Ho- did that change anything for you? Speaker 2: No it just increased my speaking engagements. I, I'm, I'm on a track by myself. You know Mike Williams called me one of a kind because I'm not really a motivational speaker. Motivational speakers they come in, they tell you about thinking positive and being enthusiastic and everything is gonna work out all right. What I provide for people goes far beyond that. I speak to the heart, to the mind and to the spirit and as young people say I keep it real. I'll let you know what you're up against, what you're gonna be challenged with. There are no guarantees but you give your best because it's who you are and I'm modeling that which I talked to them about because I know that when I'm on that stage, it was not given to me, that I earned it, that I have to be ten times better than my white counterparts in order to be there. So when they hear me start speaking one of the things and the demands that I put on myself was that they will never know as much as I know. So I studied constantly. They don't have to study and my--and I really over prepared because I had no idea that they were just going up, given the same speech. I didn't know this. So I did all this studying and all this research and when I was on panels with them and they would sit there silently watching and listening and I'm looking at all the new materials coming out and Zig Ziglar was a very good friend and Tony Robbins been giving the same speech for twenty-five to thirty years, the same speech, Personal Power of Tony Robbins is the same material repackaged. It just blew me away because they're scripted. So I'm an extemporaneous speaker. I teach people how to be flexible and versatile and adaptable and do communications intelligence that we have to hold ourselves to a higher standard and I believe sincerely that this is the only industry that I've ever seen where being African American is an advantage. Because when a Zig Ziglar or a Tony Robbins or a Robert Schuller [Robert H. Schuller] come to an audience primarily white audience and say you have the power to live your dreams, they look at themselves and they look at them and they say hey he can do it, I can do it. But when I come in and say you have the power to live your dream, they look at themselves, they look at me, and they say hey if he can do it I have got to do it. Let me get out here right now and sales go through the roof. So it's one of the few areas that if you are, if you believe in yourself and, and you have effective communication skills and spend the time to know how people listen, you can really make tremendous impact with people's lives. Story_ID: 495952 Speaker 1: Talk about your PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] series that you had, how that came about because that's 1990 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanted to be--I wanted to do a PBS special. I saw John Buscaglia and--Leo Buscaglia and John Bradshaw and I'd never seen a motivational speaker in there. And I wanted to know I called them I said have you had Dr. Norman Vincent Peale on? They said no and Zig Ziglar and they said no. So we had a brainstorming session of the National Speakers Association and everybody was asked what goal do you have to achieve? And I said, "I'm gonna have a PBS special." They said, "Don't you know they don't bring motivational speakers on PBS, they have psychologists. You're not a psychologist and besides its educational television, you don't even have a college degree." I said, "Wow, I'm gonna still do it." They said, "How?" I said, "I haven't figured that out yet." So I told Mike [Mike Williams] and he said, "How you gonna do that Brown [HistoryMaker Les Brown]?" I said, "I'm not sure, but I'll figure it out." You know my philosophy you know ready, fire aim, I'll figure it out you know. So I sent some of my materials to PBS and they rejected my idea. Then I was watching John Buscaglia one day--I mean Leo Buscaglia and John Bradshaw and I said how do these guys get on? I said that's the question, how they get on? So I called PBS, "Hi my name is Les Brown. I'd like to book John Bradshaw, can you tell me the person who's responsible for him being on the air and how can I get in touch with him?" "Oh yes, a guy named Jack Wilson and so here's his number, he's his manager." So I called Jack Wilson, "Hi my name is Les Brown, I'm a motivational speaker and I'd like to do a special on PBS. I understand you got John Bradshaw on." He said, "Yes." I said, "I have a tape called 'You Have the Power to Live Your Dream' [ph.]. Let me send it to you and tell me what you think." And so I sent him my cassette, he heard it, he said, "Whoa, man, you are strong." He said, "I want to work with you. I can make this happen." And so he contacted the PBS station in Detroit [Michigan], we did a PBS special called 'You Deserve' and that was the first one I did. I did six others after that including the one you saw 'It's Possible.' So Jack and Thea Flaum got me on PBS. Speaker 1: Thea Flaum the producer here? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. Okay. Now what did you learn about the TV, was it, was there any learning curve on these? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, one of the things I did without Mike and I should not have done, I met with the two of them and I should have then gotten help because I didn't know what I was into. So they were very calm. They said, "Oh we're so excited about working with you. Listen, here's what we're gonna do. We're gonna do the special and what we're gonna do you continue to do, you've gotta be hungry and all the material you'll do we'll hold the copyright and you know the contract be in our name and we--and you can continue to do it and you're gonna make money off the program. It's gonna be just fine." And I said okay and I was by myself, the two of them and I signed. And so they had the complete copyright all of those specials except 'It's Possible' and so they made, so they controlled the lion share of the money. One of those things I did without Mike and regretted it. Speaker 1: So that's why Mike is always around? Speaker 2: Oh, Mike would have had Catherine [ph.] there. "No Brown get an attorney, don't go in by yourself." You gotta know what you don't know. And most people fail in life because they don't know that they don't know and they think they know. Speaker 1: Now how did that series help though? Speaker 2: Oh it increases your credibility that's why I wanted to be on that tremendously so my corporate engagements went up and organizations and it was the first time in American television where we saw an African American male not up telling dirty jokes, not preaching, not playing basketball or football but talking to a primarily white audience of how to live their dream. That's unprecedented. It has not happened since them. Except no, one of my colleagues, one of my mentees Keith Harrell, he did a PBS special and a very good one. Yes, but that was unprecedented to see that...