 Story_ID: 303551 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: I'm Derrick Bell and it's D-E-R-R-I-C-K, last name Bell, B-E-L-L [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.]. Speaker 1: All right now is that your full name? Speaker 2: No, I have a middle initial, middle name, but I usually don't use it. It's A for Albert. I'm a junior and I was named for my father [Derrick Bell]. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 6, 1930, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I'm a lawyer, law teacher, writer, and lecturer, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is December 1, 19--December 1, 2004. Speaker 1: Okay and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the New York University law school [New York University School of Law] in New York City [New York, New York]-- Story_ID: 303552 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I guess I think about people not eating, and almost anything (laughter) I guess. I'm not sure that I have a favorite food. Perhaps Mother's Oats in the morning. It's supposed to be good for you (laughter). You feel good about it, don't feel guilt. I'll put that down as favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, probably fall if I had to say something. Any, any, any one, any season in which I wake up and I'm able to get out of bed is a favorite, but I guess fall is probably--. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably the autumn colors of orange, brown, green, the combination of that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Seldom go on vacation. We do have a, thanks to my wife [Janet Dewart Bell], a house in the country up near Woodstock, New York, which the plan was go to every weekend and if I get up there one weekend every five, six weeks, it's good fortune. Speaker 1: Now the last question, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: You do, you try to suppress it (laughter) as too good, too much used. My goodness! Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 303553 Speaker 1: All right. Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Derrick Bell] side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us first. Speaker 2: It's Ada, Elizabeth. Her maiden name was Childress, C-H-I-L-D-R-E-S-S, Ada, A-D-A. Speaker 1: Okay what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in 1910. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace her side? Speaker 2: I was never really good--you know it's one of those things you always wanted to do and I know her father [John Childress] was a cook on the Pennsylvania Railroad and may have cooked for, in the president's car or something like that. When I was born and when I knew he was--he retired, was blind, got it from the heat of, of the ovens over, over a long period of time. I don't know anything on his side any further. My grandmother [Joella Childress], my mother's mother was very light-skinned. I remember, remember that. My fath- my grandfather was very dark, and, but I really don't know very much about where they came from. I think my grandfather lived in Pittsburgh for a long period of time, but I really don't know. It's a little embarrassing, but I never really looked back on the family. Speaker 1: Is there a tradition in the fam- your family of your mother's side being from anywhere other than Pittsburgh? Speaker 2: If there is, I don't know it. She had one sister and three brothers, and when I knew them they were all, all in Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: Okay. The black community in Pittsburgh goes back a long, long way. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: They were very active in the 19th century, 1812, and so on--. Speaker 2: It's always amazing that so many people so renowned come from Pittsburgh. I said why, you know. I think the emphasis is on the come from (laughter), rather than stayed there and made it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well did your mother--so her father worked on the railroad as a cook and her mother was a housewife or she worked, did she work too (simultaneous) (unclear)--? Speaker 2: Far as I know. I don't remember--and I think she died, my father, my grandfather died fairly early and I remember she died when I was probably three or four, so I really didn't know them very well. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 303554 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Ada Childress Bell]--how did she grow up? Did she, she ever talk about how she grew up? Speaker 2: She went to the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] public schools. She graduated from Fifth Avenue High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. She was supposed to go to college, and they were very disappointed, I gather, when she got married instead. Her--she had one brother who was injured in gas I guess in World War I [WWI] and he didn't live too much longer; the favorite, maybe he was the older son. Another wanted to go to medical school, worked for a doctor--doctor's family for many years. Finally he got into--never got into medical school, but he got into pharmacy school. He finished pharmacy school and then worked for some few years as a waiter 'cause he couldn't get a job as a pharmacist. Finally, I guess he became a pharmacist at that black hospital [Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. If you say the name, I'd remember, but I can't--and later became one of the first detail men for I think it was the Wyeth Pharmacy and after that he opened up his own drugstore and pretty much operated that until he retired in the early '80s [1980s] something like that. Another brother was not a musician himself; he was kind of an organizer. He was sort of the union representative for the black musicians' union [Black Musicians of Pittsburgh] in, in Pittsburgh. Worked at some of the local bars and things like that. He was always my kind of information source. I remember I thought John Foster Dulles was a great man based on my Uncle George [Childress], his advice. But, he was always supportive. When I got into photography, he gave me money and he set up a dark room. When I was interested in recording, he brought me a wire recorder, which was the thing in those days. So, that extended family is a very valuable thing that I think my children missed out on because we were always moving, but I think it's a very worthwhile thing. So, that's my mother's side-- Story_ID: 303555 Speaker 1: What was your father's full name? Can you give that to us? Speaker 2: Same as mine except without the junior, Derrick A., Derrick Albert Bell. Speaker 1: And where was he born and when was he born? Speaker 2: I think Dothan, Alabama. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: D-O-T-H-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay and when was he born? Speaker 2: Nineteen o-eight [1908]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: I know his, his father [Albert Bell] was a minister and I think oh goodness, some of it--I need my sister here, she keeps better track of those things--ended up--some prestige in the, in the community for a black person in those days. My father left Alabama I learned later hurriedly, because I guess he had gone to a county fair with a young girl and had this beautiful white shirt on, you only wore on special occasions, and a couple of white boys--and he had this little play whip that he was cracking and a couple of white guys said, "Nigger what you doing with that black whip"--Niggers aren't supposed to have a whip." And they had a real whip and proceeded to beat him with it, so that the white shirt was all tattered and covered with blood. And I guess the police picked up his father, the minister, and they drove around to see could they find the kids that did it; they couldn't find them, though nothing was likely to happen to them in any event, but they did look. And remember since it indicated my grandfather had some little prestige in the community. But my father according to the story he told--he never told me he told my sister--that he was out on the road one day and he ran into these two guys without their whip and beat both of them down to the ground and then it was decided he should leave Dothan and that's how--. How he decided on Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] rather than Chicago [Illinois] or the other places, I really don't know. Story_ID: 303556 Speaker 1: But he [Bell's father, Derrick Bell] came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and worked in laboring jobs and the--met my mother [Ada Childress Bell] at some point and so rather than her going on to high--going on to college after she finished high school [Fifth Avenue High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] she, they ran off and got married. Speaker 2: Now, is there, is there a story connected with how they met? Speaker 1: If there is, I don't know it (laughter). I just, I, I don't know how they met. I'm sure that my [maternal] grandparents [Joella Childress and John Childress] weren't pleased because they had upwardly mobile aspirations, particularly for my mother. And--but I, I guess it was on St. Patrick's Day in 1930 that they, you know, just ran off and got married in some local county or something like that. I guess they'd done whatever the necessary preparations were, but they didn't, they didn't tell the family. But, I think they lived with family for the first few years until he was able to get his own apartment. Story_ID: 303557 Speaker 1: Now your father [Derrick Bell] from what I've been told, he eventually founded his own business, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father worked in the mills, you know, that heavy and very dangerous work and at some point in the [Great] Depression, you know, I think there were two of us and my brother [Charles Bell] and myself had been born, things were pretty tough, and I guess in 1934, 1935 I was old enough to remember he got a job as a porter in one of the department stores, which, then he, you know, went around with the little pan and a brush and a broom and kept the floor in shape and took away boxes and what have you. And compared to working in the mill that was, you know, a much easier job and I remember it paying nineteen dollars a week, so we were able to for example buy a refrigerator. You know, we had one of those old ice boxes before that and I remember my father opening the front door and throwing the ice pick as far as he could throw it (laughter). So, he worked there a number of years and then he started collecting numbers from the salespeople on, on the floor and whatever the profits of that were we were, you know, almost middleclass. And hit the numbers at some point. You know compared to, I mean, that was 700 to 1. You know you could combinate and everything, compared to these lotteries today I mean that was a good deal you know. These people put too much money in the lottery and the chances of winning are infinitesimal, and the people did, do win, win too much money. It just messes up their lives. You didn't want to hear all that, but--you didn't want to hear all that, but that how it's always--anyhow my mother [Ada Childress Bell] convinced my father rather than to buy a new car, which was de rigueur when you hit the numbers big like that, my father did like nice cars--buy a house. And so we bought a house that was at that point outside the traditional Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] or at the very top of the hill which was a lovely air, but still mainly white when we, when we moved there, and right across from the park; the school was much better. It, it changed my life. I mean, I was not a big guy. I, I could run, but I certainly couldn't fight (laughter), and so being able to move into this fairly, you know, stable community, a big park across the street to play in, nice kids to play with. That was, that made a heck of a difference in my life. My father--. Speaker 1: How old were you when you moved? Speaker 2: Either nine, something like either nine or ten. My father developed about that time, maybe a little earlier, what was later diagnosed as narcolepsy and they really didn't have much in the way of treatment except that drugs that would keep him awake. Oh goodness I can't think the name of it, but the doctors recommended he, he find work out, outdoors. Well, he, that's when he started the rubbish hauling business and he began it with rented trucks and was able to buy his own trucks over, over time, built it into a fairly decent business. And when the packer trucks came in, he, he must have spent hours and hours buying used trucks that really had already been, had their service life and trying to repair them and what have you with the white guy who was a mechanic that they--all I know he was called Whitey. But, he and my father would work hour after hour keeping those trucks in, in, in, in shape. So, that's another good fortune. I had intact--there, there were four of us. I was the oldest. I had a brother, two sisters. We had an intact family. Was this a marriage without any difficulties, I don't think so, but they stayed together and they, father put all four of us through college and as he used to say about things that were special, very few white folk and almost no negroes were able to do some of the things that he had been able, able to do. Speaker 1: Okay do you--were you and your father close? Speaker 2: Fairly close. I was probably closer to my mother, and my brother was probably closer to my father, but he respected the stuff that I was doing. I respected the things he was doing. I went to college [Duquesne University] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] first 'cause I had bad advice or no advice. Speaker 1: I don't want to get to the college yet--(unclear)--. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, but he was very good at, a very good provider. We had the necessities and some, I mean, when we played ball, we were usually the ones who provided the ball and the bat and the glove you see and I don't remember wanting for a lot of stuff, although I worked through junior high school [Herron Hill Junior High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], senior high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], but it was 'cause I wanted to, not because, you know, the financial situation, the financial situation was so, so bad that I had to- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --had to work. Story_ID: 303558 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: It's a lot of early, early memories. My father [Derrick Bell] buying boxing gloves for my brother [Charles Bell] and myself. We wound end up--like if somebody hit somebody, taking off the gloves ducking behind a laundry bag and throwing them at one another (laughter). My father always put up electric trains from the early, early times. And as we got older when we moved up to the house that we bought [in the Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] he would start after Thanksgiving putting up the, you know, the table and platform and putting the trains up. I did that for my kids. That was an early, early memory. The memory I write about is my mother [Ada Childress Bell] during the early days before we moved going down to the rent office, which was right down the street from the row houses that we lived in. And I remember going in; the person was behind a little cage like a bank teller and I remember her saying--taking out the money and waving at the girl and saying, "I have your rent and you will get it when you send somebody out to fix the back steps so my children won't fall." I just have that, it's a clear memory kind of supplemented by my legal knowledge that they could have tossed her black ass out of there. There were no laws because there was no, oh God I can't think, formalized eviction so that, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: You couldn't put your rent in escrow, or anything like that. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, none, none of that. And I later asked her you know what happened and she said, "Oh they came out and fixed my steps and fixed everybody along the row, builtback steps going up to the alley in the back." I said, "Well did you tell folks that you had--(unclear)--." She said, "No I didn't do it for them. I did it so that you all wouldn't fall." But it was very, it was such a wonderful lesson for me because it indicated that you don't just have to accept stuff from people who have a superior position or have some degree of authority over you, you know, you can always challenge it. It's risky, but, and that was, that washer motto. My mother was always up at the school. Now we see the importance of education that comes easily if you're middle class, it doesn't come so easily if you're not, of parental involvement. But my mother she was very, you know she's very articulate, very proud of her language, very insistent about education and so she would be up there checking on things. My brother used to get into more than a few little scrapes, but she, she was always there and we recognize how important that is and to see how you build that kind of understanding and willingness in, in parents that don't have much education themselves. Story_ID: 303559 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question, just to get an idea of what the atmosphere was when you grew up. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I don't know in where we lived for a number of years before we moved to the house that we bought with the park is, it was on a very busy street [in the Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and we were not allowed to go out in the street, you certainly don't cross the street, so it was sort of a boundary. I remember one day I got angry at something, packed up my clothes and I was gonna move, I was leaving and my parents [Ada Childress Bell and Derrick Bell] said well good-bye and I realized I got up to the end of the block, but I wasn't allowed to cross the street (laughter). So I got back and I remember sitting on the steps crying, not our steps, about three blocks away and my mother and father, one of them came, said, "Don't you think you better come on home now?" I remember that. I remember being sent to the store regularly and having to pass a, a chow [chow chow breed]. I don't like chows today. He would sit up on his steps and just, you know, growl angrily. I don't think, I don't ever remember him coming off the steps, but he, he could scare a little kid to death. But, I had to go to school and I had to go that way, couldn't cross the street, and I had to come back that way and building up the, since this is what I had to do, no sense in complaining about it, you know, and of course the dog never came down, but again you look back now and say well those were some developmental lessons, you see, and I've been doing some work--we'll come to it--, but it makes the point with Lenora Fulani who should be definitely on your list. She's controversial, but she's in education. She talks about the different--and we've done three weekly public conversations and last night was the last of the three. She was talking about the difference between an acquisitive learning and developmental learning. Acquisitive is when you get the books and you have the test and what have you. Development is when you're put in situations where you have the opportunity, almost obligation to grow, and when I had to pass that dog that was an opportunity for developmental learning and so forth (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Those were the days when dogs weren't chained up. Was he chained up? Speaker 2: On no, oh heavens no. Speaker 1: No yard, was he behind the fence? Speaker 2: They just let him out on the front, you know and he--. Speaker 1: That's something that has changed. I remember even in my life, when dogs used to just roam the neighborhood. You'd have to get to know the dog-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --like a person, yeah. Speaker 2: I went back some years ago back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and took a walk one Sunday morning up to my old neighborhood and dogs were all out there -just scads, but I'd just forgotten it. The dogs just would, you know, they just let the dogs out so that--we never let ours out because once we got up a little ours were all, you know it got stolen, it was pure breed and what have you. But, no that's, that's part of the sights and sounds, dogs barking all the time. Chickens, I thought even when we moved up we had chickens and I remember we tried raising turkeys. That was a disaster 'cause turkey, turkeys are kind, kind of sensitive. He had, my father was a great hunter. He always had hunting dogs. He finally moved them down to where he built a cage from down where he had his trucks garage. But, my father brought the country with him (laughter). Story_ID: 303560 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself when you were a little boy? What kind of a little boy were you? What, what were you interested in? Speaker 2: Almost anything and very confident. I think between--I had this extended family, they treated me like I was Jesus. I don't want to be sacrilegious, but that's right and I had great confidence. I knew I could do well in school. I knew I could run fast. I didn't realize that I could, was not gonna be an athlete, but I used to send off for all these little offers that they had in the comic pages or on the, on the shows and I would put these--for the return address I had my home address, but instead of my name I would have the initials, "Derrick Bell [HistoryMakers Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] the greatest boy in this or any other world" (laughter). Speaker 1: What gave you the idea for that? Speaker 2: I don't know. It just--I just thought I was fairly, fairly special. Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting concept itself, Derrick Bell the greatest boy in this-- Speaker 2: This or any other world. Speaker 1: --or any other world. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I mean did you think a lot about existence when you were com- I mean, who we were, what this was about, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: It was just the result of family encouragement, I think. I tended to be kind of withdrawn. When company came, I would pretend to be reading a book or something like that 'cause I didn't want to be involved with the company unless I was called. I tried to be polite, but as I said I, I had a huge stamp collection until I realized that these coun- countries are ripping you off putting out all these stamps that they wanted you to buy and I guess I moved to photography. Speaker 1: How old were you when you began photography? Speaker 2: Probably in junior high school [Herron Hill Junior High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] because when I went to--and maybe in high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. When I went to college I was a political science major and journalism minor, and I got to know the priest who was the head of photography, (unclear), Became the school photographer when I was there, but I just--. Speaker 1: What were you shooting with? Speaker 2: Four by five speed graphic with the big, you know with the plates and I must have some pictures around (laughter) some place. But, you'd have loved it. So I would go with the team 'cause Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] had, you know, didn't have much of a football team, but they had a very fine basketball team in those days. And I would go on some of, some of the trips with them, you know, be in the locker room and what have you, took a lot of you know the usual group photos. Did a little, a few marriages on my own. That was always traumatic (laughter), both taking the pictures and then trying to get paid for 'em. Did a lot of--what are they called, squeegees or something. Students would have their class pictures made and rather than order the small pocket little wallet sized one I would do those in my home, in my dark room and sell them back to the kids. So, I guess--I would get Popular Photography and Modern Photography and those pictures were so good. I said, "Ooh I don't think this is it" (laughter). I don't think this is the way. But again, no models. I saw what it should be, but there was nobody that I knew, other than Father Deer [Father Vincent Deer], the photographer, who was a great photographer, who could say hey you could do this. And--. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet any of the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] photographers? Speaker 2: Yeah I knew--they only had one and I'm, I'm blocking on his nickname. But, I did, but you know they mainly took group photos and what have you. It was nothing, nothing fancy. They probably could do fancy stuff, but that wasn't what they got paid to do. Story_ID: 303561 Speaker 1: Sir, where did you attend grade school? Speaker 2: I started at a school down in the lower, in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which was at that point called McKelvey [McKelvey Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. I think they later changed it to a black person's name, but I can't--. Speaker 1: McKelvey? Speaker 2: McKe- yeah M-C-K-E-L-V-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when I, when we moved to the Herron Hill district, finished elementary school at a school called Madison [Madison Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], that's named for [President] James Madison. Speaker 1: So, where you a good student in school? Did you like school? Speaker 2: Very good, very good student, liked school. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any--what were your favorite courses in school? Speaker 2: In elementary school I don't remember, but everything was a favorite. I was, you know I was a crossing guard, you know stand there with a belt and stuff like that. Speaker 1: And those were the days when they gave you a flag too? Speaker 2: No, I just had the belt and the cars were coming, but the--did very well in elementary school and we really didn't have an athletic--we had gym, but we didn't have an athletic program as such and that didn't happen 'til I got to junior high school. And that was the end of my athletic ambition 'cause the rather un- insensitive coach had us all line up--I guess I went to junior high school when I was eleven and I don't think I went through puberty 'til I was fourteen. So these guys are all you know--but I say I'm a fast runner; they left me. They left me so far in the dust it wasn't even funny. And so when they would pick up teams I was the last one to be chosen and what have you, so I said oh well I guess I won't be an athlete. Of course, I couldn't--you know there's a range of sports and, but the school didn't have any of 'em. Speaker 1: Now this is 1940, right--about '41 [1941]? Speaker 2: Yeah about '41 [1941], that's right. Speaker 1: It was the beginning of the war [World War II, WWII]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so what, what was the name of your junior high school? Speaker 2: Herron Hill Junior High [Herron Hill Junior High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: H-E-R-R-O-N, Herron Hill. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was the last time you ever tried out for sports? Speaker 2: Yeah. I guess, you know, I guess there was a little track team at Madison, and I was only in one track meet. And for some reason somebody was supposed to run in the 60 [60 meter dash]--it was by weights or something, somebody who was supposed to run in a larger weight class wasn't there and so the teacher who was in charge put me in that and I lost that big time. And then I went up to Herron Hill and these guys they were just bigger, you know, they were just bigger. So, I was never interested in tennis and by the time I even knew anything about basketball--I mean I remember one of my big experiences as a child was going to summer camp and I think I was into and these kids doing double pumps, what is that? I never learned to play basketball. Story_ID: 303562 Speaker 1: Summer camp. Let's talk about that because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --this was Camp James Weldon Johnson [Beaver County, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a great motivational experience. My--we went as,--my brother [Charles Bell] and I went as children, seven years old, eight years old or something like that. It may have only been for two weeks, maybe one week. I can't remember, but it just, it was just a brand new experience. It was just a great experience. Speaker 1: Now who, now this is a black camp apparently. Speaker 2: Run by the Urban League [Urban League of Pittsburgh; Urban League of Greater Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: By the Urban League in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and they named it after James Weldon Johnson who was a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored people] director at one time, and poet-(simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Director, right, but he was so many, he had so many other things. And I remember our cabins were all named for famous blacks and some of them I'd never heard of, most of them I'd never heard of before, you know. Speaker 1: Like who? Who was--? Speaker 2: I knew you were gonna ask me something like that (laughter). Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar], Marian Anderson, Harriet Tubman. Speaker 1: Was Dunbar's poetry popular in those days? Speaker 2: Not as far as I know, no. We had the book at home of all his works and I used to read them. It was only later, but reading his whole life and like so many of those folk he--he wanted to do what they didn't want him to do and which he didn't do as well as the things that he did. You know that's--he wanted to write serious poetry, no dialect stuff, but he wrote the dialect stuff so well and who's the--oh God, the ragtime musician? Speaker 1: Scott Joplin. Speaker 2: Scott Joplin really wanted to write serious classical music, but nobody could write the rags the way, the way he did. And his opera, 'Treemonisha' you know it's not perfect, but it has a lot of lovely music. So, you know, who's the black man that went to the North Pole? Speaker 1: Matthew Henson. Speaker 2: Matthew Henson. There was the Matthew Henson cabin and you know that whole range of folk. And I don't know that I ever went back as a camper, but I didn't--when I started college [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] I became a counselor and then a unit director and finally while I was in, in law school [University of Pittsburgh School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] I was a program, I was the program director for the camp. Speaker 1: For the camp, okay. Speaker 2: And I offered--a long time I thought that I probably could do that camp work better than anything else I'd ever be able to do in life. I was just, you know, there's something you just know you're better (laughter) and that was--I'm not sure I've ever had that feeling (laughter) again. I have, I have a son, one of my sons is an actor and he's, he can and my other, my younger son has become a film critic, still hasn't found that publication-that would allow him to do nothing else but write film criticism, but they, they both have an innate sense of what is good and I just, I just am amazed. But I respect it and I envy it just to be able to review a film, be able to look at an actor and say he is good or he's not good because A, B, C, D. I said where, where you guys learn that? But I, I thought that I could really do the camp counselor thing. Speaker 1: So, was there instruction at the camp on who these historical figures were? Speaker 2: In fact, you had, there would be a contest in each--we had two week periods and there would be black history contests and that would be in connection with a dinner or what have you. We made a big thing of that. Story_ID: 303563 Speaker 1: Did they talk about the struggles of some of those people as well as their triumphs? Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and the biggest thing was all the counselors were black and they were all college people. And while my parents [Ada Childress Bell and Derrick Bell], you know, the expectation was that I would go to college, again there were no models. And these people provided me models and I'd sit and listen to them talking about their college experiences at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], you know, the various places where they--'cause most of the kids went to black colleges. The fraternities, the sororities. Was is it, the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] who branded (laughter) the horseshoe thing and I said "Whoa I don't know if I wanna do that" (laughter), but no they were, they were great models 'cause you could see through them what you might do. You could see through them, and that's just so--I mean when I was--after the photography, I got into doing model airplanes. I flew control planes. I went to contests and I, I thought I wanted to be an aeronautical engineer and I read all that stuff, but I had no models. There was nobody who said you can do that. There probably were no black aeronautical engineers in those days. So, I, I got interested in law because I had models, the two or three people on my paper route, a judge, two lawyers. I could see, you know, and everybody in the black community lived in the same sector. You didn't move out to the suburbs in those days. Speaker 1: Now give us the names of some of these people, for history. Speaker 2: Homer, Homer S. Brown was one of the first black judges in Allegheny County [Pennsylvania] in, in Western Pennsylvania. He'd been a legislator for many years and became a court of common pleas, you know, the trial court level judge, highly respected in the community. His next door neighbor, Everett Utterback who was a lawyer, worked for the city housing authority [Housing Authority of the City of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], something like that. Utterback's wife or niece and Judge Brown's wife, ooh, I've forgotten her name [Wilhelmina Byrd Brown], were sisters from Virginia. Obviously, upscale you know from the elites and beautiful, light-skinned women with good hair, lovely homes and they treated me like I was their son. You know if it was cold, come in and have a cup of hot chocolate. How you doing in school? The men invited me to their offices. You know, it was really a kind of nurturance, that this kid can go for, 'cause the paper was there on time (laughter). There was another lawyer, Paul [F.] Jones, who was a city councilman. Also big brick house, no frame house here, you know, beautiful rugs. Beautiful wives. Ooh goodness I almost remembered--just gorgeous women. I remember she finally got a job, if not a teacher in the schools--'cause when I went to school there were no black teachers in Pittsburgh Public Schools, none. I remember a good friend of mine who had built model airplanes who became a practice teacher, you know, while he was getting his degree, but it was after I had my time that they actually hired blacks as, as teachers. But, those were very important, you know, that you could see again as with the coun- counselors at the camp [Camp James Weldon Johnson, Beaver County, Pennsylvania], that you could see from where you were through them as black people that what you might, what you might be. And with a lot of encouragement. So that's priceless (laughter). You know that commercial about you listen to everything else is VISA [sic. MasterCard], but there some memories that are priceless and the influence. I spent an awful lot of time trying to give back a portion in terms of encouragement and help to young people without regard to race that I got from, from the things I've been telling you about, from the counselors, from the paper route, you know, carrying those papers seven days a week. Speaker 1: Was that the-- Speaker 2: Pittsburgh Press. Story_ID: 303564 Speaker 1: Pittsburgh Press. Speaker 2: And for six years rain or shine. My father [Derrick Bell] never took me around. I took my--when my son had a paper route I think I was delivering more papers than he was (laughter), you know, but my father had a hard, he was a hardworking person. He didn't have time to take me around the paper route and--. But the, the, you know, the idea that this is your job, the papers are delivered, you're supposed to get 'em out there, then you had to go around and collect on the weekends. You tried to collect when you were delivering on Friday, but sometime people weren't home and then Saturday afternoon you had to go back out and collect, keep track, turn in the money on Sunday, you know. I think I made five dollars a week, something like that, but they would have these prizes if you got new customers. I think I got a bicycle that way and, you know, so it was--but the, the experience. My late wife who was the mother of my children worked as--in the soda fountain throughout high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and one of the things that we didn't want our children to miss all the school opportunities that we had missed, you know, after school opportunities. We were wrong (laughter). We were wrong because missing that stuff, needing to work, needing to earn money and wanting to earn money helped make us who we were you see. Now you can't feign poverty and stuff like that, and we wanted our kids to have more, but my late wife, Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] said that, late in her life she said our great challenges as parents is getting our children over their sense of entitlement and that's--it's a widespread problem. But, the--and they didn't, they didn't have the extended family that I had. They--and I think Jewel also had. They didn't have, I don't they ran into the kind of models. We were busy sending them to the best public schools, which were mainly white schools, where knowing what I now know they might not have always been treated in ways that had with the expectation, the pushing, you can do better, you know and now I wish I had it to do over again, I would have made some much different choices. Story_ID: 303565 Speaker 1: Now what high school did you attend? Speaker 2: Schenley High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which is one of the, probably one of the premier high schools at that time. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: S-C-H-E-N-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, now this was in the new neighborhood right? Speaker 2: Well it was, it was still within walking distance. It was over into I guess Oakland [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. We were sort of at the top of the hill and if you went down one way you were into the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. If you went the other way, you were into mainly a white area 'cause the school was mainly white, at least--it's not, it's not that any longer, but it was then when we, we, we were--. Speaker 1: What was the ratio, you think? All the teachers were white, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the teachers were white. Speaker 1: But in terms of the students? Speaker 2: It's interesting because whatever it was when the first year came down from junior high from--it was almost all black. A lot of those kids dropped by the wayside within a year or so, one thing or another and it was a fairly small percentage, particularly by the time we gra- graduated, maybe fifteen percent, eighteen percent something like that. Speaker 1: Now did you--well were you involved in any high school activities -instead of the small group? Did that-- Speaker 2: Well--. Speaker 1: --keep you from getting involved in stuff or did you-- Speaker 2: I would, I didn't, I didn't do, obviously didn't do sports. I think my late wife, Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell], would have, she was--really wanted to be an actress and they would do these plays. I know she was involved in the big protest when they were doing these romantic plays in which no black people were selected except to be the maid or the butler or something like that and that created a big brouhaha and they finally did a big musical, sort of like 'Oklahoma!', except they called it 'Arizona' (laughter). But, I did very well in school and Jewel, myself, and pretty much a lifelong friend were three blacks in a special class. I mean they had tracking and before they had tracking I didn't know about it. I just knew that well about twenty of us had our homeroom down in the lower, you know, kind of removed from the--we went to classes together and, but they were--we were, you know, kind of the stars. We were--and they--we had very good teachers, and I just didn't get very much advice when it came time about preparing for college, but--. Speaker 1: Now who are some of the teachers that you remember? Speaker 2: I probably can't remember names. I remember one name Kealy [ph.], but as far as any of the teachers they did press you, you know, do better, you know, the expectation. And there was a Latin teacher and I was never good at languages, but I had two years of Latin and that woman was very, I mean you were afraid--Ms. Rogers [ph.], you were afraid to come into that classroom and not have your lesson prepared. On math and science, Jewel helped me a lot. We were, you know, really close friends, but it wasn't a romance. Story_ID: 303566 Speaker 1: I was a--I tell people now I was a nerd before the word was invented (laughter). When I finally started going to dances [at Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], could not dance worth two cents. My sisters tried to teach me, and they would shake their head, and, but I find--I wanted to go to the dances and things and I decided I'd just let the popular girls who up there tada, tada, let them go 'cause it was this long row of girls sitting on the side with long faces and I would just go down the row one days after another and only on the slow dances, right, 'cause I could kind of keep myself. But on the fast dances I would be moving back and occasionally a girl would say well listen why don't we just try a few steps, you know, and that's how I came to learn you didn't have to be the greatest dancer in the world, you know (laughter) you just had to be concerned and can make this person a little happier about being up on the floor rather than sitting there. Speaker 2: Now these are--. Speaker 1: A valuable lesson (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Now, now these are the days when people were doing the Lindy hop and that sort of thing--what was this the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: No, no this was-- Speaker 2: No this was a little later. Speaker 1: --rhythm and blues. Speaker 2: So--. Speaker 1: (Singing) "You make me lose my happy home, you comfort me and now you're gone since I fell for you." I was always up on that one (laughter). Speaker 2: And so it wasn't the--the big band stuff had passed over. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was still around, but that's not what we played. It was mainly the rock and roll, the rhythm, the rhythm and blues (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Late 40's-- Speaker 1: Rock and roll is the white takeoff of rhythm and blues. Late '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: Like '48 [1948], '49 [1949]? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. I can't remember--. Speaker 2: Lloyd Price I guess was popular, Bill Doggett. Speaker 1: Bill Doggett, Sarah Churchill those and that was--some of the people could dance really, but I just, you know, you didn't have to be able to be up there with everybody surrounding you, you know, you could have a good time. And I had--I would take girls to the movies and tentatively put my arm around the chair. I was not, I, I just, I never thought I was God's sexual gift to women. That's been one of my great blessings (laughter). 'Cause regardless of how they--well at least in those days, I don't know what's(unclear) going on. At least in those days, there were a couple of things. There was a--I wanted to be somebody. And it just seemed to me that one of the easiest ways not to be somebody is to get trapped into early pregnancy or disease. I guess -sort of, we had the--have some disease, you could get the girl pregnant, or you could get caught. In those days, getting caught was better (laughter), at least I thought so. So, that I, I learned that you treat women like people, you know, and that that you try to--even if you wanted to be a player or whatever the current name is you first show that you are interested in this person, that you wanna hear what they have to think and say about the world or about whatever and you don't hey baby kind of, kind of stuff. A lot of people are very successful. My brother [Charles Bell] had all kinds of women. He was coming home talking about his exploits when I wasn't even sure I knew what he was talking about. He was two years younger than I was, but it just seem to me not consistent in, with the ambition to, feel it, you wanted to have sex with every, every girl that you, that you, that you met. And that, that's been another, another blessing too. In fact, my son said dad you really need to write a book how, how to make love, how to, how, how to love a black woman, not how to make love, how to love a black woman. He said you are very good at that 'cause most of my friends are women and that this is lifelong kind of thing with relationships if they had started off with me trying to sleep, it couldn't, it would have never developed into something. It is probably as valuable to me as anything in my life is in relationships that I have with, with women and, and, and some married, some not married, you know, my students who I'm always trying to get married. I have a whole long list of women who have, you know, just ideal. Finding men for them that's the, that's one of the problems of our time. So that--. Speaker 2: Now--. Speaker 1: Part of that again is, is from the, the things that happen in your development. Story_ID: 303567 Speaker 1: You never mentioned any corporal punishment or anything like that. Did your family--. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they, they believed in corporal punishment. Speaker 1: They did? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, there was a, you know this idea--even my children, they never talked back. Now we didn't slap 'em around and what have you, but that, that was just, that was just beyond pale, I mean, my father [Derrick Bell] I would never, you know. My mother [Ada Childress Bell] would say you know, "If you get too big I'll get up on a chair (laughter) and knock you down." So, there, there wasn't that much, but it was an understanding that you were the child even when you were grown, you know, and there was none of this back talk that you hear from these little kids, "No (unclear)," and then they get out and embarrass the parents when they're at the supermarket and stuff like that. I said no could not deal with that. Now, you know, some of the psychologists would probably say your children haven't done as well as you would like because you didn't give them free reign to express themselves, and I regret that, I would regret that if I (laughter) heard that. But I could not, I could not deal with that. My children are forty-two, actually he's gonna be forty-three, the oldest one, and forty and thirty-eight and they have their problems. They're good people, but they have had problems, but it never--now they may not listen to you if you give them advice, but they don't, there's no talking back and stuff like that. I just couldn't deal with it. Story_ID: 303568 Speaker 1: Was the church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: I went to church a lot. Yeah I was at the, what was it the Grace Memorial Presbyterian Church [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] when we moved. The minister was one of my paper customers. I sang in the choir. I think as I say in the book that you--we didn't bring, 'Ethical Ambition[: Living a Life of Meaning and Worth,' Derrick Bell], that I think my relationship with religion evolved over, over, over time, but I did go to church. You know one of the challenges for I think an educated person, particularly educated black folk, is you remember as a child the warmth and the singing and that was really part of you. But, as you get older you get a little tired of those Bible stories. You know you want some substance, you want some--in, in, in the service and so you look around for something to provide the warmth but also have some, some thoughtful substantive sermon--and that's hard, not impossible, you know. Jim Forbes [James A. Forbes] up here at Riverside [Riverside Church, New York, New York]. That's a huge operation. It's, it's a little too big for me, but I go from time to time. Forbes is always on point. Peter [J.] Gomes, you know for years when I was in Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] we always went to Memorial Church [Memorial Church, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Peter had been there almost as long as we've been there and Peter is probably the outstanding preacher in the country. I mean, he is just outstanding. In fact, he makes it hard after you listen to Peter for a while to go almost any place else 'cause he is just--. He could be funny and profound and, you, you want that. Story_ID: 303569 Speaker 1: Now did you run for class office or anything like that in high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: I don't know how much--I think there was an election and I was vice president of the class. There's a guy who is now in films, Harry Mastrogeorge, was the president. Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] was the secretary and somebody else was the treasurer so that--and again we were just friends, I mean, you know to the extent that I was interested--I remember later finding a sliver of a poem I'd written about my ideal woman that I'd written with the lines--I'm embarrassed even at this point. Her hair was long, black, and silky and she was high yellow fair, oh God (laughter). Jewel was not that. She as an attractive brown-skinned woman and after high school I went to Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. She didn't go to college the first year 'cause her father--she wanted to go--her father was a janitor at Carne- Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in those days. And she wanted to be in fine arts. She wanted to be an actress. Her father saw how those fine arts kids behave even out in the hall, and he said my daughter is not going there, so she didn't go any place for a year. And then the following year she went to Margaret Morrison [Margaret Morrison Carnegie College, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which is the liberal arts school and then she went to Cleveland [Ohio] for a master's degree. And what is the black theater company, I always-- Speaker 1: Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: You got it, she worked with Karamu House. And after I finished college I went in the [U.S. military] service for two years, came back, decided to go to law school instead 'cause I could continue to help my father [Derrick Bell] with the bills and do the taxes and stuff like that. Story_ID: 303570 Speaker 1: Now how did you decide to go to Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: I guess I got a scholarship to Lincoln [Lincoln University] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but money was always a concern and that the scholarship didn't cover room and board; and the room and board was gonna be more than the tuition at either Duquesne or Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and so following the character of logic that it was devoid of any, either facts or insight, I decided to go--stay in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. And because people were coming back from the [U.S. military] service and the first year classes were meeting in some big halls 300, 350 people I decided well Duquesne with 120 people per class was a better, was a better deal. Speaker 1: So what year is this when you graduated from high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] to go to college? Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in 1948, and I went to--that fall to Duquesne. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father [Derrick Bell] paid the, paid the tuition. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was Duquesne like. Did you like it there? Speaker 2: Not, not particularly. I liked--you know I didn't dislike it. I had a lot of adjustments as many people do going from high school to college just on the academic side. I, I, I feel--I had a few good friends like Father Deer [Father Vincent Deer] who, who was both--he was my ethics teacher, he was the photography teacher. I spent hours in the dark room. He would give me good advice. He'd look at my grades and say, "How come these are good and these others not so good?" And I said, "Well those are the ones that I have good grades in, courses I like." He said, "No, no you're supposed to work hard on all the courses," and nobody ever said that to me; now that's a simple thing, but I think after that I had mainly all A's. I, I had gotten past French. I was not good in that. But I didn't have good teachers either, but I had very good grades. Story_ID: 303571 Speaker 1: And I was in--everybody had to be in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] for the first two years and, all the males, and then I signed up for the advanced in, in the [U.S.] Air Force--'cause they had both Air Force and [U.S.] Army. And when I finished, the Korean War was still on, and we immediately got orders to report for duty that--early that fall. I think that was the last summer I spent as--I was a program director at Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and then I went to, went into the service. Story_ID: 303572 Speaker 1: Okay, now were you still in contact with your future wife at that point? Speaker 2: You know, no. When I came back with this law school [University of Pittsburgh School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], my first job was in Washington [D.C.]. And she had learned that--she had come to Washington 'cause her sister's marriage was not doing too well, and she moved down from Cleveland [Ohio] and called and said she heard that I was here and would I like to go to this new church [Church of the Redeemer, Washington, D.C.] that was being established by a man, Jefferson Rogers who had been minister at, I can't remember the name [Plymouth Congregational Church, Washington, D.C.], the prestigious bourgeois black church and quit, said the folks were not serious and decided to start a church of his own. They met in the 12th Street YMCA [Washington, D.C.], the old black Y. And so I started going and, and--Rogers is a great teacher too--. It's interesting; I don't know if I've ever met a great preacher who was also a great minister. You're either one or, or, or, the other. Peter [J.] Gomes I loved, but he is not a great minister. Of course now he has all kinds of staff and assistants and stuff like that to do the things, but the--so I started going to church. I remember going up and helping them paint the walls 'cause the room that they used was kind of shabby for the, you know, the sermons and, and I remember--in fact I told Jeff Rogers this not long ago, that we would, Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] and I started going out together and we would go to his house for dinner and Jeff loves to argue. I mean he's now eighty-seven, but he still loves to argue, reads everything, and Jewel loves to argue, and so they would be sitting across arguing like mad and Jeff's wife, Mary Grace [Mary Grace Harris Rogers] and I would be sitting across and just shaking our heads. They had three children [Anita Rogers Howard, Qasim Abdul-Tawwab and Weldon Rogers] when he quit that job, and yet--and as he was starting this new enterprise and what have you. But it seemed to me and I think right that he was more together as a result of that family than he would have been if he'd just been a single person doing this. And it encouraged me that you know marriage may not be incompatible with the ambition and the desire to be somebody that, that I had. And so I'd known Jewel all this time and we got along together and I really had respect for her. Jewel could--she was a psychiatric social worker, but she had skills of insight about people which were amazing to me as she would dissect some of my friends. You like him well boom, boom, boom. I said whoa. I forgot of course that that section worked the other way, but--and I guess when the next year she became program director at the camp, Camp Johnson [Camp James Weldon Johnson, Beaver County, Pennsylvania], and I would come up to see her and what have you and at some point proposed and then when I fin, I had finished, when was it--I can't remember how, how that--I can't get--it's probably all in 'Confronting Authority[: Reflections of An Ardent Protester,' Derrick Bell] 'cause I have--it's about as biographical as I'm gonna get. My friend Jeff Rogers says, "Derrick [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], you need to write a real autobiography." His hero, Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] wrote three of them, you know. And I said, "Well Jeff --I disagree--biogr- biographical stuff in, in 'Confronting Authority' and 'Ethical Ambition[: Living a Life of Meaning and Worth,' Derrick Bell] has a lot of that." He said, "No, no you really need to just kind of go chapter and verse." And I reminded him of what one of his great idols at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], oh goodness, blocking out his name, who had said--. Speaker 1: What did he teach? Speaker 2: One, one, one of the teachers at, at Howard, right. Speaker 1: Law, law school. Speaker 2: La- Locke, Alain Locke. Speaker 1: Locke, okay. Speaker 2: In fact, Jeff named one of his sons Alain. And Alain Locke said he would never write autobiography because he believed in telling the truth. I said, "Jeff there's some aspects of my life I'm not sure I want out there (laughter)." You know. Story_ID: 303573 Speaker 1: It's clear, Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] and I were married for thirty years, had three children, basically--people outside thought it was the ideal marriage. I'm not sure there's such a thing as an ideal marriage, but it was a good marriage. And I could not have--the thing about Jewel, she was fiercely loyal as somebody else described her. So, she had to be, 'cause I'm leaving jobs left, left and right, you know, but she was always supportive, always understanding, always had an insight. I tell people when I went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I mean I was the first black, but I also was the person who didn't come from their class, in the class situation. These people came from money. You didn't get to Har- you didn't get to--you might get to Harvard, but you weren't gonna be a leading light, [Harvard] Law Review, clerking that usually, there's some money behind that, and in, in, in a different world, you know. I'd go to lunch with these guys and they'd talk about, "Well I wrote this opinion for judge, justice so and so," and so, "Yeah, but I wrote such and such," and my head's going back and forth like in a ping pong game or something. I didn't have that experience. And they were smart, there's just no doubt about it. And I remember we went to a dinner over on Brattle Street, Jewel and I, faculty dinner, and we were walking home and I could hear during the dinner Jewel would be arguing with this one over here, arguing with that one over there and holding her own and Jewel said, she said, "You know your colleagues are smart, but many of them are not impressive." She just nailed it, you know, because you get kind of almost blown away with their credentials and what have you and you kind of hide--but she saw through all of that and saw that you had some good friends, Frank Michael who is still a good friend, genuine, but a lot of folk--she just said it, were not impressive, and it just opened my eyes. I was, I was, I was stronger as a result of her insight about individuals about that school, which she never loved. We were there, but I don't think she ever--. Story_ID: 303574 Speaker 1: I wanna backtrack a little bit and talk about--. Now are there any professors at Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], any teachers--? Speaker 2: At Duquesne the only one I really remember is Father, Father Deer, D-E-E, D-E-E-R, Vincent Deer who was really, had a sort of a father figure what have you. Speaker 1: Did you think about--in terms of the Korean War, the U.S. just came out of World War II [WWII]. And did you get a chance to talk to any of the returning soldiers about life in the [U.S.] Army or [U.S.] Air Force-(simultaneous) ? Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: Did you have an opinion about that 'cause I know? 03:11:29:00-03:13:45:05 See I thought, you know, I was very patriotic and in high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] I was in the Civil Air Patrol and it was main--they had some--we met once a week and you got these uniforms and things like that, but it was mainly kind of a drill kind of situation and there were only about a dozen, 15, 18 black guys, and this guy who had been in the service was sort of the drill master and he knew all these fancy steps and he taught us all these fancy steps. So we, you know, we really, we really did that. We went once to a summer program at an air base, Air Force air base and I remember we all were taken to the--I think we went to the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] swimming pool, but they wouldn't let the black kids swim, and that kind of got me. And they also--I understand the white guys got to fly. They took the white guys up in planes just to you know take them around. Black guys didn't get a chance to do that. And finally I remember later, we went once one Friday or whatever night it was and the, there was a dance. All these people were invited--it was a band and what have you and they stopped us at the door. They said you know well they're having a dance, but you, you can't come in. I quit at that point. I said you know it was obviously that was not for me. It's not like being in the South and watching a lynching or anything like that, but it was, and this is Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], you know. Black people didn't go to restaurants downtown. There were no signs. You just knew you weren't gonna be served and you might not be treated well. The jobs were pretty well segregated, you know, the black folk had the worst jobs at the poorest pay and only a few professionals. No teachers as I said and so it was not Deep South situation, but it was not, it was not ideal. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And I didn't start off being militant, and when you asked about the service you know, I was ready to go when I got my orders. It was only years later that I realized that we had screwed up in getting in the Korean War like we did later on in Vietnam and like we're doing in Iraq. Story_ID: 303575 Speaker 1: --Now what were the experiences in Korea? Where there any stories from the Korean War that stand out or anything? Speaker 2: I guess one of the things is how I got there. I remember you know my father [Derrick Bell]--my first station was going to be in South Carolina and the--my father was very concerned about me having to ride segregated trains and all that, and he'd just brought a new Plymouth and he said why don't you take the Plymouth and you can make payments, you, you make the payments on it, so you can drive down. And I thought that would be fine, nice, nice to have a car, but then I asked one, one of my white classmates who also had orders going to the same place, and we decided well we should ride together, you know, he could help with the driving and stuff like that. That seemed like a good--my father was appalled, but again he didn't say very much about it. We got to Virginia and we stopped in Richmond [Virginia] and I had this name of this black rooming house and we both went up and the woman had a fit, the landlady had a fit. "Get this white boy out of here, what you trying to do. You take him down to that hotel and you come back." She kind of laid me out. So, when I dropped off Ed, Ed Trainer [ph.], came back and she said, "Get in here you just trying to get me," but then of course after I got in she treated me very well and the next morning she said, "You better, you're not, you're wearing that uniform, but that's not gonna get you very far in, in the South you better let that boy take a train." But, I said, "Oh no." So, we went and stopped in Atlanta [Georgia]. I took him to the white hotel and then I guess we got to South Carolina and I made friends with four guys from Kentucky, had gone to University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky], very friendly and what have you. And after a week or so Ed Trainer would barely speak, you know. He had as northerners often do they got to the South and he had to, you know, fit in with the, with the, with the group and I said, "Boy oh boy (laughter)." So, then I, my first real duty station was Alexandria Air Force Base [England Air Force Base, Rapides Parish, Louisiana] in Louisiana and I drove from South Carolina to Louisiana and you know nonstop and you know stopping at these places you got a restroom, well it's out, it's out in the weeds for you and, but I got there and I was staying they said it was no room for--and when I was in South Carolina I stayed in, in a whole barracks by myself. They said the other barracks were full. So, for three weeks I was, you know there by myself. When I got to Louisiana, they said, "Derrick [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] well even though you're not married we'll give you a married allowance so you can live in town." And the parents of a girl who I'd met at Duquesne [Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] lived in Alexandria [Louisiana] and I didn't stay with them 'cause the, they knew a lady across the way that had a rooming house and I had a room, room there during--about a year that I was, that I was there. That was an interesting experience. I, I, I went to see the base commander. They complained that, you know, the bus was desegregated around the base, but when it got to the gate it stopped and black folk had to sit, move to the back. I said, "That doesn't seem to make sense." Well he said the local rules require blah, blah, blah, and I made some other, not really protests, but--. And I went to the local Presbyterian church, got on my uniform on one morning--'cause I went to the black church and again it was the same thing, you know, a lot of spirit, but very little substance. And there was no black Presbyterian church, so I went to the white church and, "Good morning, Lieutenant, how're you?" I said, "Well I came, I'd like to go to church." Said, "Oh well wait just a minute, Lieutenant." And I saw him scurrying about. He came back and he said, "Do you mind sitting in the balcony?" I said, "Does the service come up to the balcony?" He said, "Oh yeah, yeah." So, he escorted me up to the balcony, white folks sitting in the balcony gave me a wide breadth the first week. After that people came by they shook hands, you know, what have you. So, of course I pushed things. So I went to see the minister about singing in the choir, and he sputtered, "Oh we'll have to look over that blah, blah, blah, blah." The next thing I knew I had my orders to Korea (laughter). I, I might have gotten them anyhow, but my conduct probably did it. Speaker 1: The suspicion is that they got you out of there, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, got me out of there, right, so, so that's the story of how I got, got to Korea. Story_ID: 303576 Speaker 1: Are there any incidences in Korea that developed(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not racial, not racial incidents. I was appalled at how badly some of the black soldiers treated the Korean people. I said, "Dang, you get over here where these folk are totally subjugated just about, with the war [Korean War] and everything and we treating them poorly." I only saw a few incidences 'cause I was on--. Speaker 1: So, that wasn't really wide, widespread was it? Speaker 2: I, you know I don't know 'cause I really didn't, I didn't see that many. I was on an air base. I was an (UNCLEAR) for a motor vehicle thing. We had some air raids with these little planes, Korean planes, coming over trying to get down below the radar and throw some bombs over the side. Scared the hell out of me, but after a while I started having a little bit of admiration for guys who would get in those little planes. 'Cause you know the, the sky would just be filled with, with spotlights and tracer bullets and noise and I said, "Dang, do you really want to come through all that?" I'm not--(UNCLEAR)--they did any damage, but I was about--but within about a month after I got there they signed the whatever, the armistice [Korean Armistice Agreement] or what have you, so it was just a matter of putting in my, putting in my year. Story_ID: 303577 Speaker 1: So, when you got back [to the United States], you got married when you got back, right? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: You got married before you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, no that was--it was after I started law school [University of Pittsburgh School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. There's a woman who I had been writing back and forth and had become good friends and who was ready to be married. In fact, what I was really very appreciative--do I have to tell these embarrassing stories (laughter). Speaker 1: No no, you don't necessarily have to tell all of them. Speaker 2: So, she, she met me at the train and what have you and I was very appreciative because she had really been writing and all and I remember going to buy her a watch. It wasn't a ring, it was a watch and we were gonna pick a--and overnight I really had serious second thoughts and I said, "You know Jean [ph.] I think that this connotes something more serious than I'm ready for and I think that I'm really not, I'm really focused on law school and all." And you know she, she said okay. She married somebody else, and I remember at the time we were both living in Washington [D.C.]. She married this guy Joe [ph.] and we invited, Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] and I invited them to dinner and Jewel took me aside she said, "Now listen, Joe and I know that Jean still loves you and so you just behave (laughter) appropriately while she, while they're here." But, they had a good marriage and had two children and I guess he subsequently died. But again Jewel had just so much insight into, I mean, I couldn't get away with a thing you know (laughter) 'cause she could understand--. Of course I'm married to another women [Janet Dewart Bell] who also has that same kind of insight. Guess I'm attracted to these strong black women (laughter) that understand me up and down. Story_ID: 303578 Speaker 1: Now tell me about law school now. University of Pittsburgh law school [University of Pittsburgh School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] this is what 1956, '55 [1955] (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started, yeah, no I started in 1954. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When the Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision came down while I was on this cruise ship coming home [to the United States]. I didn't know it at the time, but I recognized later that I was on the way home on May 17th and I started law school that fall. Speaker 1: Did you think about the Brown decision when, in '54 [1954]? Were you thinking about that? Speaker 2: Not until, I didn't know anything about it until after I started law school, but--. Speaker 1: I mean it didn't get a lot of--. Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: It didn't have the kind of publicity and--. Speaker 2: That the fiftieth anniversary had, no not in--now in other areas it probably did, but I, you know, I didn't get--the papers probably covered it at the time, but I wasn't, I wasn't home. So, but after I started law school I got more and more interested in civil rights law and stuff like that and-- Speaker 1: What got you interested in civil rights law? Speaker 2: I guess the overall experience, some of the things that I've been telling you about and the law seemed to be the instrument for, for bringing about change, you know, and so that I was the only black in, in my class and we had--. Speaker 1: Were you the first? Speaker 2: Not the first. In fact, a guy named K. Leroy Irvis graduated the year I came, an older guy, who later went on to have a very successful career in politics, became speaker of the [Pennsylvania] House of Representatives in Pennsylvania probably responsible for saving University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] from going bankrupt, you know because it became a quasi-public institution, highly--he's still alive. I see him when I go back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. But, I would go by his little apartment and he would tell me, you know, what law school was all about, what teachers to watch out for, how to study. So, he was my sort of model, very smart guy, who also built model airplanes (laughter). Story_ID: 303579 Speaker 1: I built model airplanes when I was in Korea. We'd have these dog fights with the pilots and one day I won a plane kit or something like that 'cause totally accidentally I cut off the streamers from one of the pilots, you know, it was going around like this, so that--you know I, I didn't have any idea I wanted to make it a career, but I didn't have a FIGMO calendar in my desk drawer like many of the guys did, counting off the days until it was time for them to go home. I was, I just figured that, you know, I just figured that this is, you know, war area and what have you. I'd like to come home, but I, I, just can't, I can't worry about it. And every two weeks I'd have to go out on--couldn't shoot worth two cent, could not shoot, you know, you--officer I had this .45. I went to, to the range one day and they just shook their heads. They said, "Try to keep it in your holster (laughter)," you know. But I had to wear it on guard duty, you know, I was officer of the guard. And you have all these nineteen-year-old, eighteen-year-old guys out on guard post and you were supposed to have a password. Each of those nights I kind of put my belongings together 'cause I didn't know whether I was gonna get back or not 'cause they're nervous, they couldn't remember the password. Outside the fence, the barbwire fence, there might have been some enemy people, so you weren't supposed to use your flashlight. I decided that I would rather deal with the danger from outside than the danger from coming up on one of these guys (laughter). Forgets the password, and shoots first and ask questions later. Story_ID: 303580 Speaker 1: When you were in Korea, did you know you wanted to go to law school when you came back, I mean did you-- Speaker 2: I was pretty sure. Yeah, in fact, I applied for law school while I was in Korea and I had applications to go to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], but they wanted twenty-five dollars. I had no idea about the hierarchy of law school, none. I could have gone to Harvard, Yale, you know, I didn't, it just seemed to me they were too expensive. And I had no model to say, "Hey this--if you can get in there that's gonna make a very big difference." And I also had the thought, kind of, if I stayed at home the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] would pay for my legal education, you know, which it did, so I came out without any debt. I didn't have a job, but I came out without any, without any debt. My students, I think Justine [ph.] was a dean scholar; in other words the dean created scholarships for people who would likely go to Harvard or Yale, which are the schools that kind of tend to beat us, and Justine was one of those. So, she got, so she doesn't have the kind of debt that--a lot of my students owe 150,000 dollars. The woman who was my--Derrick Bell Fellow last year, was close to 200,000 because she got a master's [degree] before she came to law school and many of them had no desire to work at the big law firms, none. So--but I came out without any debt and I didn't have a job. I was about third in my class--. Speaker 1: Now this is around 1957? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957]. I was about third or fourth in my class. I was co-editor-in-chief of the Law Review [University of Pittsburgh Law Review]. All of my white friends started talking about this law firm and that law firm. The school sent me down to one of the biggest law firms 'cause they said well we wanna, let's, we'll talk to four or five of your top people. So, they just gave us, gave them our names and I went down, made an appointment, and the people I thought they were gonna fall out, you know, ahh. Then finally the partner, senior hiring partner said, you know, we never thought about hiring anybody black, you know. So, they called me back a week or so later and told me they weren't, they weren't ready, but we met in the council room and he introduced me to several other partners, two or three of whom had called to [Washington] D.C. and found out the federal agencies that I could have, could have worked with. So--and later my brother [Charles Bell], who was a musician, got, what did he get, I guess they paid for commission of the work that the Pittsburgh Symphony [Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra] performed 'cause the head of the hiring was also on the board of the Pittsburgh Symphony so that you know things, things work out. But I, you know, that worked out. I probably would have been very unhappy way back in the back room someplace. There's a fellow now I see when I go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], who's a partner, black guy, but the, that was, that was just too early for that. Speaker 1: So, when were you hired by the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] now that's, that's a--? Speaker 2: Right, right, almost right away because the, one of the officials came up to the law review speaker and the faculty members told him well you know this black guy he doesn't have a job. (Unclear) and the person named William [P.] Rogers who later was secretary of state said, told me about this undergraduate recruitment program and indicated that, you know, I should apply. I applied and I was accepted. Speaker 1: So, this is 19--what--. Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957]. Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], okay. Story_ID: 303581 Speaker 1: Tell us about the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. Now where were you stationed? Speaker 2: When I first went down in the fall of '57 [1957] I guess, I was in the Conscientious Objector Section, which was part of the, oh the special office that serves the, serves the, serves the attorney general, I guess. And when the civil rights law, the 1957 civil rights law [Civil Rights Act of 1957] took effect, one of its provisions created the Civil Rights Division. There had been a civil rights section and I, I made application and got a transfer over to this new division, and it was new, you know. There was an old black guy, Maceo [W.] Hubbard, who'd been there for years, very interesting guy. He used to give me a lot of good advice, some of which I took, some, some not. Maceo said--I guess we got to talking about writing recommendations for other blacks and Maceo said that, "Boy, I want you to remember when you write a recommendation for another black person you can hurt 'em, but you can't help 'em." I said, "What do you mean, Maceo?" He said, "If you say something bad about 'em that's gonna be the death knell. If you say that they're the greatest thing going, they're gonna say consider the source and pretty much ignore it," (laughter). And that has proven true any number of times. I was there about six months or so and along the line they, that's when they called me and asked, understood that I was a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and they wanted me to resign. And I talked to a lot of different people and I said you know I'm not a policymaking officer, I got a two dollar membership, I don't think I should resign. And they--I thought they were gonna fire me, but they didn't, but they moved my, literally moved my desk out in the hall and just took away my--I wasn't doing that much anyhow--but took away anything having to do with race and just gave me some busy work and I, and I left. Speaker 1: Now this is during the Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] administration, right? Speaker 2: (Nods head) And I look back now and I can see they were very nervous. The southerners who were still in charge in [U.S.] Congress they could have taken it, "Well they got this black guy who's a member of the NAACP working right in this new division," and give them a hard time. But in any case they, they weren't ready to have a hard time on anything. Story_ID: 303582 Speaker 1: But, again it worked out because when I was trying to decide whether I should stay [at the Civil Rights Division, U.S. Department of Justice] or not, I went to see Judge William [H.] Hastie. I met Hastie, I knew about this reputation, how he had quit a job in the war department [U.S. Department of War; U.S. Department of Defense] and blasted them for not trying to desegregate the services. And I told him about my situation and he said, "Well you know your friends were telling you to work from within, that's not bad, but you need to do what you feel is right." And I, what I felt was right was not to accept giving up my membership. So that when I left and I went back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and began working for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the executive director had been somebody I delivered papers to and also somebody who encouraged me all the time. And I was working--that was probably the hardest job I've ever had was that year as NAACP executive director with nobody, and a board who thought more of being, seeing this as a place of prestige rather than a place of contribution and work and what have you. But, it was in then that Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] came through and you know Thurgood and, and Hastie were good friends. Speaker 2: When did you meet Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 1: He came--it was in 1959 and he--. Speaker 2: He came to visit the--. Speaker 1: He, he came on a speaking, speaking tri- trip and I met him and Thurgood said, "Boy what's a lawyer doing in a non-lawyer job?" And I started to explain. He said, "Why don't you come on up and join me?" Well Hastie as I learned many years later had said, "You know, Thurgood, you need to hire that boy. He, he, he would be a good person." So, that's how, you know, had, you know had I taken low and said, "Yes I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll give up my membership," and stuff like that, I would have been writing these little form letters and been very unhappy about it. But, again by doing what you think is right, which is, which was not to accept that, I got another experience with working at the NAACP in Pittsburgh, and Thurgood coming through with the story that Bill Hastie had told him and getting me into a really exciting, exciting work that I probably wouldn't have gotten into without that. So, I always, you know, you're a little hesitant to tell people to jump up and confront people in authority all the time, but sometimes I think it--it doesn't always work out, but sometimes it can, and it certainly has worked in my, worked in my case. Story_ID: 303583 Speaker 1: So you went to, did you go to New York [New York]--you became part of the team of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAAP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Right, and I was, I guess I came in January of 1960 and the sit-ins started in February, February 1st, 1960. So, it was only five lawyers on the staff, Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall], Constance Motley [Constance Baker Motley], Jack Greenberg, Little Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, III]--you know his father was "Big Jim," Big Jim Nabrit [James Nabrit, Jr.]--and myself. So, it was plenty for everybody to do. But you know the exciting stuff was the sit-in cases and--. But I was always interested in school cases and I handled other cases, but mainly I gravitated toward the school cases, until I was, you know, helping to enforce Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Speaker 1: What, what school cases did you work on? Speaker 2: Probably all of them. I supervised all af- after Con, Connie Motley left--I worked as her assistant for a while, and I pretty much took over the school cases. You know, I'd get supervision from J. Greenberg who had taken over after Thurgood left, but mainly it was what Greenberg called trench warfare. You know they would resist in every little thing, so that any of the case you could file 'em and things moved very slowly. Courts weren't that anxious to push them along, so it was, it was tough. Speaker 1: Yeah, Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill] was telling us--we interviewed him and he was saying the series of school cases around Virginia-- Speaker 2: Oh right. Speaker 1: --and you know led towards Brown first of all, then I guess these challenges toward Brown. Speaker 2: There was a lot, a lot of stuff. Virginia was another place that had good lawyers, you know, and so I didn't--I knew what was going on, but I, I seldom went to Virginia 'cause you had Sam Tucker [Samuel Wilbert Tucker] and Oliver Hill and oh a couple of other guys whose names I can't remember. So, they handled the cases in good shape. Story_ID: 303584 Speaker 1: You spent some time in Mississippi, right? They had quite a--that's where the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] included Medgar Evers, Dr. Gilbert Mason [HistoryMaker Dr. Gilbert R. Mason, Sr.] down in--. Speaker 2: Gilbert Mason in Biloxi [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Amzie Moore. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know--that name sounds familiar. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in, he was the one that worked with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] later on-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --in '64, E.D. Nixon in Montgomery [Alabama] was still around. Speaker 2: No, I, I paid taxes in Mississippi for a couple of years because they knew I was there and they said, you know, and lawyers in the North decided it was easier just to pay 'em based on the salary, percentage of the salary that I earned while I was in Mississippi then to try to challenge it and what have you. So, but I spent months in, in Mississippi on, well working with Connie [Constance Baker Motley] on the college cases, the James Meredith case and then Donald Cleveland [sic. Dr. Cleveland Donald] case by which time I was working doing that. And with the school cases, we ended up spending, spending a lot of time. Speaker 1: Okay. The Cleveland case you said was a--. Speaker 2: It, it was, who was it? His name was Cleveland Donald. Speaker 1: Cleveland Donald. Speaker 2: I think it was Cleveland Donald. He was the first black to enter the law school [The University of Mississippi School of Law, Oxford, Mississippi], as I recall. Speaker 1: Yeah James Meredith. So, those were the days when every other day there was some headline coming out of Mississippi. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Did you have an assessment of--we interviewed Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] some time ago and he was very, he was sort of an anti-agitation in terms of--he says the agitation really didn't do that much in terms of people, you know, moving on their own or to even the demonstrations, it was all NAACP legal work really was the key to the civil rights victories. Do you have any thoughts on that? Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I, I have a less positive feeling about litigation I did, than I did then, and a more, a greater sense that much was done to the protest in all with the lawyers kind of being and serving as a backup rather than coming up with these test cases that would take for years and even if you won them the tendency was people didn't know what you'd won. You had to go out in the community and what have you, and if you'd done that in the first place people might have through one way or another, gotten the desegregation order that you finally got, 'cause they still had to do it because there was very little vo- you know voluntary compliance. So, no, I, I think we need more activists and fewer lawyers (laughter) on, on some of this stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you ever have a case where you had to--did, did, did you ever have to get involved with trying to get some of the civil rights leaders out of the jail and so forth that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, there was an awful lot of work done on it. I didn't do very much specifically. Usually the local lawyers would arrange for the bail with money coming from New York [New York] or wherever it came from to put up for, for bail, but I didn't--again I was kind of removed from the sit-in cases with a few exceptions and that was really not a problem in the school, in the school cases except you know indirectly if they closed down bus routes or something like that. Story_ID: 303585 Speaker 1: You worked with Constance Baker Motley. Speaker 2: When I first came to the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] introduced me to Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter] and said, "This is a good man, you work for him." Now, I didn't realize this growing split, you know, that was developing and I'd say that to Lenora Fulani who was a good friend. I said, "How do I always attract myself to people most people don't like, you know?" And Bob of course has been getting--he's another one that should be on this list, a lot of accommodations. I think he's gotten honorary degrees from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Robert Carter. Speaker 2: Robert L. Carter, right. But the--I only worked for him a month or so, but he taught me some valuable lessons. But, then when I started working with Connie, who had been there since high school, you know, not high school, since she graduated from, from law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] and probably even before. And Connie's a wonderful woman. I mean, I would go with her on the Meredith [James Meredith] case in the South and what have you, some of these other cases and I had this tall, striking distinguished black woman obviously knew more about the law than these highly paid white guys. It was, it was something. The court room would be filled with black folk, you know. Who win, lose, or draw they were so proud to see a black person speaking up, holding their own with the judge, with the, with the white attorneys. It was, it was quite, quite an experience. And, and Motley is just fierce in terms of holding on to it. Once she gets on a case, nothing's gonna turn her around. She is just determined, and that's how her career is, is reflective of that. Most of it's in, in her biography and she worried everybody to death about facts and what happened here. "Don't you recognize so and so in this picture?" I can't remember. I said, "Connie I can't recognized everybody." I need to get in touch with her because I gather she's had some health problems recently, but quite a, quite a woman. She, she really, she really--she would have been and so appropriate if she had followed Thurgood on the [U.S.] Supreme Court. It would have been a wonderful, wonderful choice. But, we can't focus on what might have, what might have been. Connie was probably my closest working associate in my years at the Legal Defense Fund. After she left, I was pretty much on my own. The staff started growing a little bit. I guess I worked with [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers when he first got out of law school. He spent a year there. And later he went to Charlotte [North Carolina] and started, you know, a very successful practice. Of course he had his house bombed a couple of times, but I remember he bought this summer home down just across the border into South Carolina. It's sort of a large gated community, and we were driving back from Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] where I'd taught for the summer and he invited us to come by this place and I had to go past the guards and all these rolling hills and everything and we finally come up to this house, get out of the car, and there was a parking garage and not one, but two Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] sitting there. Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] turned to me and she said, "Look at those cars. Look at the--would you stop referring to his man as your protege (laughter). He's done a lot better than you have." Story_ID: 303586 Speaker 1: Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] and I have had difficulties on the school issues and things like that. But, as you said earlier I think even the committed to the bone school integrationists admit now that it didn't work. It didn't work, you know, people say 'cause it wasn't tried. Well, that's, that's partly true, but what we didn't recognize and this is quoting Carter, Judge Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter] again, is that we didn't recognize that segregation was not the evil. It was burdensome, it was embarrassing, it was humiliating, it was bad. And we focused on that with the idea that you could get rid of those signs of you could get rid of laws that required segregation. People could be chosen, what did King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] say, "By the content of their character and not the color of their skin." But the--Carter said that we recognized later that segregation was only a manifestation of the evil. The real evil was as Carter would put it, white superiority and whites give up an awful lot to maintain that sense that I might not have much, but I'm better than those guys, you see. And instead the efforts to try to get them to join have been made--King was working on that at the time of his death--may have been responsible for this death as far as we know. The populist movement that was what they, they were trying to do, and it still needs to be done and as we see by this election there's a lot to be, a lot, a lot of work to be done. But the--I just thought that you know this is the way we could desegregate the schools, kids would learn, start learning together. They would move beyond these racist groups; that didn't happen. It wasn't likely to, to happen. I have suggested in this new book 'Silent Covenants[: Brown v. Board of Education and the Unfulfilled Hopes for Racial Reform,' Derrick Bell] that we might have been better off--we would have been very unhappy at the time, black people would have been unhappy if the court had said we're not gonna strike down separate but equal, but rather we are going for the first time enforce the equal part. You have enforced the separate part, but you haven't enforced the equal part, and we are going to strictly do that. Now, we would have been disappointed, the white lawyers in the South would have been disappointed, but they would not, it would not have been like a red flag because the politicians took that desegregation order and just used that to get into office, to stay into office, and do almost nothing else. That we're gonna defend segregation, segregation today, segregation tomorrow, segregation for, forever. Once the court [U.S. Supreme Court] had handed down the decision, that's all they could do because [U.S.] Congress didn't support them, the White House didn't support them, so we, we, we're disappointed about the with all deliberate speed decision in 1955 which the southerners took as never. "We got 'em." And they did you see. We kept struggling on and when I started handling cases we finally got orders. They couldn't evade. They tried it, they, for years evaded, they avoided what have you. They couldn't do that anymore. So, what did they do? They closed the black schools. They fired the black teachers and principals, maybe with one or two exceptions. The black schools even in their inadequacy, in all the ways that they were inadequate were the meeting places you see. Education is not dependent totally on what kind of school building you're going to, it's what kind of encouragement, what kind of motivation, what kind of models do you have. Even the bad black teacher a kid could sit back and say damn that's a bad teacher, but if he's black and he can be a teacher I can be a teacher too, and all that got lost. And they didn't send our kids to any school, they sent our kids to the bad, to the worst of the white schools. And even that wasn't enough for many whites. They moved. They put their kids in private schools. We ended up, many of those desegregation orders were set aside because kids were being assigned from one back school to what had been a white school, but was now almost as black as the ones that they were coming from you see and with the whites going there with the money in terms of property taxes and stuff like that. So in many areas today, fifty years later, the black kids' education situation is, is as bad as it was and sometimes worse you see so that--. 'Cause it's not that controlled content of the curriculum. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. I mean, you know, the, all, the principal all they had to do is keep order. The fact that they were teaching the kids or not teaching the kids and some of them were awful. There's no, you know you can't deny what it was, but an awful lot of those teachers there was the relationship with parents that we, that we lost when, when you--. Parents didn't wanna go clear across town. They, they were, you know fearful. How, how do you act with that. They hope the kids were gonna get a better education. Some did, but many, many did not. So when I got to--you know I handled all those cases, I supervised all those cases (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Over three hundred cases you've dealt with, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know. Story_ID: 303587 Speaker 1: I think the marriage [to Jewel Hairston Bell] sometimes was shaken and the kids didn't get the attention they, they deserved, but I couldn't take those kids on, on trips to the South. It wasn't safe and, but I thought, you know, I was doing God's work. I mean I was, I was with Medgar [Medgar Evers] the weekend before he was killed, and we were going from community--I mean, he was such a beloved figure. And Myrlie Evers should be also on your list if she's not. She's a wonderful woman. And, and I said, "You know we got all this stuff to do, we're down here working on these cases maybe I should stay for the weekend." He said, "Derrick [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], no go on home to your wife and kids in Atlanta [Georgia]." Tuesday night, I went home that weekend, Tuesday night they called and said Medgar, Medgar had been killed. So, it wasn't a place you could take your kids to, but the--we still thought we were doing it. Story_ID: 303588 Speaker 1: And when, as I started to say when I finally got to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and had a chance to step back from it, 'cause you know like a soldier in the battle you been fighting what you think is the enemy and you don't have time to step back. I had time to sit back and reflect. It just seemed to me that we assumed incorrectly that integrating the schools would provide the same education for black kids that the white kids were getting. In many instances, the white kids weren't getting that good education you see and--. Speaker 2: That's actually true. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: The stories of the white students in the State of Mississippi I think there was one stat from World War II [WWII] that says the scores of black students in Ohio were higher than-- Speaker 1: Yeah they were. Speaker 2: --anybody-- Speaker 1: In Mississippi, right. Speaker 2: --in Mississippi, you know, they just didn't have the-- Speaker 1: No. So that the--. Speaker 2: --greatest schools. Speaker 1: So, I guess I, it got about 1976. I guess I came in 1969 writing what have you and I wrote this article serving two masters from the biblical thing about you can't serve one and serve the other. Speaker 2: This was in '66 [1966]? Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 2: In '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: There was an article in The Yale Law Journal--and I detailed how I thought we were serving our ideals for integration, but we were not serving the parental, our client's interest in education 'cause we could, we, we just put them together. We fig- figured integration was effective education and, and it wasn't you see. One of the things now is that the lawyers are pretty much out of it, and the educators are moving back into it and even in places like New York [New York] with inadequate funding, there are some schools that are really doing extremely well, the kids in them, so, 'cause they're now focusing on what is it that we need to do to provide the development, the motivation that is the essence of learning. How do we get parents involved, if it's a single parent who's working or not working, you know? Speaker 2: So, the, the real--you ever think that maybe the real failure in those times was not necessarily what you all were doing in terms of desegregation, but the, that there should have been another front somewhere, you know, another group of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --people working on educational content and trying to ensure that we still had control in those schools or some control. Speaker 1: No, there, there wasn't. Speaker 2: I don't see how-. Speaker 1: How you could do it 'cause the resources were, you know, pushed and limited as it was. How you would do that I'm not sure. You know Jean Fairfax, I got all kinds of names for you. Jean is retired in, in Phoenix [Arizona], and Jean is eighty-two, I think, something like that, but still very active. She had worked with American Friends Service Commission [American Friends Service Committee]. She did an awful lot of work with the, with the school--is it Prince Edward County in Virginia where they closed the schools for two or three years, and she worked trying to find other schools for the kids to go to and she then, she joined the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] doing the same kind of work, and she had that sense that we had to be concerned not simply with getting orders, but what is happening in the black communities. And she, she and her sister took on a black school out in Phoenix promising to send everybody to college that finished high school, and she still worked various -and sundry, so Jean Fairfax, you gotta add her (laughter), add her to the list. Story_ID: 303589 Speaker 1: But had the, had the federal government passed down a decree that, that would, would--say they passed down a decree that now the schools have to be fair, but they don't have to be equal, but they don't have to be integrated or, or-- Speaker 2: Well that's-- Speaker 1: --had they done that would-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --would, could, how could such a thing be enforced in the South with the power structure and the way it was in those days? Speaker 2: Well I think that, you see there were a number of states, not the Deep South, and I need to get the list, that even about 1950 started appropriating money to equalize black schools. Now, they were doing it to keep segre- to keep desegregation away because the court, these cases were all moving up and there was understandable fear that that's what the court was going to do and there was not resistance to that. So, if the court had said these plaintiffs want us to desegregate the schools we're not going to do that now, but we are going to enforce the equal partners, separate but equal in the following ways. We're gonna require all schools, white or black, to be brought up to some norm that will have studies, so white, because white schools even though they were clearly superior still had deficiencies because you had to spend some on the other black schools, so if you, you said all of these schools had to be brought up to a standard, if you said that you had to allow the black community to put people on the school board in commensurate with their num- their percentages in the community and if you would appointed interracial monitoring committees that had to report back to the judge any kind of hanky panky and the judge had to issue orders to deal with that, that would have been a much different thing. See as it, as it was that the feeling in the South was so strong against this thing. I mean, white people couldn't, couldn't stand up and say I'm for integration. Justice Black [Hugo Black], you know the pride of Alabama, after he signed on to that decision he went home he was, you know, just an outcast, you know. He went to his old tennis club and was having lunch after playing tennis and people stood up and booed and walked, and many of them walked out. Now this is not poor white trash. This is the elite, you know, so that the desegregation has triggered this kind of thing in a way that ordered them equalized or not. Now that didn't remove the seg- the, the, the part about segregation, the humiliation or what have you, but I think that would have come on its own 'cause most of the schools couldn't afford two sets of equal schools and the integration might have come in ways with blacks on the school board influencing it, so it wasn't of the character that we were talking about earlier. Story_ID: 303590 Speaker 1: --We were saying off-camera that seg- that education was the weak link in the segregation chain. Can you explain that? Speaker 2: You know the, when they started this design and I, I really should say something else, that in the early '30s [1930s], toward the mid-'30s [1930s] there was a lot of back and fourth among NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], other civil rights leaders about what to do. That was the heart of the depression. Black people weren't getting a fair share of, of the New Deal programs, the lynching was going on, the segregation or what have you, condition of schools. And, and people like Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], Ralph Bunche, several others felt that we needed to develop the economic model, business what have you, and but many of the others felt that we needed to go to court and win rights of equality, racial equality and that's what won, won out and the, and that's where this whole program began. Now, obviously just in recent talks, not very popular, that while we have been complaining about how could so many white people vote for Bush [President George Walker Bush] against their interest, how could they do that, well there's a lot of writers that suggest that we think it was against their interest and in some ways it was, but they, what their real interest was, was doing something that relieved their sense of, of, of, of exposure, of, of lack of power, of powerlessness, and the, to identify with the person in charge who--I, I call Bush sort of folksy whiteness, I mean he wasn't from a you know, he went to school, but he didn't talk like he gone to anybody's college and he, he never made, he never admitted a mistake, you know, and so people oh yeah and plus he was, he was a God-fearing man, you know been saved again, you know. And so there was an attraction to who should have been an enemy, not much different than the attraction some slaves had to their masters. It wasn't they really loved the masters, but when survival is on the line, you do whatever it takes to survive. "Massa we sick," you know, kind of thing. That's what the, some of the Jews in Germany dressed like the Gestapo, tried to walk like him. You know, survival. The hostage--there is a name for what happens with hostages when they, they start falling in love with the people who took them prisoner [Stockholm syndrome], you see. Well this is another level of that kind of thing where you're, you're, you don't feel good about yourself. You, you don't know whether your job's gonna be outsourced or not. You have all of these things over which you don't have any control and the tendency is to identify even though those policies are horrendously against you for identifying with that person. I'm suggesting that given the hostility of the courts going all the way back to black people and their interest, was there something in those who pushed for going to get equality in the courts something like the reasons that the white folk, and some blacks and Hispanics voted for Bush you see. Now that's not been popular, but most of -my stuff is not pop- people have to think about it (laughter) for a while. I have to think about it for a while. But, you know why beat a dead horse. This is -over, da da da, but--'cause the problem is if we did it before we can do, we might do it again. Story_ID: 303591 Speaker 1: We have to figure out what it is as you either as individuals or as groups do that is, is truly effective rather than pseudo-effective. I mean it's, the truth can scare the hell out of you, but it could also enlighten you if you keep struggling for the truth. That was Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] problem. He kept trying to tell the truth. Now, his views changed. He wrote when he resigned from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] the second time when they wanted, this was during the same kind of fight, they wanted him to submit his editorials to them for review to the board. Well he said, "I can't do that." And in his letter he said, "I have not always been right, but I have always been sincere." See that's, that's the, that's what we, we need to get, and that's what we didn't do on, on and so we didn't think through and maybe we couldn't given those situations, but it's that the years later, Larry [Crowe], and I still hear people at these conferences and things talking about Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was a great decision. Of course we still have a lot of work to do. Now wait a minute, now that's an oxymoron if you ever, and yet you would hear it again and again, Brown was a great decision, but we have a lot of work to do. Now, I'm all for celebrating the courage and, and the, and the, and the risk of the parents and their children who listened to us and undertook those school cases. I think even the lawyers are entitled to some credit for keeping pushing, keeping pushing until they got to, to Brown. But, Brown would not have happened it seems to me but for the fact that we were facing Russia [Soviet Union] in this Cold War, the Russians and these other Communist countries were making hay reporting to these emerging third world people, most of them were not white, about all of the segregation. They were lynching and everything going on. You don't wanna go that way and, and the brief for the government was filled with talk about how bad segregation was in terms of our foreign policy you see, so, plus that was in the McCarthy [Senator Joseph McCarthy] era wasn't it? We were afraid of communists under ever, every bed. Speaker 2: So, yeah McCarthy was just, they just slammed the door on him before-- Speaker 1: That's right and-- Speaker 2: --and they were trying to-- Speaker 1: --and the decision, so that the court doesn't mention either the foreign policy or subversion, but they had to know about it. Some of the letters indicated that they, they were concerned about it, you see. So, we got that decision the way we got every positive civil rights policy from the get go. Emancipation Proclamation is the 19th century equivalent. When did Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] sign it? We need to recognize that signing it was gonna help him win the war [Civil War], and it did, you see. So, Brown was signed 'cause it was gonna improve our foreign policy. It was gonna indicate a promise to black folk that the country really cares about them. But, within the year when that other decision came down, we got the other part of interest convergence and that is when white leadership recognizes that when we are granted it's co- it's gonna cost too much, gonna cause a lot of hostility. They pull it back, right, that's affirmative action, right. When we were rioting in the streets, how did I get to be the first black at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], 'cause I'm the first black good enough, hell no. I was the first black 'cause I came along at the right time you see, and, and, and I got hired. And trying to get the second person hired was tough, you see, and that's why a lot of folk got, got, got hired. But now affirmative action is almost non-existent, and the, and I guess when you (unclear) so the thing about it is try to learn from these fifty years and not just repeat the same launchers about well it was a great decision. Well, it wasn't a great decision. We thought so then, we all thought so, so--but unless we recognize what it wasn't we, we, we may be seeking something similar. Story_ID: 303592 Speaker 1: Some of the questions that intrigue me that the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] is often portrayed in movies as being heroic during this period of time and in terms of-- In the '60s [1960s] we have like Burke Marshall, John Doar, I think they have Louis Martin in [Washington] D.C. in the justice department, I mean, what role has the justice department played in the struggle in the South, I mean what's your assessment? Speaker 2: When it came down to it, they, they, they functioned when they had to. They very, very much worried about the politics of the, of the thing. John Doar came then, good guy, but he was also, you know, working for the government. So, on the one hand he's committed, he pushed and what have you, but we would go to these meetings at the White House [Washington, D.C.] when I went back and I was working with the Health, Education and Welfare [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], go to meet with some of the White House aides and would be coming back in one of the limousines and "Well you having fun, Derrick [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.]?" "No, John I'm not having fun." You know he saw this as a great, great game. I remember when we, I foolishly tried to desegregate Mississippi schools, and the first one to be desegregated was up in the, up in the country. And we got these people to sign this petition that they wanted and then people started losing their jobs, mortgages being foreclosed, people's homes being shot through and stuff like that, and by the time the order came, it was supposed to be for school desegregation, most of the people pulled out, couldn't find the first grade children 'cause remember it was gonna be one of those greater year plans. We ran into one man had his children out in the fields, he was all ready that morning and John Doar had finally come down and had the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] with him and the man said he was just afraid. You know he was crying, Jean Fairfax was crying and tears were running down my face in that, in that hot sun. We recognized these people just were afraid you see and I said, "Damn Bill how could you subject these folks to this?" I tell the story all the time about Mrs. McDougall [ph.], this old woman lived in this (unclear) colony, which was sort of a black community where people would own their own land for a long time. It wasn't probably the best land, but it was theirs, and I asked what her one evening walking up the road, but, you know, sons losing their jobs in town, this happening, the house being shot through. I said, "Mrs. McDougall how, how do you do it? How do you keep doing this?" She said, "Derrick I can't speak for the others, but I'm an old woman. I lives to harass white folks." And I've never forgotten that. That--it didn't mean that she had guns to shoot 'em or could even defend herself, but just her stance she saw was a harassment that kept her going, and that's what I think kept a lot of folk going. Story_ID: 303593 Speaker 1: And, I guess the, the great challenge today is to kind of recognize where we are, 'cause our, our situation is, it's not good. Oh, I'm doing fine I think, you know, but if you look at the statistics in, in New York City [New York, New York] half the black men from sixteen to sixty-four are unemployed. What do you do in New York City when you're unemployed? We got more blacks in prison than we got. Most of the people going to prison are black and, and even in the North, so you know what it's like in the, in the South. The, the infant mortality rate, the, the out of wedlock burst. Now they're going down, but there are still a lot. My heart goes out when I see the young women, girls really, with these strollers struggling to get on the subway. I help them up and down the stairs when I see 'em, and no man, no place, no rent, no place and here this baby that she had at sixteen or seventeen often by these guys who see their roles as impregnating as many women as they can. So, there's a, a breakdown in, in, in so much. And with this administration [President George Walker Bush], I'm very concerned that the, the stuff that they're pulling off in Iraq, this stuff is gonna start coming back on them, so even the white folk who are patriotic and what have you are gonna start raising questions and as slick as their political operatives are I would not be surprised to see them coming up with something that shifts the blame from themselves to the traditional scapegoats. And that's us. And I don't know what form that would take or what have you. It's already taken on that form, you know, that, that was the Willie Horton for the first Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. Covered a multitude of sins 'cause this one guy had screwed up, and but that it was used in a way that showed this is the race that we're protecting you from. So, that the great challenge it seems to me is how to even live your life individually or to the extent that you can influence oother groups. To do stuff that is not the equivalent of what white folk did when they (unclear). In other words, be so concerned about survival and making it, survival at this level, making it at this level that you support policies and people behind those policies that you really should be challenging. Story_ID: 303594 Speaker 1: How did you feel about '64 [1964] when the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteers were down in Mississippi and they formed the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP]. That's the one that Fannie Lou Hamer was in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and all that group with to Atlantic City [New Jersey] for the convention [1964 Democratic National Convention]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and basically their dream was sort of shattered in Atlantic City; they didn't get what they thought they were going to get--they didn't get seats after, after they did everything-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they thought they were supposed to do. Do you have any comments on that? Speaker 2: Well, they, they had the right idea and we need to get the right idea again because the fact is if the truth be told the same questions we're raising about why did white people support Bush [President George Walker Bush], you might ask why did black people support the Democrats, 'cause they were opposed to Bush, but what were they offering? What were they, what, what understanding were they, were they conveying. They didn't talk about race, right. They didn't talk about race 'cause they wanted to get the white folks' vote, which they could get and that so we repeated the same kind of thing with Gore [Al Gore] in 2004 with, with Kerry [John Kerry]. A person who did not, it was like either he didn't know or that he was under wraps. You can't talk about this. You can talk about this. You can talk about that and didn't--I mean I gather this, this statement he made when he thought his microphone was off about these are the biggest damn crooks I've ever saw in my life. That should have been his motto and he should have just stuck to it and, and let me give you the details about what, what kind of crook and so forth and just hammered away, hammered away at that. Couldn't have lost more votes than he, than he lost. Maybe, he could. But if you're gonna go down like Dukakis [Michael Dukakis] shunning Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]--might not have been able to win with Jesse Jackson, but at least he would have an excuse for how bad he lost, you know (laughter). And that, that it seems to me is the, is the need to do what your heart tells you to do. It may not always be right, but it will always be sincere to say what--. Story_ID: 303595 Speaker 1: Now you left the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] in '66 [1966] and you-- Speaker 2: I went back to the government and- Speaker 1: You worked for--? Speaker 2: --and I was the deputy director for civil rights at HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I did it 'cause I think I was ready for a change and I had some little disagreements with Jack Greenberg, but nothing that was you know public and what have you. And I thought that the administration [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] would have civil rights through the government through the use of fund cutoffs and this was, was where the action was going to happen. And to some extent it did, more due to threat than actually cutting off, cutting off funds, which they did very, very infrequently. But, by that time I was also interested in teaching and I got this call from, gee I've forgotten his name a guy named Levine [ph.] out of USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] saying that he'd gotten this money from government to set up this center to serve the Legal Aid Society people and what have you, give them training, set up various things and asked me did I want to be a director. I said, "Well I'm really interested in teaching." So he got back in touch with me and said, "Well, we'll make you an adjunct professor of law." I, I didn't know what that meant. I was just a part-time teacher, but I got, I took the job and worked very hard and did like your friend Todd [ph.], I started filing suits against the city (laughter) and what have you. USC was not pleased. In fact, they moved the Western Center [Western Center on Law and Poverty, Los Angeles, California] offices out of there, you know, shortly after I left. But, I did go to faculty meetings. I did go to lunch with some of these guys. I knew what they talked about and all. So, when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and the riots came, then all of these institutions decided well maybe we should have somebody black, or one or two people black. And after not getting any responses, positive responses to my expressions of interest often conveyed by major faculty people, I, I had offers or indications of offers from about eight major schools. All these schools and USC wanted me to stay there. They hadn't said anything about staying joining the facul- faculty. Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], and all, you know suddenly-- and I decided I came back I had a nice visit at Harvard. I said, "Well everybody thinks it's the best school, I guess I'll come here," and that's how I, that's how I got into teaching. Story_ID: 303596 Speaker 1: Now, what's your assessment of why, why you? I mean, of all the people, and I mean, I'm not diminishing you, but I'm just saying like what's your assessment of why you were the one that they were pursuing? Do you think they were pursuing numerous people and just trying to figure out who they could get (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, oh yeah I think that's right and I think that they had people at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] that they respected that they could, they could ask them about me and I could hear the questions now, well does he, does he run after the white women (laughter), you know. Does he use that MF word in the classroom, you know, I don't know what they said. The then acting, I guess maybe it was just a senior faculty member, Albert Sacks would come to the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] conferences that they held down in Airy house in Virginia, and I met him there and we would chat and what have you. And I think, I think Al Sacks had a lot to do with my being hired. So, it was just, it was just contacts, you know, that, that said--and plus I'm mild mannered, I'm not a big militant. I think my hair was a lot longer at that, in those days, but the--they said you know we, you're an older person, I guess I was thirty-eight, and they said we can give you a two-year appointment as a lecture in law and then make a tenure decision. They would bring in the white guy who had been in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] a number of years on the same, same basis and they said, what we want you to do is develop a civil rights course and you know work with the black students, no writing obligations. Well, I came in to write, you know, and so I, I started developing the civil rights course and what have you and, but I got tired of black kids saying, black students saying, "Well we're happy to have Professor Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], but when we gonna have a real black law teacher, somebody teaching in the traditional curriculum, not civil rights," which is sort of off to the side in their view and in, in the school's view too, I guess. And, (cough) excuse me, so I vo- volunteered to teach criminal law. Never practiced criminal law, of course they hadn't practiced criminal law either, but I did that for a year and then I came up for tenure and the head of the committee sat down with me and said, "Well the civil rights course is going very well, but the criminal law is a little shaky. We think maybe you should extend for another year and then we'll, we'll look at the tenure thing." And I talked to Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] about it, she said, "Listen, they need--Harvard needs you more than you need Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]." And she was right, and so I told them, listen I had a two-year appointment, I've done what I was supposed to do in two years, done the best I could, now it's your turn. So, Lord knows what happened in that faculty meeting, but the dean finally came down and said, "Well we're happy to tell you that you got tenure." And so I said, very good. I never shall forget the dean at--by that time Al Sacks was the dean, I think, and he invited me to his house for dinner, several other faculty members and I'm standing there with them and I said, "Well you guys now it can be told and I said that if I was able to get tenure I was gonna do what I've been wanting to do and I've already put in my order for a white Cadillac convertible with red upholstery," (laughter). People's faces (laughter). I had no intention of buying, but I don't know, the devil made me say it (laughter). I said no, no I'm, I'm kidding. But, a Cadillac in, in Cambridge [Massachusetts] is a BMW, of course, and I did get a BMW before they were really popular and stuff. But, it was--those were good, those were good years. It was, it was a struggle, but as I said Jewel was very supportive. I came to like students, you know, and my teaching was not all that great, but I was determined I was gonna be a better, better teacher and it did give me a chance to write and I, I would say now you know I'm seventy-four, had some health issues, but as long as my health stays okay I'm gonna keep at it because I, I think one of the most fortunate things could have happened to a person is to be in a job that gives you so much that if you came into a whole lot of money you'd keep doing it, and that's, you know, that's my situation (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did-- Story_ID: 303597 Speaker 1: Did you write your textbook, the first one 'Race'-- Speaker 2: 'Race, Racism and American Law' [Derrick Bell]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Did you write that at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: That was the--the first one came out in 1973. Speaker 1: Right. That is still-- Speaker 2: And it's--. Speaker 1: --a standard textbook. What is it-- Speaker 2: Yeah--. Speaker 1: --the fifth edition now? Speaker 2: The fifth. It came out, the fifth edition came out last year and I, I would have never imaged that this book would be still useful to people thirty years later. Speaker 1: That's a history tour de force of civil rights (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's the same thing--it's not looking at what other folks are doing, but now you know what is that you can bring to this out of your experience and that's always been my kind of model is to do what you think and if people like it okay, if they don't like it's still--that's why I like Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] statement, "I may not have, I may not have always been right, been right, but I've always been sincere." And that's--there goes our dean here (laughter). It, it stood me in theory (unclear) the books, the trade books. 'Faces at the Bottom of the Well[: The Permanence Of Racism,' Derrick Bell] has sold 100,000, 150,000, copies. Now by bestseller standards that's nothing, but for a serious book of kind of nonfiction/fiction that was published twelve years ago you know, I'm, I'm amazed, I'm, I just could not have--. Speaker 1: Your, your writings are of two types; you got the textbooks and you got like, you have--. Speaker 2: And these kind of quasi fictional-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but--. Speaker 2: --in which--but they, they all tended to convey lessons and somebody wrote a piece that I'm really pleased in which he likens my stuff to biblical parables, you know. Now, I call them allegories and all and he makes a distinction between allegories and parables. Jesus' parables were intended to change the dynamic, to teach a lesson by upsetting what people generally think. The, the, the Good Samaritan. The Samaritans were hated by Jews. You know they were (unclear) and had the priest pass by on the other side. They had the Pharisee pass by on the other side and had the Samaritans stop and do all, all of this. It really, it teaches by shock almost and that's what I didn't, I had not realized any connection, but I think that that's what, you know my space traders story ['The Space Traders,' Derrick Bell], which is still the most popular of all, all of them. I don't think it's the best, but I, it certainly is the most popular. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, yeah that is a popular one and I think its popularity has increased by the television-- Speaker 2: By that yeah. Speaker 1: --pr- production-- Speaker 2: Production. Speaker 1: --which is--how are the people gonna find it 'cause they don't know how--. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it is available. It's, it's, it's under the name of Cosmic Slop. Speaker 1: Right and who would guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, because that was the, what was it the Parliament's [Parliament Funkadelic] George--. Speaker 1: Yeah George Clinton. Speaker 2: George Clinton. Speaker 1: Par- Parliament-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's-- Speaker 1: --Funkadelic-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --album named 'Cosmic Slop.' Speaker 2: And the, the two brothers-- Speaker 1: Singletons, right?-- Speaker 2: No, not Singleton, no the other, oh well, oh. Speaker 1: If it's not the Singleton's it would be-- Speaker 2: Isn't that amazing? Speaker 1: Hudlin. Speaker 2: Hudlin, the Hudlin brothers, thank you very much. Speaker 1: The Hudlin brothers, from Illinois-- Speaker 2: The Hudlin brothers did, did that. They directed--Reginald [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin] and Warrington [Warrington Hudlin]. Speaker 1: Warrington Hudlin, yeah right. Speaker 2: See with a little help I can (laughter). Speaker 1: I was told this morning, that it was the Singletons by Bernice Baines Brown [ph.] on the phone. She thought it was the Singletons (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh she's wrong (laughter), Oh she's- Speaker 1: So it's the Hudlins. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Hudlins. Speaker 1: And it's in the--this guy name Henry McGhee whose father was a longtime teacher, and a longtime friend of mine who runs the video section at Time Warner and whenever I, people ask me to send them a copy for a course or something and I write and say could you send me six more copies, and he, he sends six more copies for me. But, it's Hank McGhee, M-C-G-H-E-E. Speaker 2: 'Cause I, you know, I, I know people. I've used it myself for educational pur- purposes and I used to use it to train VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] volunteers, you know. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know people come away--I know, I remember writing it because I was teaching this course, and students could see how blacks' rights and interests could be sacrificed in order to get to some other situ- that's the [U.S.] Constitution, right? That's the Hayes-Tilden Compromise [Compromise of 1877]. Story_ID: 303598 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you synopsize the story [Hayes-Tilden Compromise; Compromise of 1877] for us, just briefly for somebody--. Speaker 2: You know the framers, some of them were very much antislavery, but they felt that they had to have the southern states and the southerners were not going to go for this giving up slavery. They said how can you develop a country to protect property and not protect our property and slaves, and nobody had an answer to that. So, you ended up with three definite provisions protecting slavery, and historians have found another ten or twelve that indirectly protected slavery. So, the country was able to get started at the sacrifice of black rights, you see. The Emancipation Proclamation is the same thing. As I said earlier, Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] didn't, Lincoln wanted to save the union and when he learned that by ending slavery, at least with this Emancipation Proclamation he would further that end; that's when he did it. Story_ID: 303599 Speaker 1: Yeah can you synopsize the story for us ['The Space Traders,' Derrick Bell]. What happens? This is like science fiction. This is something that you would hardly expect a law professor to write (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact what's the book of black science fiction, 'Dark Matter[: A Century of Speculative Fiction from the African Diaspora,' ed. Sheree Renee Thomas] which got published in that--but as I was saying the students could see how these things happened in the 19th century where black rights were sacrificed, but they couldn't imagine that that could happen again. So, I, I wrote an early draft of that story and I read it to them and there was silence. I said, "What do you think?" And they said, nobody said anything. So, I said, "Well come on guys," you know do you know this could, could--finally the student said, "But that's really, this, this is kind of powerful. We, we, we need some time to think about this one." Speaker 1: Just to, just to be for those who are watching and never seen it. Space (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The space--. Speaker 1: --travelers come from plantet--. Speaker 2: Yeah they come and, and suggest that-in huge ships, obviously with advanced technology and they indicate they're not here to destroy the earth, they're here for trade and they had brought gold in these ships to pay off all of America's debts. They brought chemicals that clean up the environment. They brought the safe nuclear engine and fuel that will negate our, our loss of fossil fuels, and they're gonna leave all of this. It's gonna guarantee hundred years of, you know, very profitable successful country. And they're leaving and they want, the only thing they want in return is to take away all black people, all those who are on birth certificates, passports, other official--(unclear)--are listed as black. And of course, this causes a lot of debate and I look at various groups in the story who might have responded one way or the, or the other. Speaker 1: And they never really tell you why, at least they don't (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, 'cause they, the, the leader says, "Well why, no, that's just our business; you guys just have to decide whether you wanna do this trade." And the politicians, the conservative politicians see it as in their interest to get rid of all these welfare people, all the race stuff and blah, blah, blah and would be able to go merrily along and the--so the politicians get into--put, put the matter to a vote, a referendum and the--whenever black rights are subjected to referendum they go down, almost without exception, and this is no exception and then the vote comes out to seventy to thirty in favor of the trade so that on the day designated it turned out to be the last Martin Luther King holiday that the country will observe. Blacks are gathered on the beaches with these great ships just off shore and the space traders take over and order blacks to strip to, down to all but a single undergarment and then their arms are linked by slender chains and then slowly but surely black people leave the new world as their forbearers had arrived. Now, there was a part two that's in my book 'Gospel Choirs[: Psalms of Survival on an Alien Land Called Home,' Derrick Bell] and it was supposed to be on that series ['Cosmic Slop'], but the series got cancelled after, after the first three, after the first three broadcasts, all of which were very powerful. Speaker 1: Yeah, those were, it was, it was a series of short (simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Short about thirty minute-- Speaker 1: Yeah, pieces. Speaker 2: --pieces. Speaker 1: Three thirty minute pieces of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a show I think and they were hosted by-- Speaker 2: George-- Speaker 1: --George Clinton-- Speaker 2: Clinton, right. Speaker 1: --as sort of a twilight zone, yeah. Speaker 2: And the, the one, I'm bad again with I think Ellis [Trey Ellis]--what's Ellis' first name? Speaker 1: Oh no, no, he's a journalist. This la- guy's last name is Ellis and, but the second story that I published in 'Gospel Choirs: Psalms of Survival on an Alien Land Called Home' [Derrick Bell], which didn't sell, and never sold nearly as well as 'Faces at the Bottom of the Well[: The Permanence of Racism,' Derrick Bell]. In fact, in that one I have, it's after the ships have taken off and the space traders turn out to be friendly and they, they recognize how blacks have been treated here, the humanity that we have been able to persevere and they want us to bring those qualities to their country and, but they've noticed through their listening devices and all that people miss home, you know, and they really want to go back. Meanwhile, the word has come up that turmoil is happening in, back in the country, that all hell has broken loose. The money and all was, has been looted, you know, folks are in bad shape and they want blacks to come back and so that the space traders tell us that and one person, I'm blocking on the character's name in, in the, in the, the conservative guy, Golightly [Gleason Golightly] urges that we return, that this is our country too, that we fought for it and blah, blah, blah, this is our home and my other character Geneva Crenshaw said no, you know, we've had enough, we need to go on and see what the, will happen in this new country. And it's not resolved because the blacks can't make up their minds and what have you, but that was going to be the second, the second phase of the, of the, of the story. And the Hudlins [Warrington Hudlin and HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin] still think that they may able to, but I haven't heard from them for, for quite a while on it, but they still think it's a potential effective thing. Story_ID: 303600 Speaker 1: 'Space Traders' [Derrick Bell] is part of a series of books, right, of fiction pieces (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the series-- Speaker 1: Not 'Space Traders,' but the-- Speaker 2: It's, it's-- Speaker 1: --'Faces at the Bottom of the Well[: The Permanence of Racism,' Derrick Bell] -- Speaker 2: Yeah, there actually were four books and it began with an opportunity that I had left Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to go become dean at Oregon [University of Oregon School of Law, Eugene, Oregon] and they got in touch and said they wanted me to write the foreword for the new issue. Now, there are eight issues a year. The first issue that comes out in early November contains a review of all the [U.S.] Supreme Court, major Supreme Court cases. Speaker 1: -This is the issue of the -- Speaker 2: Of the Har, of the Harvard Law Review. Speaker 1: Harvard Law Review. Speaker 2: But the, it opens with a foreword written by, you know, one of the great acknowledged legal intellectuals and I, you know, I had no thought that that was, that I would ever be offered that and I kid a black woman, one of my former students, that she had threatened them and that's what got them to do it. She denies it, but I, I think--in any event they asked me to do it and I thought, what's that old spiritual sinner, please don't let this harvest pass, please don't let this harvest pass (singing), and I thought, you know, this is an opportunity to write about race and bring all of your experience and insight you have to it and it just seemed to me that I could talk about cases, but cases didn't, didn't have meaning for me as far as what I thought race in America was all about. And I don't know how to transition, went to a series of stories, but I thought about this character who became Geneva Crenshaw and the character I remember I had this sense that it was half dream half real in which I was imagining that George Washington [President George Washington] and Tom Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson] and, you know, some of those early people came back and it was my task to show them the new developments, aeronautics, electricity, automobiles, tanks, you know, and I'm thinking to myself all of this to show these people, what, what, what, what should I, where should I start, and this voice that became Geneva Crenshaw responds, "Well first you will have to explain to these men where, how you are black, got free of your chains and gave the audacity to try to teach a white man anything," and it just--I don't know that's written any place, but that, that character just stuck with me and that became Geneva and Geneva is somebody--. Connie Motley [Constance Baker Motley] says, "Oh Geneva's me" (laughter), you know, I said, "Well, Connie you're part of it." But, it's, it's the sort of the strong black women I have known that I've been married to, that my mother [Ada Childress Bell] was, that I see out in the world, and she was the sort of the epitome of all, all those, those women and so she became the person with, with far out views and I became the, the traditional civil rights lawyer wanting to stay with the law, hesitant to move beyond the existing parameters and what have you. But in the, in the dialogues you are able to convey it seem to me much better than a lecture, you know, messages, and that, that was 'Space Trader'--she's not in--she becomes, she in that second part [in 'Gospel Choirs: Psalms of Survival on an Alien Land Called Home,' Derrick Bell] that didn't get, didn't get bought. But, again the thing is to upset the usual arrangement of things. Speaker 1: The character of Golightly [Gleason Golightly] in 'Space Traders' played by [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume was he based on any particular person or? Speaker 2: Well you know, I--people wanna say well was this Malcolm [Malcolm X], was this Clarence Thomas, was it, what's the, Thomas Sowell, you know, one of these people. I said, "No that was me," you know, that I may not have reacted to him, but I felt, I felt his pain. The, the idea that you're, that you want to, he really wanted to do things for black folk, but he had this independent spirit and what have you and it led him into the conservative camp where he went along with some of the stuff and that's what he says in his great speech. He said, "Listen I have gone along with you guys, maybe for different reasons, but I do believe people are supposed to stand up. I went along with you when you were cutting back on this program and what have you, now you know you owe me one," in effect. And he couldn't get it, couldn't get it, see. Story_ID: 303601 Speaker 1: That's what I really said at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, when I came back, you know, I, I accomplished, I was better known than most of them. I had written more than most of them. I was a better teacher than most of them, and I had said we should have a woman of color on this faculty and this woman who's been here, Regina Austin, has been outstanding. It's not she's new. She's tenured at the University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a major school, she's a great teacher, and she has insight that these, these people need and she's a woman and she has insight that I don't have and in effect you owe me one and I didn't get it. Speaker 2: Now this is the first time you went to Harvard? This is the first time or the second? Speaker 1: No, the second time. The first time I left just 'cause I was I got interested in this deanship thing, which was foolish, but a good, a good experience. Speaker 2: But, you left Harvard to become dean at-- Speaker 1: At Oregon. Speaker 2: --at the University of Oregon [University of Oregon School of Law, Eugene, Oregon]. Speaker 1: I had a sabbatical that I spent out of the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], and a fellow that I had seen at the law school meetings who had been dean at Oregon came up and said, "You know you need to come down and see the city" and stuff like that, and I said, "Oh okay," and we drove down as I recall. And he told me about well that they were looking for a dean and if I put my name in that would cause the president and all to say ooh this is serious that they can get somebody from Harvard to be, so I agreed to do that, but then they wanted me to meet with this and then I got competitive and Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] thought I had lost my damn mind you know (laughter), what are you doing? And so they offered me the job and I said, "Now listen you guys I'm not--I'm black and I'm not accidentally black I really believe in pushing civil rights." This is a white school in a white state. "If you, you know, wanna change your mind fine I'm not filing any lawsuits." The response, of course, "We're ready, are you ready?" (Laughter) How often have you heard that one? So, Jewel being good with--my kids were horrified, but we moved to, moved to Oregon. Speaker 2: Now this is 1980? Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980]. Speaker 2: Eighty [1980], okay Speaker 1: I had some little difficulties with the house back in Cambridge [Massachusetts], but that's a whole other story, but we wanted the kids to be in school at the beginning of the school year and what have you and it was basically a good experience, I think. Would I, would I do it again, well I'm not so sure. But, if you ask me if I'd do parenthood again, I might say I'm not so sure that I'm the best parent in the, in the world. Story_ID: 303602 Speaker 1: Now is there a highlight to this tenure at the University of Oregon [University of Oregon School of Law, Eugene, Oregon] 'cause I know, I mean, before we-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --talked about how you left. It wasn't all negative I know, so-- Speaker 2: Oh no, no I meant it's a lovely place to live. The problem is it's so far away from where the things that I'm involved in, not that there wasn't racism out there, but the major conferences, the major lectures, the major activities are mainly on the West Coast--on the East Coast and as people warned me. Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] called me and said he thought it was a mistake. He said that you're really involved in this stuff and you're going to be removed from it, and it's gonna be--and I said, "Oh now Leon I can still do some of these things." But, he was right 'cause a one day conference is three days, you know a day to get here, a day for the conference, and a day to, to get back and the school had no money, you know. The person who would have been president there promised Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] and I all kinds of this, that, and the other thing financially and by the time, the end of that school year he had quit in a, in a run in with the athletic department. You know they decided he was, he was less important than the athletic director, so he said, "Well that may be, but (laughter) I'm leaving." And each year I was there was less money, but I did okay with fundraising. I did everything okay. I got along with students well. I was fighting over money with the administration. We didn't always agree, but you know, there was a lot of respect going back and forth, conservative alumni I did okay. I didn't give, I don't give myself high grades for dealing with the faculty. I just did not do the things they wanted me to do and they wanted this to be Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in Northwest, but every weekend they weren't in the library, they were off to the coast. They were down in the mountains and you know over to the mountains, the cascades, an hour in one direction and the shore's an hour in another direction and Eugene [Oregon] is beautiful, beautiful, you know climate, scenery. And the folks they wanted to be Harvard, but they didn't wanna work like the people at Harvard did, so that that caused a lot of problems. And when, I guess it was the same, same kind of problem in Harvard, that is we had no Asians. We had only, I think, one other black person. It was always like pulling teeth. And this woman had applied and teach securities and corporations and all, and she was listed by the committee as third on a list after two white guys. The two white guys one at a time decided no, they didn't want the job and then some of the faculty members got a majority agree that this woman somehow was not good enough, and that we should reopen the search, and they voted that. And I said right at the faculty meeting, well you know this is your, your school, but if you think with my commitment to civil rights and affirmative action that you gonna expect me to sit here and stay in this position after you have turned down a woman of color, an Asian woman who was number three on the list when the two top guys turned down the job, I said you know, I quit. And there was great upset and what have you, oh, oh, but these things don't just happen with one incident, you know, it was sort of the final, final straw that the--it's just very, deanships are very hard, law school deanships 'cause you have the responsibility, the faculty has the authority and without a sense of responsibility in most instances. It was, it was it was troubling, but that was the last straw for me. But I don't, you know I still, I've, I've been their commencement speaker since then. Whenever I get out there, you know, I still see people. You know sometimes you, you, just the, the, the attachments of life I would live the rancor, you know, in the different disagreements unless it's just really awful. I ran into, oh God Bob [Robert C. Clark], the dean who took over and who was dean at Harvard after, when I, when I, when I left, and he was chatting me up like old times, you know, so that (unclear) time goes along, you kind of forget the bad stuff and remember that this is the person with whom you had contact with during some earlier period. But that's when I, I left--actually I didn't leave right away 'cause Jewel had taken on a position at the university as head of all the minority efforts, you know, the recruitment, the finance, the scholastic difficulties and whoever who had been in charge of it before had made a mess of it and she had worked at it for two years and she says, "Well I understand why you left, but I would like another year." So I said, "Jewel fine, you know, I will do something else." So, for one semester I just lectured in places around the country. The second semester I taught at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. Story_ID: 303603 Speaker 1: I had hoped to--I had interviewed with the dean at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] 'cause Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell] clearly did not want to go back to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I wasn't that anxious, but Harvard had, had made it a, had voted me another position if I would, you know, if I wanted to come back. So, when the NYU thing didn't, didn't materialize, we decided you know to go back to, to Cambridge [Massachusetts]. I always think that that was problematic as my students say, because Jewel had--really before we went to the West Coast and we found out she had breast cancer and she had a lumpectomy, which was early on--(unclear)--and a lot of radiation, but no chemotherapy. And she would come back east every six months to be checked on what have you and no, no problems. But within a year after we came back to Harvard she was working doing the same kind of work at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] and found that the breast cancer had come back and this time it just got progressively, progressively worse, so that by the time I was ready to, I was, you know, really taking up with this, working with the students on getting a woman of color and not having very much success. And I came home and Jewel was in bed and not really doing well and I told her I was planning to take leave until they got that person of color. And she raised up and she said this question that I've tried to answer in 'Ethical Ambition[: Living A Life of Meaning And Worth,' Derrick Bell], but--she said, "Why does it always have to be you?" And I'm still not sure I'm able to answer that question, but she was, you know after a period of kind of upset she was, she was down with the decision so that and she, I guess that was in April, and she died in August of that year. Story_ID: 303604 Speaker 1: And I stayed a full year [at Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know. I taught a course without being paid 'cause a lot of students came to me and said, "What you're doing is really great except we've been waiting you know our whole law school career to take a course with you and now you're not going to be teaching." So, I went to the dean. The dean was Bob Clark [Robert C. Clark], and said, "Listen here are these students; I will teach the course without pay for students who are willing to take it without credit or grade." And he reluctantly I think said okay. So, I ended up with about twenty-five students teaching one of my civil rights courses. Every week we would get together, a lot of reading would be done, a lot of presentations were made, a lot of writing 'cause I believe in a lot of writing, and it was just very, it was just this kind of sense that we were all there 'cause we wanted to be there. Not for grade, not for pay, and it's just the--it was probably the most fulfilling course I've ever taught, and I've been teaching for thirty-two years and it would never have happened but for standing up for the situation. Again, it's just like with the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] in getting-the (unclear). The things that I try to say that in 'Confronting Authority[: Reflections of An Ardent Protester,' Derrick Bell] and a little bit more in 'Ethical Ambition[: Living A Life of Meaning And Worth,' Derrick Bell] that doing what you think is right can be risky, and it can bring you down. Paul Robeson is my ideal, and I talk about him in both books I think, and he stood up for what was right and they, they brought him down, you know. Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], they were prosecuting him in '82 [1982], something like that. [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, not, not Katherine, Josephine Baker, you know, had to stay over in France 'cause they didn't like what she was saying about racism. So that it doesn't always have to work out, but often enough and I've gotten letters from people who have said let me tell you my story about leaving something, about standing up for something, and it ended up that they're in a better place now than they were at this other. Story_ID: 303605 Speaker 1: I mean, for me NYU [New York University, New York, New York] is a much better school. First of all, you know, as I told you this is my fourteenth year as a visitor. John Sexton worked it out, 'cause you're not supposed to be able to teach full-time at these schools and, and, and not either be tenured or working toward tenure. But, when John asked me, I said, "John, been there, done that. You know I love to teach. I can't, I can't stand anymore faculty meetings." People were just coming for faculty meetings as I looked out the door there. It's just, it's just too painful. It's not that I'm always right and other faculty members are always wrong, but for the most part we come from different backgrounds, we have different perspectives, we have different ideas about what the school is supposed to be for, and, and I was always on the, on the, on the minority side, literally and, and, figuratively. I said, "I don't wanna do that anymore." So, Sexton with his great manipulative powers worked it out and I couldn't have done this at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. This is my fourteenth year as, as a visitor. They called me the Walter Alston of legal education. Walter Alston was for twenty years on one year contract with the Brooklyn Dodgers and the Los Angeles [Dodgers], one of the great coaches, one of the great baseball managers, but he never, I don't think O'Malley [Walter O'Malley] every offered him more than one year, but it's, he said this, this is, you know, this is your, this is your deal you know and I said okay. Now, I don't, I'm not sure I'm gonna make it to eighty-two teaching on one year contracts, but I wouldn't be unhappy if, if my health held out. The students--I came into teaching to write. You know I've been writing briefs and this, I've been interviewed by all the people from newspapers in all. They knew what they wanted to write before they interviewed me, and that's what they wrote. I think I hardly even recognized it, so I said I wanna write myself, and I've done a lot of writing, but there's just no doubt that the most rewarding satisfying thing is the students. I mean, and then get to know some students very well therefore, which again is something I, that I got here that I probably wouldn't have got, gotten at Harvard. It is to, to be, to be a parent and to have young people that, that are smart and ambitious and who listen to you, whoa (laughter) now that's, it, it doesn't get--what is that old, that expression in the commercial, it doesn't get much better than that, and that's, that's what, that's what I have. To able to boast about folk, Joel Klein, who is the chancellor of the school board, is a former student of mine and of course John Sexton and so many, so, so many people. Patricia [J.] Williams, who also should be on your list is, is, is a student. There's just a long list of folk. I take unfair credit for, well they did take one class with me. Speaker 2: You had [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree. Speaker 1: Charles Ogletree is, is a former student. In this past spring, Charles Ogletree's daughter was in my class, and she's gonna be one of my TAs [teaching assistant] this, this fall. Mark [J.] Green who ran for mayor unsuccessfully was one of my students, and his daughter was in my class. So, you're, you know, you're getting this second, second generation and I guess I've got other students whose children have been, you know, had been, been in my class. Story_ID: 303606 Speaker 1: Do you think in retrospect when you look back and leaving Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] did it, did it change anything, I mean, were you able to change anything-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or shake up anything by leaving? 'Cause you have a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not, not in the way I wanted to. I--'cause it, it seemed to me that once I did this, that they weren't gonna do anything simply because now they tried, you know make some arrangements and all, but it wasn't, I wanted to have somebody there. That Regina Austin was there, you know. I wanted some kind of a firm commitment, not that we are gonna try harder, but it seemed to me that once I both left and announced why I was leaving that they weren't gonna hire anybody for a number of years. And they finally hired Lani [HistoryMaker Lani Guinier] one year who was outstanding. Speaker 1: Lani Guinier. Speaker 2: Gra- and just a wonderful woman. Also should be on the list. Lani was not one of my students, but she gives me credit to giving her all kinds of advice when she was an undergraduate and what have you. Speaker 1: Did you know her father [Ewart Guinier]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, oh yeah and her mother [Eugenia Genii Guinier], we knew both and her mother and Jewel [Jewel Hairston Bell], my late wife, were the best of friends. The mother is still alive. Jewel, of course, died. So that the--I could--you know I started to say I came in to teaching to write, but the most satisfying thing is the students by far. Story_ID: 303607 Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think I have the hopes that everybody and I have that some, somehow slowly but surely racism is going to decline in importance, that more of our folk will be able to--what did Rodney King say, get along, we need to all get along-- Speaker 1: Can't we all get along. Speaker 2: --together, can't we all get along together. It's kind of crazy in terms of everything else, but you can see why white folks loved it. You know I have the hopes that everybody else does. I have--my concerns is that that's not gonna happen. You know the subtitle of my book, 'Faces at the Bottom of the Well[: The Permanence of Racism,' Derrick Bell] is the permanence of racism, and from everything I know and have read about in all that's how I reached that conclusion. And people say oh that's so depressing, you, you, that's so defeatist; I don't think so. I think face, again facing the truth about a situation even if that, your beliefs change, but facing that as of now is, is, is can be uplifting. You know I use the expression of the, the person in Alcoholics Anonymous [AA], but before they can start dealing with their addiction they have to be able to come to these meetings and stand up and say, "My name is Derrick Bell; I am an alcoholic; I will always be an alcoholic, but today I'm trying to get through without taking a drink." It's the only way you can do it. It's the only way you can do it. Speaker 1: So you, you would count American racism of being, having an addiction. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The country is addicted to it. Speaker 2: Yeah, not only addicted, but in the same way. You see this is a country that is, this is a capitalist country. What does capitalism mean? It means that some people are able to profit through the export, exploitation of other people, right, and ordinarily you would say you can't have democracy where people vote their needs in, and capitalism, and yet we know we had two hundred years of it. Now how did that work. There are a number of reasons why, why it works, but one of them is this belief that you're supposed to make it on your own in this country. You know if you don't make it, it's your fault, that the Hora- Horatio Alger [Horatio Alger, Jr.] deal and if you don't make it one way you go to the casino, you play the lottery and stuff like that, one of these ways you gonna make it. There is enough, this has been a rich country. It's not as rich as it was, but there is a trickle-down effect, so a large number of the people can have something, you see. But the--but it also depends very substantially on racism. There are white folk that don't have very much at all, certainly not more than black folk, believe that they are part of the group 'cause the people who are in charge who have all the money look like they do, you see. And, and, and even those of us who have, black folk who have a billion dollars, Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], and what have you, although she's a wonderful woman or what have you, they, they look at her as though she's white. They identify with her, she's not a threat. She's not putting a Malcolm X on or acting like Malcolm X or something like that. That that is, provides a stabilizing influence for this country, that what's the old film--this Ku Klux Klan [KKK] meeting and this red neck obviously poor stands up and testifies, "Every morning when I wake up I thank God I'm white." He has nothing, but he got his whiteness. White is a property in being white in this country. A property that exists for people that don't have traditional property, money in the bank, real estate, stocks and bonds, and what have you, and the country protects that property the way it protects any other property you see. Story_ID: 303608 Speaker 1: You see what happens when white folk fear that affirmative action is, is, is helping people that don't deserve it. They cut back on affirmative action, even though white people in general and white women in particular have gained so much more from, from affirmative action than black folk will ever have. And now there is virtually no affirmative action. There's still some law--corporations and all that see a benefit in having some black folk, but in terms of its potential it, it, it is not there 'cause so many--it, it's clear race was a factor in this, in this last election, even though it wasn't talked about. People are fearful in all and they're fearful of race even when the race is not there, and, and in subtle ways and not so subtle ways the Republicans have for the last, since Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], been able to say you, we are gonna protect you from these special interest, meaning black folk, you see. So that the danger, the thing I'm concerned about is that I think we talked, touched on this earlier, and I hope I'm just being pessimistic, overly pessimistic is that you know jobs are being lost thousands at a time going to China where they got a billion people that they're quite willing to put, put, put, put to work, going to Mexico. We're outsourcing jobs you see, jobs that make us who we, who we are. We're not a manufacturing country here anymore. Everything comes from, from, from someplace else, so you have, you have the percentage of unemployment is far greater than the official numbers. For black folks it's, it's--the studies in New York [New York] I gather are similar to other areas, like fifty percent of black men you see. So that the, at some point these policies of the administration are going to back, back, start to backfire. And these guys are so slick that they will be able to somehow put the blame on, on us, and that could be extremely bad. You know if you say, "Oh that can't happen to us," well that's what the Jews in Germany thought. We're Germans, you know, until somebody felt that the economy was poor in all and you could get the focus off the poor economy and the leadership of the poor economy by saying we gotta get rid of these folk 'cause they are, they are, they are the serious problem. Any one serious problem precisely because at the areas that they were in they excelled and, and there was resentment, and there's resentment here with black folk. We were told we're supposed to do well, but when more than two or three of us at a time do well, we're, we're in trouble. They certainly don't want to hire anymore you see. People leaving Oregon used to say, I said, "Why don't you--you all are so concerned about qualification, this person has got better qualifications than I do, and I've done more than any of you, what is your problem?" "Oh well Derrick [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] you're different." You heard that one (laughter)? So that I'm afraid that we are prime in case things start going bad--we're already on the downslide in terms of, in terms of our situation in the country and it's masked by the fact that we do have a fairly large middle class. We do have black folk doing all kinds of things that they couldn't do before say Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], but I'm not sure that that's much more than, than a cosmetic kind of icing on the cake kind of thing. Story_ID: 303609 Speaker 1: In that regard, do you have any thoughts about Clarence Thomas and Condoleezza Rice, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and some of the top Bush [President George Walker Bush] appointees and what they represent for black America at large? Do they represent progress or what do you think? Speaker 2: I guess that they certainly haven't represented progress. I'm particularly disappointed in Powell; wouldn't have read my book about the value of quitting, you know, rather than soldiering on even when you have to tell lies in order to, in order to do it. Thomas and Condoleezza Rice I just don't, I guess I do get--I think people are ambitious. People would like to get ahead and given how easy it is for an educated black person to get ahead by comforting white folk, I'm amazed that there aren't more folk who are--now most of us try hard not to scare, scare white folk to death, you know, but the, but the--I, I regret that these folk act as they do, but it's also a lesson that most of us would not, would not play those roles I think. So, that's, that's, my- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my view on it. Story_ID: 303610 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything that you've done--you, you eluded to this earlier, to something earlier, but when you look back at your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: I can't imagine that I would know to do it differently, but, I would have tried to convince the legal people that desegregating schools was not, not the best way to go. I remember there was a lawyer in Louisiana, in New Orleans [Louisiana], A.P. Tureaud who had worked with us on school cases and we learned at some point that he was working at making deals with some of the white parishes, mainly, some of the parishes, rural parishes in which instead of desegregation they were gonna provide better schools, hire more teachers, blah, blah, blah, and we were mad as hell. And we went in and filed motions to upset these orders that he had gotten and what have you. And I often think back to Tureaud was a lot more on the ball than, than we were. Speaker 1: And how do you spell T-- Speaker 2: Ooh goodness, T-U-R-E-A-U [sic.]. Speaker 1: E-R-E-A-- Speaker 2: T-U, did you say T-U, T-U, T-U-R, T-U-R-E-A-U. Speaker 1: T-U-R-E-A-U, okay, A.P. Tureau. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In Louisiana. Speaker 2: You no Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] is the new head of the National Urban League, and he probably would be on your list at some point, his father was Ernest Morial [Ernest Nathan Morial]. And Ernest and A.P. were colleagues and, and both, both lawyers. Speaker 1: Ernest Morial. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, and contact him and he'd probably provide that. Little Jim Nabrit [James Nabrit, III] when I went to Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], there were only five people on the staff, Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall], Connie [Constance Baker Motley], Jack Greenberg, and a guy named James Nabrit, III, or something like whose father [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] had been president, was it president of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or president of Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]? Speaker 1: Howard, it was Howard. Speaker 2: Was it Howard? Speaker 1: Yeah, James Nabrit, Jr. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. He was after--who was the great guy, the minister? Speaker 1: After Mordecai Johnson. Speaker 2: Mordecai, Mordecai Johnson, now that was a character (laughter). They don't make 'em like that anymore. But, Nabrit I remember was particularly upset, and he's retired living in Washington, D.C. someplace like that, and probably could give a lot, a lot of background, but I often--so you know I would have raised, if I had it, I, I think I would have tried to raise my children differently than I did. We had a lot of assumptions about, my wife and I, as to just being models, that that was gonna be enough to get them to follow in our footsteps, to give them the motivation and what have you, but it wasn't enough. And they're good guys, but the, they're, you know, they, they hadn't had lives as worthwhile in terms of having enough money to pay your bills and reach some of their aspirations as I think they might have had we adopted a different stance. So, parenthood I could have done better. The professional stuff I, I could have, I could have done better. But-I'm working with Lenora [Lenora Fulani] and what have you on the school, the school things--it's, it's like penance (laughter) for not recognizing earlier what it should, should have been. There probably a lot of other things. I probably could have been a better husband, but I was married to a remarkable woman [Jewel Hairston Bell] and I didn't mistreat her, but I'm not sure that I fully appreciated what she was. God has been good and I've been married twelve years and six months to another wonderful woman [Janet Dewart Bell] who I think is very different, but who some of Jewel's friends, like Judge Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter], are now some of her best friends. So maybe there are similarities that I don't see. Now that's something I didn't expect or probably didn't deserve, but I had two wonderful women that I've been married to, that's a blessing--who, who understand that I love women, but I'm not sneaking them off to bed and they can deal with the other part (laughter). Story_ID: 303611 Speaker 1: Tell me this, now did your parents [Ada Childress Bell and Derrick Bell] get a chance to see you become a successful lawyer or did they--? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah my father, my father died after, a few years after I came to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and so he knew. I remember when I told my mother I was coming back from the West Coast coming to Harvard and she said, "If you keep changing jobs, won't people feel that you are not dependable (laughter)?" Harvard didn't mean anything to her except her son was changing jobs again. And my mother died in, in 1999. She was ninety-three. The last year or so were not, you know, really very great, but for, you know, she, just a lot of, lot of appreciation. Story_ID: 303612 Speaker 1: When you look back over your career--I mean you've received numerous awards and people--you seem to not have any trouble finding a job, you were able to publish your books, but, when you look back on everything, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Trying to hold on to whatever integrity I have to speak the truth, whether it's going to be welcomed or, or not, to try to do right by other people; family certainly, but other folk that you meet on the street that--. You know, life is so tenuous. There's nothing guaranteed about it, and you really want to hope that you can take your last breaths without a lot of regret I guess. You know I already expressed some regrets here, but you wanna try to minimize those and maximize those things in which you did of some, some value. It's that old hymn, "If I can help somebody along the way." I guess that's, that's pretty much it. Story_ID: 303613 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I guess positively, as opposed to "Glad the son of a bitch is gone," you know. I guess you want to--I guess you want to feel that you've done right by the miracle of your life and that's the, the critical thing and then if others feel that way too that's, that's, that's bonus. But, you wanna feel yourself that you've done the best you can by others, by your career, by your family, by the things you cared about. I used to say by your country, although it's, that, that part's getting harder and harder and harder. I think my evolution of involvement in religion has been that I agree with a lot of the modern theologians that there isn't a theistic God. There's not somebody up there looking down. The God exists, but it's a much more complicated thing. But, a part of God is, is within us, you see. I think that the reason people in an early time reached out and started making up Gods is 'cause it was so scary to recognize that they had options, that the animals who just, their lives were, you know, survival and eating, and, and, and reproducing themselves and avoiding being taken over by larger animals and what have you. But here people had something more that you had, you had and that was scary that you, you, you had some little more control, not much more, but you had a little bit more than that and so you wanted to take that responsibility and put it on somebody else and so they started making, you know, images, engraving images, and Gods and worshiping them and trying to satisfy them and so that when bad things happen it was God didn't want it to happen, you see. I think it evolved and I think that, I think that, that Christianity doesn't recognize that it seems to me for the most part but that Jesus' claim to divinity is not based on miracles, not based on virgin birth. I mean the virgin birth is, I mean, if you look at Mark [Gospel of Mark], the earliest gospel there was, there was no, no mention of the virgin birth. It's something that the later guys created. It doesn't mean it doesn't, it's not praise worthy, but that is not where the essence of Jesus was. The essence of Jesus is, is his, how he lived his life and the lessons he taught that were revolutionary in that time. He didn't want no big churches and rules and what have you and to try to get to that essence, which it seems to me that in his own language, in his own way, he was trying to say you know much of God is within you. You have the power to do or not do, to do good or not good, to be a Good Samaritan, the evil guy who does good or not. To be the one who recognizes that the tax collector is a human being too. You invite him down from the tree and, and go have dinner with him. Everybody said, "Oh how could he do that and turns the tax collector around." Those, you know, there was no, there's no history of that kind of thing. Certainly, the Old Testament people they were pretty tough, you know and so that there, there is a motto there it seems to me that it does provide guidance. It may be too complicated, it may be too sophisticated for, for the masses. I asked Jim Forbes [James A. Forbes]. I said, "Jim, you know, theologians don't believe in a theistic of God, yet when I go to church they were talking about God looking down on--." He said, "Yeah because most they think the congregations aren't ready," you see. When you're not ready for that truth, then they tend to be ready for, "Well we're not having no homosexuals in this church," you know. Come on you guys, "We're not, we're not, we're not going for same, same sex marriage. We're, not, we're not having women as priests," you see. Where is that in the Bible, you know (laughter)? So, that, so it's an ongoing quest. I don't think you, you retire from, from, from that trying to see whether it's in your personal situation, and domestic life is always a challenge, whether it is in your political, you academic life. It's, it's--the learning process goes on, you know, the discovery process goes on and that's what you hope to be able to do. Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you sir for spending the time with us...