 Story_ID: 571557 Speaker 1: Our interviewee this evening is Mr. Simeon S. Booker [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker]. Good afternoon, Mr. Booker. Speaker 2: Good afternoon. I didn't get your name. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. Speaker 2: Paul Brock. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I've seen you somewhere. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And can we start by my asking you for your full name-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Good afternoon, today's interviewee is Mr. Simeon S. Booker. Observing is Ms. Julieanne Richardson [sic. Julieanna Richardson] and the videographer is Mr. Matthew Hickey. Also observing is Ms. Carol Booker [Carol McCabe Booker]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And I'm Paul Brock. All right. Can we start by my asking you for your full name and if you would spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Simeon Saunders Booker, Jr. Simeon is S-I-M-E-O-N, Saunders, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S, and Booker, B-O-O-K-E-R. Speaker 1: All right. And where are we today? Speaker 2: We're on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: All right. And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 1, 1907 [sic. 2007]. Speaker 1: Nope. I'm gonna-- Speaker 2: Six, five (laughter). Speaker 1: The other way. Speaker 2: Eight (laughter). Speaker 1: Two thousand and-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Seven. Speaker 1: --seven [2007]. Story_ID: 571558 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you some People magazine questions. They tell me it will relax you. More importantly, it will relax me. And I'll start by asking you for your favorite color. Speaker 2: Favorite color? Speaker 1: Your favorite color. Speaker 2: Gray. Speaker 1: And your favorite food? Speaker 2: Steak. Speaker 1: How about your favorite season or time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: Our place down at Cove Point in Maryland on the beach of the Chesapeake Bay. Speaker 1: All right. And finally, your favorite saying? And I know you may have a number of them, but-- Speaker 2: Favorite thing? Speaker 1: Saying or your favorite--what, what, what do you think covers everything when they--someone asks you about something? Speaker 2: You're kind of losing me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Your--how about your favorite phrase? Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: Your favorite phrase? Speaker 1: Phrase? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I don't have any, to be frank with you. Speaker 2: Okay, that's good also. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 571559 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to try to take you back to your earliest memories, stories that may have been told to you by your mother [Roberta Waring Booker] or your father [Simeon Booker, Sr.]. And first of all, I'd like to find out how far back can you trace your family's history, first on your father's side? Speaker 2: I have it here but I, I can't trace it all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --outside of-- Speaker 1: Okay, let's-- Speaker 2: --my father. Speaker 1: Let's start then with-- Speaker 2: We have a census bureau tracked down of the family, his father, where they were--grew up-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Virginia. Speaker 1: That's fine. And we'll, we'll go, go to that. How about your father's full, full name? Speaker 2: I'm a junior. He has the same name. Speaker 1: Same, same name, okay. And his place of birth? Speaker 2: I assume it was Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Any particular place there in Virginia? Speaker 2: I can't--southern Virginia. I can't think of the name right off hand (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's okay. Anything--you know, you don't--it doesn't come to you immediately, we'll just skip and come back to. Speaker 2: My wife [Carol McCabe Booker] is not here so I can't ask her. Speaker 1: Okay. And how about you father's date of birth? Speaker 2: Father's native--I didn't get that last word. Speaker 1: Oh, date of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Let's, let's go to how far back on your father's side of the family do you--can you take us back? You-- Speaker 2: Only to him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) remember your grandfather or--? Speaker 2: --him. No. Story_ID: 571560 Speaker 1: Let's go to your mother's s- side. Your mother's full name? Speaker 2: Roberta Waring Booker. Speaker 1: Roberta, and how do you spell that middle-- Speaker 2: R-O-B-E-R-T-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Waring, W-A-R-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Booker. Speaker 1: Okay. What was her maiden name, you remember? Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Waring. Speaker 1: Oh, was, was Waring, okay. Good enough. And do you remember her date of birth? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Or place of birth? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And we'll, we'll just come, come back to, to that. How far back on your mother's side can you--can you take us or you--do you know your maternal grandmother or great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Grandmother I would know, her-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --her mother and her father was the first black superintendent of schools-- Speaker 1: Okay, your mother's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) here [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: --father. Speaker 2: My mother's grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, good. And do you remember--was the first superintendent of schools here? Speaker 2: For the black schools. Speaker 1: For the black schools. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And do you remember that name? Speaker 2: His name was Waring. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: J.H.N. Waring. Speaker 1: All right. And the--that, that was your maternal grandfather. How about your maternal grandmother? Do you remember anything about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. I met her but I don't remember anything now about it. Speaker 1: Okay. How about, how well did you know your maternal grandfather, Grandfather Waring? Speaker 2: I didn't know him well. That's so long ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember any stories that your mother may have told you-- Speaker 2: No (shakes head) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about any of his exploits about him? Okay. Story_ID: 571561 Speaker 1: Let's go to your--back to your father's side now, who was born in Virginia and--Simeon Saunders Booker, Sr. [Simeon Booker, Sr.]. How about paternal grand- grandfather, your grandfather, grandmother on your father's side? Speaker 2: No, I don't--never met her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think she died early. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Your grandfather died early? Speaker 2: Mother. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, your grandmother. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And you, you did not know your, your grandfather? Speaker 2: Not-- Speaker 1: You didn't. Speaker 2: --on my father's side. Speaker 1: Not, not on your father's side. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. The--what are you earliest memories of your--of, of your father? Speaker 2: Earliest memories of him? Well, he was a very affectionate father. He took care of his family. He was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] secretary in Baltimore, Maryland, of the black branch on--can't think of the name of the street now. And then he moved to Youngstown, Ohio, to open the first black branch of the YMCA [West Federal Street YMCA]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in Youngstown, Ohio. I was about six or seven, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's see how much you--okay. Let's, let's talk a little bit about, about your father because I know he is a historical figure. The--you remember when he headed up the YMCA there in, in Baltimore. He had established a, a--was establishing a name for himself nationally with the Alpha Phi Alpha society [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity; Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was very active in the Alphas and he was elected a national president of the fraternity. And he was very well known. Speaker 1: Right. The, the--do--was, was that while you were in Baltimore or was this after you had moved back to Youngstown when he was elected the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was-- Speaker 1: --national president? Speaker 2: --before. I guess it was before he even came to Baltimore. Speaker 1: All right. So, prior, prior to-- Speaker 2: Or during the time he was in Baltimore, he was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --elected. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's, let's establish your date of birth so that we can establish him being in Baltimore. Your date of birth? Speaker 2: August 27, 1918. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: My present age is eighty-eight. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were born in Baltimore? Speaker 2: I was born in Baltimore. Story_ID: 571562 Speaker 1: We're talking about your father's [Simeon Booker, Sr.] legacy. He was well known both locally as the head of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] there in Baltimore [Maryland] and nationally as the national president of the largest African American fraternity in the world. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity; Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.]. On that, can--what are you earliest memories of your dad there in Baltimore? Or, or do you have any memories living there in Baltimore? Speaker 2: Well, he was very effective. He organized branches. He was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) YMCA branches. Speaker 2: --very religious man. When he went to Youngstown [Ohio] after he organized the first black YMCA there [West Federal Street YMCA, Youngstown, Ohio], he then took over the ministry of a church [Third Baptist Church, Youngstown, Ohio] and he, he would--he had a lot of energy. Speaker 1: He was a very active man. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Why--do you know why your dad moved from Baltimore to, to Youngstown? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because that was an early age-- Speaker 2: --a challenge. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: New challenge. Speaker 2: To establish a new YMCA from scratch and it was a challenge for him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember very distinctly even to this day when he dedicated the new building that he raised money to build, I went out on the roof of the building during this dedication ceremony and a plane went over and dropped flower down that I had to take to the stage in the gymnasium of the building before this crowd to officially make the building a reality, so to speak. Speaker 1: Right. And this was--this took place in Youngstown? Speaker 2: Youngstown. Speaker 1: Where he was a building a new YMCA. Speaker 2: That's right. Where he built a new YMCA at the dedication of the building. Story_ID: 571563 Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Roberta Waring Booker] during this period, was she a housewife or did she work outside of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was during the era of Depression [Great Depression]. My mother ran the YMCA cafeteria [at the West Federal Street YMCA, Youngstown YMCA]. As if she didn't have enough to do at home with four kids, she ran the, the cafeteria all day, ordered food for it, this, that, and the other. Speaker 1: Did she-- Speaker 2: Fixed the food and everything. Speaker 1: Did she do that both in Baltimore [Maryland] and in Youngstown [Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, only in Youngstown. Speaker 1: Only in Youngstown. Speaker 2: And she did it only for a few years in Youngstown. The Depression came, we had to live on the third floor of the YMCA building 'cause everybody was out of work. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and things were at a downhill paces. Story_ID: 571564 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your siblings. When the Depression [Great Depression] came, there were four children at that time? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Total? The oldest to the youngest, by name. Speaker 2: James [James Booker] was the oldest. He died after he finished high school. I was the second. Ray [Ray Booker] was the third. Speaker 1: Ray? R-A-Y? Speaker 2: R-A-Y. And my sister, Carolyn [Carolyn Booker Holland], was the fourth. She still lives in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or in Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right near Washington. Story_ID: 571565 Speaker 1: Okay here we are, the family has moved to Youngstown, Ohio. There are four children. Your mother [Roberta Waring Booker] is working in the cafeteria and taking care of a large household. And the year that, that you moved to Youngstown, can you tell us what year that, that was? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. I think you were about seven at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that-- Speaker 2: But I don't remember the actual-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --year. Speaker 1: So, we'd be talking about 1925, approximately. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. The--now, the--your father [Simeon Booker, Sr.] in Youngstown also took on another vocation. That was he was a minister at a church. He had a-- Speaker 2: Third Baptist Church in Youngstown. Speaker 1: Third Baptist. And was that a large church or small (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a very large church. Speaker 1: One of the largest in the black community? Speaker 2: In that section of the city it was the largest. Speaker 1: Okay. And what are your-- Speaker 2: He was a very good speaker, very dynamic man. Speaker 1: Okay. You were around six or seven at this time. What are your earliest remembers- remembrances on Third Baptist Church? Did that mean you had to go to church every Sunday or--? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And Sunday school? Speaker 2: That's right, all of it. It was on Oak Hill Avenue, right below a funeral home, right below a cemetery. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember it very plainly 'cause we lived at 310 West Myrtle Avenue and I sometimes would walk to church, walk down to the church or walk across town to his- the YMCA [West Federal Street YMCA, Youngstown Ohio]. Story_ID: 571566 Speaker 1: Did you help your dad [Simeon Booker, Sr.] at the YMCA [West Federal Street YMCA, Youngstown, Ohio]? Speaker 2: I did custodial work. That's about all I could do as I grew up. I made extra money cleaning up, helping the janitor, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And how about your brother, James [James Booker]? Did he work? Speaker 2: He died early. Speaker 1: Oh, he died early, so-- Speaker 2: And the other brother was younger and my-- Speaker 1: Ray [Ray Booker], was younger. Speaker 2: Yeah, and my sister [Carolyn Booker Holland] was even younger, younger than him. But I was the leader of the pack. Speaker 1: Okay. The--because of your father being one of the leading ministers in Youngstown, Ohio, during that period and a national figure, how did that impact on you in school? You were in elementary school at the time there. What was the name of that elementary school, by the way? Speaker 2: What was the name of-- Speaker 1: The elementary school that you went to in Youngstown, Ohio. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't even remember, but it was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --only a few blocks away. I can't think of the name of the school. Speaker 1: That's okay. Okay. Do you remember whether you were a good student or an average student? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't a--I was a good student, wasn't a, a perfect, excellent scholar. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: My younger brother was the brains of our family. Speaker 1: Ray (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the brother that passed was a very brilliant fellow. Speaker 1: Okay. And the--how did your father being such a prominent member of the Youngstown community impact upon you in school? Did that put additional pressure on you from some of the teachers, you and your brothers? Speaker 2: Not necessarily. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Any particular memories that particularly impressed you, the teachers or some of your student buddies (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't remember that much. Speaker 1: Okay. The--was there junior high or, or middle school that you went to there in Youngstown? Speaker 2: No. I graduated from South High School [Youngstown, Ohio], I remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Were there favorite subjects at South High School? Speaker 2: English. Speaker 1: Okay. And you said that James had been an excellent student there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did you find yourself having to compete with James? Speaker 2: No, I never tried to compete with him. Speaker 1: All right. And--now, right at the end of high school for James, he passed away. Speaker 2: Yeah, he passed in senior year. Speaker 1: Do you remember what the cause of it was or? Speaker 2: I think it was pneumonia. Speaker 1: Okay. Which was not uncommon during (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In those days. Speaker 1: --those days. Right. Okay. Any particular teachers that you remember particularly-- Speaker 2: No, I don't remember teachers' names that far back. Story_ID: 571567 Speaker 1: Any thoughts of wanting to be a journalist while you're in--still in high school [South High School, Youngstown, Ohio] or--what, what did you want to pursue? What vocation did you want to pursue? Speaker 2: Well, as I grew older, I began working at--part-time at the small black newspaper there. I can't even think--Buckeye Review and I'd write articles for them. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were in high school at that time when you wrote these? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you had quite a talent as a writer. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. And I had a lady who was a columnist on the Youngstown Vindicator [The Vindicator]. That was a daily paper. She took a lot of interest in me, Esther Hamilton, that was her name. In fact, she did a story on me after I won a (unclear) state award years later. Speaker 1: And she was a columnist there for the daily (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Anybody at the Buckeye Review become an inspiration, the editor or? Speaker 2: Well, he--the editor was J. Maynard Dickerson. He was a lawyer and he held one civic job, I don't remember what it was. Story_ID: 571568 Speaker 1: And your mother [Roberta Waring Booker], she continued to-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) be a housekeeper and to work-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --at the YMCA [West Federal Street YMCA, Youngstown, Ohio], okay. Now, you're graduating from South High School [Youngstown, Ohio] and you've got to--you had an ambition to go to college? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I could've gone to Youngstown College [Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio], that was the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] financed college, free. But when I registered, they wouldn't give me an activities card. Blacks weren't given activity cards. Speaker 1: What is an activities card? Speaker 2: That was a card that you--permitted you to get involved in the college student activities. And so I decided I would leave Youngstown College and go to Virginia Union University in Richmond [Virginia], which was the school my father [Simeon Booker, Sr.] went to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Graduated. Speaker 1: Okay. So you went--after spending, what a month, a few weeks? Speaker 2: A year. Speaker 1: A, a year at Youngstown. Speaker 2: After the first year, after Youngstown College, I had to give up that life, free, because the tuition was all paid by YMCA, and go to Virginia Union. So I decided I wouldn't put any more expense on my family. I began at Union. I wrote articles for the athletic teams. The basketball team was the famed dream team that played Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York] and I wrote articles for the football team, and that gave me enough money to take care of my own expenses. Speaker 1: At--okay. Now, you were quite an athlete or at least in basketball at-- Speaker 2: Only at the high school. Speaker 1: At the high school level. Speaker 2: No, I wasn't any professional athlete or-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I didn't play that well to make, even go out for college basketball. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you worked your way-- Speaker 2: I worked my way just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) through Virginia Union. Speaker 2: --as a publisher for the athletic teams. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in the summers, I'd go back to Youngstown [Ohio] and I would promote black baseball games. The Homestead Grays were right over in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and they would come over to Youngstown four times a year and pay me two hundred dollars a game to put out placards, write articles for the newspaper, the team--the game and things, and I made it. I hustled my way, summer, to build up enough money to, to add to what I made at the school so my family wouldn't have to pay any money for my college. Speaker 1: Now, how well did you do academically while you were at Virginia Union? Speaker 2: I was always around C average. I wasn't never any bright student. Speaker 1: Okay. And you spent three years there and you graduated from Virginia Union? Speaker 2: That's right. I graduated in '42 [1942]. And after I saw my name on the list to graduate, I left to go back to Baltimore [Maryland] to work on the Afro-American newspaper [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers]. The publisher of the paper, Carl Murphy [Carl J. Murphy], and my uncle, J.H.N. Waring [J.H.N. Waring II], were both classmates at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Carl Murphy and your uncle went to Harvard-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --to- together. Okay. We're going to continue that. And you've gone back to Baltimore and you've graduated from Virginia Union, and now you're reaching out to be a professional journalist. Story_ID: 571569 Speaker 1: That's the--my family at a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] family meeting at Bordentown, New Jersey. There's my father [Simeon Booker, Sr.] and mother [Roberta Waring Booker]-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): There's a pen you can point with. Speaker 1: My father right here, my mama, and there I am, my older brother [James Booker], Ray [Ray Booker], and my sister, Carolyn [Carolyn Booker Holland]. That's a long time ago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next one, and the one on the back. Unfortunately we're gonna go to the small one because it's in-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's members of co-op and-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that family members? Speaker 1: I can't tell the--I, I only remember the one in the front, Ruby Dee [ph.], D-double E. She's sitting there. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the, the funeral of her husband, paying my respects to her. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Turn it on your other side. No? Oh there's no other side, okay. Okay (unclear). Speaker 2: That's me meeting General Westmoreland [William Westmoreland]-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, sorry. That's you and the General Westmoreland, again? Speaker 2: That's right. He's on the left. I don't know the fellow in the center. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): On the Little Rock [Arkansas] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's Little Rock. I don't know his name. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Superintendent of schools of Little Rock? Speaker 2: Yeah, after the-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm recording now. Go ahead and tell us about it now. Speaker 2: That's my Hi-Y basketball team in Youngstown, Ohio. I'm second from the left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you point to yourself? Speaker 2: That's just--that's Downingtown, Pennsylvania at my uncle's school [Downingtown Industrial and Agricultural School, Downingtown, Pennsylvania], but I don't see anybody I-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Your mother? Speaker 2: All relatives. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Your father and you. Speaker 2: Where am I at? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Back row on the right with the striped shirt, isn't that you? Speaker 2: Right here? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: Right here. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. And next to that your dad and then your mom? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (simultaneous) And that's--and that's Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Waring Howard], Dorothy (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Aunt Dorothy. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --Howard. Story_ID: 571570 Speaker 1: All right, so you're on your way to meet Mr. Carl Murphy [Carl J. Murphy] over at the Baltimore Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] and what, what year is this? Do you remember what year? That's okay. I'll go back. I'll come back to it. Anyway, you're on your way (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was in 1942 that I graduated. Speaker 1: Forty--that's right, 1942. Speaker 2: And I went to--missed--never marched with my class when graduating [from Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], just as soon as I saw my name on the list, I packed up and went down to Baltimore [Maryland] for my first big job, which I thought. And to my amazement, the salary was eighteen dollars a week and I went ten dollars in the hole every week. And I-- Speaker 1: What do you mean by that, when you say you went-- Speaker 2: The expenses were so great that the salary that was so low, and I was the only man on the staff at that time, so I got much of the rough assignments. One of them was going to executions. I went to the Maryland Penitentiary [Baltimore, Maryland] six times to watch them hang blacks and that was a jarring experience. Speaker 1: And they hung them in those days. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: No electrocutions. Speaker 2: No, just--and to see that body drop down there, I said, oh, bo- you know, and to know of it and to have all that happen, man. So I said, well, I did a few stories down there, but I didn't raise any Cain, and I decided I better get out, so I headed to Cleveland [Ohio] after two years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, how long did you stay at the Baltimore Afro-American? Six months? Speaker 2: I'd say about two years or so. Speaker 1: Two years, all right. Story_ID: 571571 Speaker 1: Then I went to Cleveland [Ohio] and W.O. Walker [William Otis Walker] was the publisher and he was a nationally known Republican, so every mo- every period before election day, the whole magazine was a GOP leaflet, so I said, eh. But in Cleveland while at the Post [Call and Post], I managed to win two outstanding awards, the (unclear) Cleveland Newspaper Guild award for a series on housing and a Wilkie Award for a series on employment. Speaker 2: Now, were you covering housing and employment mostly at the Call and Post? Speaker 1: No, I was on the city there, so I was covering everything. Speaker 2: Everything there in the City of Cleveland. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it was a progressive paper outside of the political taint and he was a man who was involved in a lot of activities, and I covered a lot of activities in Cleveland. Story_ID: 571572 Speaker 1: And it was in Cleveland [Ohio] that I got active and tried to organize a union, and that's when I found out unions weren't that popular. I got fired and I was out of work. For, for about six months, I had to work at a filling station, pumping gas and this, that, and the other. Speaker 2: You tried to start a journalist union? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Newspaper guild [Cleveland Newspaper Guild]-- Speaker 2: Newspaper (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) chapter. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And--but I had heard of the Nieman [Nieman Foundation for Journalism] and I had written the Nieman. I applied twice before for the Nieman Fellowship. And being I was working like this, I tried for a third time to be a, a fellow, to be selected as a fellow, and I won it. I was named the fellow and a few weeks later, was named the correspondent to go to Korea for the NNPA, the National Negro Publishers Association [National Newspaper Publishers Association], correspondent in Korea. But I decided to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] on the Nieman Fellowship. Speaker 2: The--there are several questions that come to mind. One is, here we are during the middle of World War II [WWII]. Was there a reason why the [U.S.] Army didn't send you a letter? Speaker 1: I--my eyesight. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I applied for a volunteer to the Army, but I was turned down, so I was safe in that area. Speaker 2: Okay. And the Nieman award that you sought while you were at the Cleveland Call and Post, were--that was very unusual for an African American to win-- Speaker 1: No, I was the-- Speaker 2: --win that award? Speaker 1: --the second Nieman, black Nieman. The first was a black fellow from Chicago [Illinois] who worked on the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. Can't think of the guy's name [Fletcher P. Martin]. I just saw his picture. I have his picture out there, big fellow. He did a great job at Harvard and I was determined to follow suit. Speaker 2: So, you were inspired by this gentleman from the Chicago-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: --Sun-Times? Speaker 1: He was a good--he was--made a lot of headlines in Chicago on the stories he covered, but I just can't think of his name. You get my age, your memory slips. Speaker 2: Right. We'll come back to you for, for, for that name. Now, so you are off now, well, involuntarily off to Harvard on your Nieman award because of trying to start the newspaper guild union there at the Cleveland Call and Post unsuccessful. Speaker 1: Well, I got back on the paper. They had a coming together. We never had a union, but they at least readmitted me to the job and I applied and won it. And the thing I noticed, I was making seventy-eight dollars I think a week at Cleveland, when I went to union. When I went to Harvard, the pay was over one hundred [dollars], so I said, oh, boy. I left Harvard, I had money in the bank on a scholarship. Speaker 2: So, you were being penalized-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to come back (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I could see the economics of journalism. Story_ID: 571573 Speaker 1: Now, you were accepted back at the Cleveland Call and Post, though-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. Speaker 1: --after the Nieman [Nieman Fellowship]-- Speaker 2: No, not after Nieman. That was another thing. When I got to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], they have a rule, you have to go back to your paper. I didn't go back to the paper. I wrote a letter to fifty daily newspaper editors around the country saying I was available. I was at Harvard and I was looking for a job when I--the year was up. And one publisher answered me and that was Phil Graham of The Washington Post. He said, "Booker [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker], you come here, get a job and I'll give you the next opening," which he did. Speaker 1: Now, you said, get a job and then he'll give you the next journalist opening. So you were not working as a journalist when you first went-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: --to The Washington Post (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I came to Washington [D.C.] then, I was working at the library peddling books, stacking books. Speaker 1: Okay. And Phil Graham, Sr., was-- Speaker 2: That's right. He--when he got a opening, they hired me. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what area--what--where--what, what were you covering there when you were hired as a journalist there at The Washington Post? Speaker 2: What did-- Speaker 1: Yeah, what, what, what, what were you covering? Were you in the metro, in the style, or national? Speaker 2: No, I was just on the city desk-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --under Ben Gilbert. He was a very well known city editor, and I came in and the problem I noticed, Washington was a segregated city then. I couldn't eat except in the--on the third floor of The Post building at the cafeteria. Anywhere outside the building, I couldn't eat, had all kind of problems. Speaker 1: Were you the first African American hired (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was the first full-time reporter on The Washington Post, black reporter. Speaker 1: Right. There had been part-time reporters prior to-- Speaker 2: That's right, part-time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I--they gave me run of the place, but the stories just weren't--they put you in a little niche. You'd cover crime, you'd cover this (unclear) or that (unclear), but it wasn't an all-encompassing kind of schedule for me and it was boring. So, eventually I got tired of that and joined [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson-- Speaker 1: Okay. Before you-- Speaker 2: --when he expanded his office here in Chic- in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, before we, we go there, let's visit a little bit more in this job at The Washington Post. How long--what--did you stay at The Washington Post? Speaker 2: I'd say about two years. Speaker 1: Okay. And what kind of assignments, news assignments-- Speaker 2: Oh, I would mostly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get--did you get the same-- Speaker 2: I started off on the police beat. They had a, a very well known police reporter, Al Lewis [Alfred E. Lewis], and he would send me all of the facts from the police station and I would draft a story. That's where I started. And then I went--gradually went to covering events, agency press conferences, all little stuff. So when they finally said--I did a story and made eight-column streamer, I said, that's it. I'm gonna leave now. Speaker 1: And that's when you left. Speaker 2: That's when I went with Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me go back to a question, though. Did they assign you to all stories or were they special stories that they would not make an assignment to you on? Speaker 2: They assigned me--they tried to be very fair. I'll give them credit. They assigned me anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'd go into places and say I'm Simeon Booker from The Washington Post, they'd laugh. Speaker 1: They thought it was a joke? Speaker 2: That's right. It was very embarrassing, but I stayed with it and I at least broke the ice. I showed that a black could do the job. Speaker 1: Did they hire any more full-time-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black reporters? While-- Speaker 2: --they did hire--they hired--when I left, they hired--they started hiring full-time blacks and some of them has done very well there. Speaker 1: Can you name some of the ones that-- Speaker 2: And I have a very good relationship with them even now. I--they did a story on me about two weeks ago. Well, you've seen it, which I thought was very good. Wil Haygood wrote a wonderful story. Story_ID: 571574 Speaker 1: All right. So, about this time, you hear that [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson wants to expand his-- Speaker 2: That's right. That's when I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) publishing empire. Speaker 2: --flew out to Chicago [Illinois] and I had a little Tin Lizzie and I drove my family. I had a, a, a wife [Thelma Cunningham] and two kids then, my first wife, drove out there, and started a new life. And no sooner that I got out there, then the Till [Emmett Till] case broke and that gave me all this energy. When news broke that he had been missing in Mississippi, I called his mama [Mamie Till-Mobley] in Chicago and got the only picture she had, gave Jet exclusives for the picture. Then, I just followed her 'til she went to Mississippi when they found the body and they got in the big battle. They wanted to bury him in Chica- in Mississippi. She wanted to take her son back to Chicago. She eventually did, and they had a big funeral and she opened the casket, and it was a very moving scene, national. Story_ID: 571575 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna go back and get a little bit more detail. First of all, you were--your first job with Johnson publications [Johnson Publishing Company] is--was in Chicago [Illinois], am I correct? You-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --went--were there in, in that bureau. And you were an assigned reporter? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was a reporter. I was on the editorial desk. They would call them editors. Magazine terms was editors, newspapers are reporters. Speaker 1: And that's--did Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] hire you at more money than they were paying at The Post [The Washington Post]? Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: He paid very good pay. I remember what it is because I know the expenses, but-- Speaker 1: And, and you started covering national news-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at that time, okay. Were there some--any important stories that you covered before the-- Speaker 2: I don't remember (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Emmett Till case? Speaker 2: I don't remember. That was a big one that wiped everything out. And what made it so bad, I was a northerner. I'd never been in the Deep South my whole life. And when I was faced with going in the Deep South, I was just--I couldn't believe it. Here's a section of the country blacks couldn't walk on the sidewalk. Whites, you couldn't look whites in the eye. I'd never seen anything like that in my life. I just couldn't believe it. Story_ID: 571576 Speaker 1: How did you first hear about the Emmett Till case before you were assigned? Speaker 2: In the, the Tribune, ran a paragraph-- Speaker 1: Chicago Tribune (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) story, yeah, just, just Negro boy missing in Mississippi. That's all it was, you know. It wasn't anything big or anything. And from that, we took it and built it up. Then when they found his body in the river hooked to this big metal piece, keep it down, it just developed. Speaker 1: Now, you had occasion to go down to Mississippi and not--you weren't just reporting from the Johnson Publishing desk [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]. You went down to Mississippi. Speaker 2: No, I didn't go down 'til the trial. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I took David Jackson. He was the photographer who shot the coffin pictures in Chicago [Illinois] at the funeral. But we went back down to--for the trial and the day before, we were just out trying to find where Mose Wright [Moses Wright] lived. He was the uncle of Till. And while we were driving along there, this car pulled up the side and a guy jumped out with a shotgun saying, "What are you doing down here," the N word? And they ran us out of there. We're at a time trying to find our way over dirt roads back to Dr. Howard's [T.R.M. Howard] house where we were living in two apartment rooms he owned across the road from his house and we was staying. Speaker 1: Because there were no hotels and-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no hotels, nothing. We had to go miles just to get food. Speaker 1: What was the trial like? How well were you received there? Speaker 2: Well, we were received just like we were servants. They put all the black press in one little side in a corner over by the window so we could hop out if we got nervous, and we just had a real tough time. And what made it so unusual, the first day the judge realized there was no evidence. They had no witnesses. So, he recessed the trial so that we could go out, reporters. The--Clark Porteous, the Nieman fellow from a paper in the South and myself organized reporters looking for witnesses. We stayed out all day and we found three new witnesses they brought in that at least gave some evidence that the crime did take place. Speaker 1: Were these black or white witnesses? Speaker 2: They were all black. See, the blacks, they just disappeared. I think the whites frightened them. But even after the trial took an hour--the jury to an hour to deliberate, they freed them, two men, and we had an awful job of getting out of the South home, and that was tough. Speaker 1: The--there's also seems to be a story in your run-ins with the local sheriff there. Speaker 2: Oh, that was a terrific thing. No, I had no run-in with the--I didn't run in with anybody there 'cause I didn't need that kind of excitement. But, I was sitting at a table, at the press table and this sheriff came in, where's [HistoryMaker] Simeon Booker? And Jimmy Hicks [James Hicks] said to him, he left yesterday and I said, oh, boy. Then I knew my time was limited down there. I didn't even realize he was reading Jet but he had gotten a hold of a Jet and some of the things I said about him he didn't like. My stay was very rough down there. Speaker 1: You--did you have any conversations other-- Speaker 2: With whites? Speaker 1: --than--with, with the sheriff? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't have any trial or any conversation with anybody as I left. And they sent down Clotye Murdock [Clotye Murdock Larsson] for Ebony but she collapsed on us down there. We had to rush her out of there. She couldn't take all the tension. It was very bad. Story_ID: 571577 Speaker 1: So, that short trial and--was just that, a very short trial and with--nothing much happened? Speaker 2: That's right. That short trial let you know what the problem was. And the problem was big and I just made up my mind then, I would stay on it and I got--and because circulation jumped, so people start buying Jets, that Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] made up his mind, he was gonna cover more than just entertainment. And so I began going to a lot of murders and killings and all kind of things in the South. Speaker 1: So, let's talk about some of those. You were-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't remember. I, I didn't bring anything. But they were always the same. I went in one town as I remember and this white lady came up and said the ne-, the N word, "You don't belong here." And I said, "I live down here." "No, you don't." "N word folk don't wear them kind of glasses." Then, I knew, boy, I was in the wrong place. Story_ID: 571578 Speaker 1: You were brave enough and wanted the story bad enough to get on one of the Freedom Rides. Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, that was some time later when Farmer, Jim Farmer [James Farmer], decided to have a Freedom Ride from Washington [D.C.] to New Orleans [Louisiana]. I got on with a freelance photographer because I couldn't get my own photographer to take any dangerous trip like that. We joined them. We traveled two buses from Washington to someplace to someplace to--finally got to Atlanta [Georgia]. And Reverend King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] told me, "Booker [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker], you'll never make it to New Orleans. They're gonna whale at you once you get out of here," and I don't know how he knew, but he was right. I was on the first bus that got through. Second bus got stopped, turned over, burned, really just--I--wouldn't believe it. We got all the way into Birmingham [Alabama], I think, wherever we were going, and they, they had to go back and bring the other people back out. Terrible thing. It was--and I had to call John Edgar Hoover's [J. Edgar Hoover] office. I knew one of his associate directors, Deke DeLoach [Cartha DeLoach]. Man, send help. These people will never get out of here. And we sat in that airport where people just went around--guards were all around us 'til the plane came. We got on and flew down to New Orleans. Speaker 1: That was the only way you made it to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was the only way I make it out. But I had a lot of close experiences and I always wore old clothes, carried a Bible, always was--never allowed my picture to be taken anywhere. That's why of all these pictures you have, you don't see any of me in the South, always taken afterward. I have one picture I noticed, I was going down the road with King and Wilkins [Roy Wilkins] and I--you could just see my head in there. That's one of the few pictures that I have of me on the march in the South. I just wouldn't allow any pictures, just too dangerous. Speaker 1: The, the se- the first bus made it through, but the second bus was stopped and burned, you said. Did you know some people on that second bus? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we knew my--one of my--I was split up going one, my photographer would be on the other. We, we would all split up so we'd have, have representation on both buses. But, Moses Newson was a afro, was on that bus that was burned, and he changed his life. And Jim Peck [James Peck], I'll never forget his face, so bloodied, all cut away. And the doctor from Detroit [Michigan], oh, he got so badly beaten. And you always remember and, and you can see it and feel it. Speaker 1: The, the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] did look into that. I don't know-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. The justice department not only looked into it, they furnished protection when these same Freedom Rides decided to go back to Birmingham and finish the march. They gave them protection for the rest of the way in, so they made the march just as they had planned. But it was a dangerous venture and the tactic of Freedom Ride in the South at that time was very dangerous. But those people had the guts to go through with it and you had to give them a lot of credit for that. Story_ID: 571579 Speaker 1: That's the Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm and myself, [HistoryMaker] Simeon Booker. Speaker 2: (Unclear) after he was thrown out of [U.S.] Congress. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, who's in there? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon on the left, his photographer, Maurice Sorrell in the center, and Congressman Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] on the right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you know how to spell Sorell? Speaker 2: Double L. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon on the left-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon on the left, ambassador from Ghana to the United States, Moses Ebenezer Debrah [sic. Ebenezer Moses Debrah], D-E-B-R-- Speaker 1: A-H. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --A-H. And, right, Stanley Scott. Speaker 1: No, that's Moneta Sleet [Moneta Sleet, Jr.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Moneta Sleet. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that Moneta? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's Moneta Sleet. Speaker 1: Photographer, Moneta Sleet. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, it's the prize-winning Ebony photographer, Moneta Sleet, M-O-N-E-T-A. Speaker 1: (Unclear), Carol [Carol McCabe Booker]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): David Susskind-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --show in New York [New York], I think. To the left is Jimmy Hicks [James Hicks] of the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News]. In the sort of almost center is David Susskind, the program host, then Simeon. Speaker 1: Vice president-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next one. Sideways, please. Thank you. Speaker 1: --campaign. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry. Once again, who is that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you tell us again? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who, who is that, please, again? Speaker 1: Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] at the Resurrection City, the Poor People's Campaign camp there on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 571580 Speaker 1: Now in 1963, two schools in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] had what was described as a racial riot, St. John's [St. John's College High School, Washington, D.C.] and Easton [sic. Eastern High School, Washington, D.C.], and you heard about this and you got involved in it. Tell us about that. Give us the details. Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you first hear about it? Speaker 2: That was the first time I'd ever been out in the middle of such a racial muddle. At the end of the Thanksgiving football game, the black, all black Easton High School team just rioted after being defeated by St. John's parochial school in Washington [D.C.]. The team charged across the field, started beating up fans, people, everybody, just tore everything loose. I was so distressed, I wrote a letter to all the three daily papers protesting the conduct on the black students, saying I was black and somebody should speak out about their conduct and do something to improve conditions in the school for them. Well, man, they slashed the tires on my car and, oh, they just--a certain group of blacks. But in the end, the superintendent named a ten-person committee to investigate the situation and I was a member. And I was--became the chief writer of the report of the committee, and I look at it as one of the finest things I have done in my public career to improve racially, not being quiet when if you speak out you can do some good. Speaker 1: Right. The--this was just nine years after Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. What made you--or made it so important that you speak out and join Carl Hansen's commission to explain this or make a report on it? Speaker 2: Well, I think you always have to do your part to develop a harmonious community. You can't sit aside and not speak up. I couldn't be running all over the South protesting discrimination of whites against blacks when in my own City of Washington, I remain quiet when blacks overwhelm whites at a football game, and I think that was the thing that did it. It bounced me off 'cause I then became much more fruitful in my approach. I knew what I was doing and where I was going. Speaker 1: And there were blacks who resented what you had to say in that report and your involvement. Speaker 2: They did, but you always will have that and you have to learn how to stand up beside, despite it. Speaker 1: You said they slashed your tires in-- Speaker 2: Oh, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in retribution. Speaker 2: Oh, they really did me in. Speaker 1: Anything else? Speaker 2: Did me in. I never was really appreciated for doing it. People never remembered it, but I regard it as one of the bravest things I've ever done, and it had some good. Speaker 1: What, what was the good that came out of it that you saw? Speaker 2: Well, it made a lot more people aware of participating in civic activities and proving the plight of blacks underclass who have no opportunities to participate in opportunities where they can grow. That was it. Story_ID: 571581 Speaker 1: Let's go back to--I know you said y- you did not have a tremendous role, but you were there for the Little Rock Nine out of the--the kids trying to go to school in Little Rock, Arkansas, and the governor of Arkansas, Governor Faubus [Orval Faubus], turning them back. You saw that story, you covered that story. Speaker 2: Well, when--Little Rock--I was--have always been very friendly with Mrs. Bates. And I went down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Daisy, Daisy Bates. Speaker 2: Daisy Bates, that's right. I went--took a photographer down to Little Rock to cover the incident of the school kids. And I went there, but being a professional now at covering race relations, I learned not to go right up front on the front row. So, I stayed back and watched and the black reporter from--Wilson, Alex Wilson [L. Alex Wilson], from the Memphis paper [Tri-State Defender], went in to get closer, got beat up by the mob there. I didn't. I didn't get hurt, covered everything, left, filed my story. They take him to the hospital. He never got his story out. But I thought that Bates did a tremendous job bringing that crew to go to the school entrance opening and stayed with them all the time, and she and her husband were real pioneers in Little Rock. Story_ID: 571582 Speaker 1: --Some reason, they would not allow black reporters to go into the school [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] or to have the same access as white reporters there. What was the reason behind that? Speaker 2: Well, that was always a problem in the South. You never got equal right, but you got the story. And I remember I had to talk to the superintendent outside to find out what went on at a meeting he called for press people. Even though I was press, I wasn't allowed to attend, and that was true in many areas of the South. You just weren't part of the system. So I had to develop a relationship with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] where I could go anywhere. They would always tip me off on how bad a city was, how safe it was, and I could--I became very close to them. And that's why the Freedom Ride, they took me to get--leave one of those buses, call back to Washington [D.C.] and get the FBI to send troops or send plane down to pick these people up and get them out of there. That was one of the roles they played that was hidden. Story_ID: 571583 Speaker 1: Were there other stories that you covered while you were-- Speaker 2: Oh, I covered a story every other week or every week. I was covering--I had a whole listing of stories. You're talking about the major ones, but I went into Texas on a story. I don't even remember the details of it. I was in Virginia where the blacks refused to go to school. I can't remember that. But I went in all the southern states covering stories, doing exclusive stuff on the situation involving blacks. Speaker 1: And is it fair to say that because of the stories that you covered especially in the South, but nationally, that Jet magazine became not just an entertainment publication but was also covered serious news stories and gave that to America? Speaker 2: It became so--The Washington Post the other day did a story titled "The Man From Jet" about me. I would go in Mississippi, when I knock on a door, they wouldn't say he's from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or this, they'd say that's the man from Jet. So, I never allowed pictures. I was always some ghost, but I got there and that was my point, get the story out. Speaker 1: Now, do you feel that--those activities and others, was that the reason that Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] decided to expand into a Washington [D.C.] bureau and have you head it up? Or how did that happen? Speaker 2: Well, he decided to develop a Washington bureau because Washington is a key city with [U.S.] Congress here, with a cabinet here, [U.S.] Supreme Court here, very few black pape- national agencies covered events here, and that's very hard to come by because who's gonna cover it? I came along at a time the caucus was about three--black caucus [Democratic Select Committee; Congressional Black Caucus] had about three or four members. Now, it's up in the '60s [1960s]. You work with those people. You do stories on what they're doing and you build inference. And that was the thing that the NAACP did, develop a strong legal basis. But when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came along, moving mob groupings, it destroyed the less spectacular form of work back on the legal side. And Washington is a city with many things happening, international base, Congress, all the others plus the city government. Story_ID: 571584 Speaker 1: In your seventy years of covering national news events and newsmakers, you've known just practically every major white or black new- newsmaker. For instance, just give us details on Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. You met him. You interviewed him. You worked with him in getting stories, so what was he like in your opinion? Speaker 2: Well, I think Dr. King came along at a period where things were slowing down. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was in the mainstream and the Urban League [National Urban League]. Then, when he took to the streets, he suddenly got the imagination, shook the imagination, and he became a key factor. But, I never thought that Reverend King was a real number one and only. He just didn't have--he had the emotional aspect, he had the spiritual aspect, but he didn't have the mental capacity to organize the--for a vast operation like civil rights organizations need to combat the evil in this country. And that's why one of the things that I have--think and have said some time, that when the move came to develop a King shrine at the Mall [National Mall] here in Washington [D.C.], I think it should've never been a King shrine, it should've been a leadership shrine, and black leaders of all the different groups should be part of that shrine to carry on. Because Dr. King was just temporary. You look at his organization, nowhere to be seen now and yet we have spent--they're building a mill- $100 million dollar shrine for him and it's, it's just something wrong with it. They still have 20 million to go but it looks like we have to be better thinkers, preparers, planners if we wanna make it so we can reach out and go another hundred years. I look today here in this country, 12 million illegal aliens in this country. How'd they get here? And we got blacks, the lowest on the totem pole now for unemployment, for health, for housing. Who is looking out for blacks at a time our leadership is nil and losing? Speaker 1: You've known a lot of civil rights leaders or black activists. Would you rank them in any order, one, two, three (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'd never rank because each person has a time and a place. I can say none last the whole period. Even the NAACP hasn't carried--they would--they go a certain distance, Urban League goes a certain distance, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] goes a certain distance, but it's a combination of all of them helping one another when they're weak to keep this going, not when one guy jumps out and goes it alone and then when he weakens, he has no replacement. And that's what we've--have in the U.S. today now. Speaker 1: Can we depend on just one leader or do we need to have-- Speaker 2: As many as we can get. Speaker 1: --a thousand? Speaker 2: It, it depends on as many as we can get. I'm talking about major leaders, but I think we need much more preparation and planning at that level. Story_ID: 571585 Speaker 1: You've known presidents all the way back to Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], and of those, what is your opinion of the worst and the, and the best? Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's a funny thing when you say that. My one who I gained the most respect from were the Kennedys, John F. [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. I was in the--first black ever to be in a press party going up Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.] for inauguration. I did that under Kennedy. When he died, the family selected me on the delegation, press delegation for the funeral. When Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] died, I just--I couldn't go to the funeral. I--after the funeral, I couldn't go to New York [New York] for the burial [sic.]. But it was just--became that they just lost out. I went down to the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] burial and to see his widow [Coretta Scott King], I just had to go tell her, well, keep going. She made it a few years after that. And I look now, who has replaced him? The SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] is struggling to keep up and you hear very little about it. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the guy in charge, and now he's leaving and our leadership is just suddenly going down. Story_ID: 571586 Speaker 1: The American public, some of the young generation leaders coming up today, do you think they are being effective and can they be more effective? Speaker 2: It takes time for them to come up and, and these are times where you, you can't prepare people 'cause you don't know when opportunities come and you have to just do the best you can at it. I look at I think the young have done a good job in many areas, but I still think we need our own voices to speak out, and when we don't speak out, we hurt ourselves. I look at the things that are going on now in Washington [D.C.] and it's kind of tragic to see all this money spent for a war in Iraq and all of it's taking away from what blacks at the bottom should be sharing for their own good. Story_ID: 571587 Speaker 1: You covered Vietnam [Vietnam War] and there's several times General Westmoreland [William Westmoreland] and you were, were close friends and associates. Do you think Vietnam was wasteful to African American young people? Speaker 2: No, I thought Vietnam, I said to myself, I wondered many times why the hell we were over in Vietnam? What did we ever lose in Vietnam? I went there and some of the saddest moments came when you go to the airport and you see the new arriving troops coming in. And if you follow, you travel around much in Vietnam as I did, you say, why are we here? Explain to me why are we here? People from Washington [D.C.] where we're over in a country, world where nobody can understand what you're talking about. Why are you here? What are you here to gain? And the same thing about Iraq. What are we--have we lost in Iraq, our name, where we've got to be experimenting on new weapons and this, that, and the other. Is the whole world gonna drive to improve, increase weapons? Or we're fighting over oil and all the other natural goodies. And, and you just have to figure out where the hell humanity is going. Story_ID: 571588 Speaker 1: You said a little while ago about the issue of immigration in this country. Do you believe that black leadership is not speaking up enough on that issue? Speaker 2: I've always believed that blacks should speak up, but why don't they? It's very simple to understand. Corporations are putting the money up for the illegal aliens. Blacks are afraid to say anything for fear they lose the little they get and so nothing is ever done. I mean why would it happen? That's what you have to think about. If these blacks can't speak up, who do they represent? Who will speak up? Story_ID: 571589 Speaker 1: You had a very special relationship with the publisher, Mr. John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson]. He was the one who set up the Washington, D.C. bureau. He was the one who originally hired you. Tell us about that relationship and what was most important to you about it. Speaker 2: Well, I don't think I had a special relationship with him. I think once the Till [Emmett Till] case provided Jet with an image that they had never enjoyed before, I figured he became more conscious that he had some responsibility, being a publisher. It wasn't enough to be publishing magazines full of entertainment and undraped women and all of that. You need to have something solid and be--and it all comes back when blacks turn out to be the one who most need school, most need housing, employment, who's gonna get it if you are the largest publication and you don't touch it? And that was the thing traveling the South taught me, that if blacks buy your magazine, you have a responsibility to report on their affairs in serious areas. You can't be just the go buy factor. You got to be in there. Speaker 1: You--I remember Robert Johnson [Robert E. Johnson] at Jet and the close relationship you two had. Is there--how much did he impact the shape and future of Jet magazine? Speaker 2: I thought he was very effective. I thought--I think Mr. Johnson had the capacity of finding talented people, put them together and saying, go, show me. I think he did it. It was one factor that made our magazines number one in black America. Speaker 1: The, the fact that you were not able to report national news, but also did the ticker tape column that most people look forward to each, each week gave them an insight to what was going on in the national black community and then your later doing many news stories, of course, serious news stories. Mr. Johnson saw that that was effective, saw that it raised circulation and allowed you to move, move ahead on, on that. What's going to replace, replace that now? Speaker 2: I wish I could answer you as I should, but I just--because of other circumstances, I will have to say, I don't know. Story_ID: 571590 Speaker 1: But one of the things I wanted to bring out is a person who I regarded as number one when it came to black young people. Have you ever heard of the name Frank Wills? Speaker 2: Oh Frank, right. Speaker 1: What did he do? Speaker 2: He found some tape on a door, that's-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And thereby disrupted the entire--began the unraveling of the Watergate break-in. Speaker 1: It resulted in the impeachment of a president [sic.]. Speaker 2: Brought down a government, right. Speaker 1: And yet, I looked today, he was one of the understudies that I really spent a lot of time with. He went around, traveling around for a while. I got the Democratic Committee [Democratic National Committee] to offer him a scholarship for study. He just said, no. Then, his mama died, he went home, started mowing lawns, and so was forgotten. Today, there's no, nothing in Washington [D.C.] for this young black fellow. And I have pictures at my office where--here, I'll show them to you, some--where he's praying help before he died. I thought it was the most tragic end of a guy who tried to do something, got up there, and, because the Republicans said he destroyed us, they never gave him any break. Story_ID: 571591 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): President George Herbert Walker Book- Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] at the microphone and to the right is HHS secretary, Louis Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Louis. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And to the far right is Office of Personnel Management director, Constance Newman [HistoryMaker Constance Berry Newman]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nieman fellow, Fletcher Martins [sic. Fletcher P. Martin], talking with Simeon [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker]. What paper did Fletcher did work for? Speaker 2: Chicago Sun-Times. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and the gentleman on the left again? I missed the beginning. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Fletcher Martin. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And he was the first-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Black Nieman fellow. Simeon was the second. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon in Washington [D.C.] talking with on the--on the right, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], civil rights activist, and in the center, Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] staffer, Bernard Garnett. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay, ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): On the left is Simeon and next to him is his oldest son, Simeon, III [Simeon Booker, III], on the campaign trail in New York [New York] with Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] when he was running for [U.S.] Senate. Don't know the name of the other gentleman. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay, on the top? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Congressman John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] when he was, what campaigning? Speaker 2: Yeah, when he was campaigning. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and the bottom? Speaker 2: That's Mayor Walter Washington and his wife and I don't know who this guy is. Who? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And his wife Bennetta [Bennetta Bullock Washington] and Simeon in an uncharacteristic laughing mode on the left. Speaker 2: Oh, is this--this is not me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes, that's you. Yeah, you're not used to-- Speaker 2: Fixing dinner. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 2: Who is that, me? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Story_ID: 571592 Speaker 1: I wanted to go over a few things that we may have missed and, one, you did a syndicated show, radio show for a while there. It became well known nationally. Reflections on that show and some of the things that you did on that show that impacted all of America. Speaker 2: Well, I think that show was one of the most appropriate forms of publicity and giving out information that I ever mastered. I've discovered that even though my Jet pieces may have picked up a few white listeners, going on the Westinghouse radio three times a week, I was getting a whole feel. So, being a very slick fellow, I learned how to take both my stories on Jet, turn them into something for Westinghouse [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company], put them on and I could reach a much larger audience, and I could churn up a lot of mail. And it was interesting how I would do it by not just going out and wrang and bing, bang, but doing it very gently and smoothly. And Westinghouse taught me a lot of things about techniques of, of--I remember doing a story one time on Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.]--not Vernon Jordan, Whitney Young. He had been drowned and somebody called me from the place to tell me. I did a memorial obituary for him for Westinghouse and, boy, they put it on and people were all--they called raising hell, oh, this guy don't know what he's talking about. So, they pulled it back, apologized and all, and (laughter) then they discovered it was true. My point was, how much confidence did they have in me? All these few people call and, and I often looked at that, but I gained a lot of publicity for a lot of events that the major press wouldn't tackle 'til I would come along and do a commentary on it. Then, I would see stories begin to appear on it. Speaker 1: So you brought it into the national view. Speaker 2: That's right. It was a--I found it gave me some of the most challenging opportunities. It made me think on my feet, made me think ahead. It was--I enjoyed Westinghouse for it. I just hated to give it up. Story_ID: 571593 Speaker 1: You also had a special relationship in reaching out to J. Edgar Hoover. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I had a relationship with J. Edgar Hoover not based on being an informer, but because of Deke DeLoach [Cartha DeLoach] and my going in the South, one time he invited me over and asked was I ever scared. I said, "Are you kidding? I'm scared every time I leave Washington, D.C., and when they say go in the South." So from then, he began saying, "Call me if you're going and I'll tell you what's safe," what's this, that, and we developed a real friendship of knowing where to go, what the temperatures were, how to make it here, there, and I admired that from him. And John Edgar Hoover, I got a picture with him once and it was during the time when he was being criticized for going after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and--'cause I didn't let anything determine what I was going to do. And so I just kept going, but it had nothing to do with King, how the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] would treat teenagers or anything. It was just two people knowing each other and working together. I was surprised many times by John Edgar Hoover's understanding of this (unclear) and I was happy that I did it. Story_ID: 571594 Speaker 1: You said that R. F. Kennedy's assassination hit you very, very hard. I know several times you and your son [Simeon Booker, III] met with him there in New, New York [New York], or you met him--your son met him there in New York. What was that relationship like between you and-- Speaker 2: Well, one-- Speaker 1: --Senator Kennedy? Speaker 2: --thing I always said, when I traveled with John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], we were up in Lexington, Kentucky. We arrived there and stayed there about forty-five minutes and then he said, "Everybody get on the plane, we're going back to Washington [D.C.]." I said, "Well, that's strange." Well, we got to Washington. He called me aside and said, "Booker [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker], you know why they came back home?" And I said, "No." "They couldn't find a hotel that would admit you." I said, I said, "Damn, this is a hell of a country." But I learned to like him and the Kennedys, Bobby, because I could talk to them. They were very fair minded people who attacked a lot of the problems I was attacking. And I thought they had a certain interest in blacks whereas on the other hand, the person I had the most problems with was LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] who the press tried to build up as the new man for blacks. I wrote a piece in Jet on LB one time in which I said, he talks about just that he has no blacks on his some kind of staff, I don't remember which. Oh, he called the publisher, he was so mad, and had the publisher come to Washington. And I said, man, he's--he--like that, he can go to hell. Well, he was rough on me and I discovered that it was for my best interest to send Fannie Granton [E. Fannie Granton] to cover the White House and I stayed back until he had left and then I started covering the White House again. Story_ID: 571595 Speaker 1: Were there any instances that you may have been covering the story or had a run-in with a Washington, D.C., or national politician in which you felt or you may not have gotten the backup from the publisher, [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson? Speaker 2: No. I don't remember (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He backed you all the way on almost everything? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he backed me or if he didn't back me, he would say, you're on your own and--which I knew that any time 'cause I was always on my own. 'Cause he was gonna be far enough back in case anything happened, he wasn't gonna get hit. But, I admired him for what he did and he, he seemed to enjoy the new thrust and he got enjoyment about being respected for the Till [Emmett Till] case, for these other cases I got going in civil rights. Speaker 1: And increased the circulation-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --of, of Jet. Speaker 2: They increased it and increased his image-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --from being just a publisher of nonsense. Speaker 1: Now, when you said publisher John H. Johnson had to come down to Washington because of LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] asking him to come down, did anything happen as a result of that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he would just tell me about it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he just came down and met with him. Speaker 2: Yeah, he came down and they--he was smart enough to work something else out and get on another. But I quit covering. I had my assistant cover the White House. Speaker 1: Fannie Granton [E. Fannie Granton]. Speaker 2: I guess the first time in history that a, a office manager covered the White House because her boss was the--a no-no at the White House. And LBJ just never was my favorite. Story_ID: 571596 Speaker 1: Now, from the time you opened the Washington, D.C., office [of Jet magazine] until your retire- recent retirement, how many years did that cover? How many years did you head up that office? And--yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Fifty-five years. Speaker 1: Fifty-five years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm trying to tell them--'cause I looked and I was way off on the side there. Speaker 1: Fifty-five years. And that's longer than-- Speaker 2: Can't hear you. Speaker 1: Okay. That's, that's longer than any other Washington bureau chief in the history of Washington. I don't know whether you were aware of that, but you hold that record for holding Washington bureau chief's job there. The, the--we, we should not leave out Maurice Sorrell. You, Fannie Granton [E. Fannie Granton], Maurice Sorrell-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --were a team. How did you pull them together? What-- Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was just luck and timing picking people. Fannie Granton was a real hard worker, a lawyer by training, very exceptional person. I had others that came in. In fact, we integrated our office at one point. I was trying to think of the young Swedish lady with--she-tell them (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Ragni Lantz. Speaker 2: What's her name? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ragni. Speaker 2: Ragni Lantz, Ragni Lantz. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That's what--she was very good. And it did something 'cause the people see, look, if they can integrate their bureau, we can integrate ours. Story_ID: 571597 Speaker 1: But you made me forget something I was going to tell you. It was on the end of my tongue and I didn't want to miss it. Speaker 2: Was it-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sorrell. Speaker 2: Oh, it was-- Speaker 1: Was it Maurice [Maurice Sorrell]? Speaker 2: --about my wife. I--one of the real keys in my existence has been I've been married to Carol J. McCabe [Carol McCabe Booker]. It's a marriage that has given me a lot of faith and hope and she has been lovely, and I just want her to know it and know that many people look at me and say, as after the story appeared in The Washington Post a few weeks ago, one of the questions to the author was, Booker [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker] is married not to an African American woman. She was right. But we've made it as black and white, together. Thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What a beautiful marriage it, it is. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I know she's helped you a great deal. Speaker 2: She's helped me and done a beautiful job, helped family, my son. She's done so much for me-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --businesswise. Speaker 1: Carol had a career before she met you. Speaker 2: She has a career now. Speaker 1: And she was at-- Speaker 2: She's general counsel of the Broadcasting Board [Broadcasting Board of Governors] and I'm very proud of her. Now, is there anything else that-- Speaker 1: Well, I just want to talk about Carol. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I--I wish we had-- Speaker 1: She was at Voice of America at, at the time you two met, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. She was and she travels all over the world. Story_ID: 571598 Speaker 1: Let me look at this list and see whether I've anything I--oh, there's one point I wanted to bring in. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: And that was when I was in Cleveland [Ohio] just after getting there, I moved in one of the real beautiful places, that I grew, that was Roosevelt Student Co-operative House [Roosevelt Student Co-operative Housing Association, Cleveland, Ohio]. We had people from all over the world there, all races, creeds. I lived there and eventually became the first black senior member of the house and we had Japanese, Chinese, Jews, whites, blacks. It was a very unusual way to live. The students bought the house, they would furnish the meals, they'd hire a cook who would come in, fix one meal a day, they'd fix their own breakfast. We used to have programs, people visiting us. It was one of the most, I thought illuminating experiences in my life. And I just wanted to bring that in. Speaker 2: And you were a journalist at the Cleveland Call and Post working for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: --W.O. Walker [William Otis Walker]-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --at that time, right? Speaker 1: That's right. Story_ID: 571599 Speaker 1: Now, your dad [Simeon Booker, Sr.] made quite a name for himself, also. He was a minister, the leading church in the African community church [Third Baptist Church] in Youngstown, Ohio, the head of the YMCA [West Federal Street YMCA, Youngstown, Ohio] there, and a national, international president of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity; Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.]. Even though you were moving on to other things, coming to Washington [D.C.], to The Washington Post, what was he doing back in Youngstown? How was his career going? Speaker 2: Well, it went--he--until his death, he kept right in there. I always admired him. The only thing I said everybody who sees me says, S.S. Booker [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker]. That's his son, that's another Alpha, but when they find out I'm not a Alpha, it drops back and I've had to explain to so many people why I never followed in my footsteps as much as I wanted to. But when I was harassed at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], I had so much on my mind, so much to do, I didn't have time to be getting up at midnight, walking the streets, all that kind of silly stuff, and I just gave it up. Speaker 1: So, how do you feel about fraternity harassing these days? Speaker 2: I can't get closer to you. I'm pulling out of the picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: All right. How, how do you feel about fraternal harassment and abusement (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't believe in it, not for me who was working his way through college for that. I didn't have time for that 'cause I, I, I worked--every penny I made, I put in my college expenses. My father and mother [Roberta Waring Booker] never had to pay anything for my college education. I took care of myself, all expenses. Speaker 2: And your brother, Ray [Ray Booker], he went on to his own career, right? Speaker 1: My brother, Ray, went on. He got married and he lives in--lived, before he died, in Cleveland [Ohio]. He worked in government. My sister [Carolyn Booker Holland], she lives in Alexandria [Virginia], I think, and she worked in the school system, school systems. Story_ID: 571600 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? You've lived a full life, very fortunate, fruitful life. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, perhaps they won't have to be remembered at all. I lived my life. I believed--I, I said you can do it, you can follow your father [Simeon Booker, Sr.], and that's what I did. I never regretted it. Speaker 1: Will you be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I always hear his voice, help everybody. That's been my motto, help others. And every week at Jet in my column, I took a pride in saying, help somebody in this column. Say something nice about somebody, encourage some kid, open some job opportunity for somebody, do something to help somebody. Make this country greater. Speaker 1: And you've certainly done that. Story_ID: 571601 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you can think of over your life that if you had to do it over again you would do differently? Speaker 2: Well, I've done--I could be very cute, but I won't. No, I, I think I haven't had time. The decisions I've had to make had to be so quick, I never got a chance to study them to see what to do. You step in there and take it. And one of the things that has made my life so happy has been my wife [Carol McCabe Booker]. Story_ID: 571602 Speaker 1: (Laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How about your legacy? What, what would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 1: Well, I'm just happy to be--look at her [Booker's wife, Carol McCabe Booker] and say, we made it. 'Cause I give her a lot of credit. When I get down, my wife can really push and work, and we've had a very happy marriage (winks). Story_ID: 571603 Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much, you've been-- Speaker 2: One, one other question, and that is-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --the--you, you--you've heard the saying that we've had a number of, of black presidents-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Black press. I'm getting a--the black press. Have they been as effective as they have the capacity to be? Do you think they have been as effective? Speaker 1: Well, I think the competition today is shifting, the whole landscape of the press field in the minority community. I see many areas, radio and TV have become the major arteries for information and I think that has had an effect as to which way our press, our newspapers and magazines are going to have to go. And I find the troubling thing about me seeing with what happened is that magazines and newspapers are giving up being serious contenders for progress and opportunities in the various fields. They're going for the okey doke, the entertainment, the sports, leaving our kids without a background for progress. Speaker 2: Okay. Did I leave out anything? Is there anything I-- Speaker 1: No, my wife's [Carol McCabe Booker] back. She said you- you've done well, just stop (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh no. Story_ID: 571604 Speaker 1: You were sixty-six when you adopted a baby boy and she wanted to know about it. Is there-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh. You were--you adopted a son at sixty-six, when you were sixty-six. Not many men would have done that. Why did you do it and how do you feel about it? Speaker 2: Well, many men don't have a wife who's forty years younger than you are. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, you blame-- Speaker 2: Not forty, she's-- Speaker 1: You, you blame it all on Carol [Carol McCabe Booker]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Carol is a lot younger than I am. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: What she's saying is, talk about the circumstances around the adoption. Speaker 1: (CAROL MCCABE BOOKER): The need for more parents for black and interracial children. We have so much to give. Speaker 2: Say it louder so they can hear you. Speaker 1: (CAROL MCCABE BOOKER): We had so much to give. Story_ID: 571605 Speaker 1: That's me. I don't know. Diggs is next, Congressman Diggs [Charles Diggs]. And Jimmy Hicks [James Hicks] is next to him, right here, smiling, the one right here, yeah. And that's all I know. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And what were the circumstances, sir? Speaker 1: That's the Till [Emmett Till] case, the black press table during an intermission. Speaker 2: I was talking to President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Was it a special circumstance, special event? Speaker 2: No, I don't even remember it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Montgomery march [Montgomery, Alabama] with Roy Wilkins and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in front. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And there I am peaking behind that fellow, second from the left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Right there? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. All right. Okay, ready. Go ahead and tell us about this one, sir. Speaker 2: That was at the White House press conference and I was asking JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] about why would he go speak to a black--to a White House photographer association when they didn't have any black members? And he hired--and the organization hired its first black in less than a week, admitted a Washington corres- black Washington [D.C.] correspondent. Speaker 1: In route to the central highlands where one of his infantry units were going into battle. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And, once again, his name, please? Speaker 1: John Westmoreland [sic.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was the head of the entire division, troop--I can't think of his first name. What's his first-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): William Westmoreland. Speaker 1: William Westmoreland. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just, just focus on the photo and (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Does he know any of the photographers? He should say it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: Where was I, Carol [Carol McCabe Booker]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You were in the-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, some place I shouldn't have been. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Staff with our first white member, Ragni Lantz, right in the--beside me there on the top picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you go from left to right, sir? Speaker 2: Fannie Granton [E. Fannie Granton], Maurice Sorrell, Rangi Lantz, myself, Mary Dean [ph.], and Bernard Garnett. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Don't you mean Mary Whiteman? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you think it's Mary Whiteman? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Mary--was that Mary Whiteman? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Was it Mary Whiteman? Speaker 2: Mary Whiteman. She got married. I--Mary Dean, that's her maiden name. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and the bottom photo. Speaker 2: Now, that I don't know. I was-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Fannie's on the left. Speaker 2: Who is the second one? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I don't know who that is. Speaker 2: Who's the third? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ragni. Speaker 2: Ragni and myself. I don't know the one second from the left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What about this one, please? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can't tell you much about it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who's in it? Speaker 2: That's (unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): President Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ike and myself. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Probably at the Gettysburg farm [Eisenhower National Historic Site, Gettysburg, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: At the Gettysburg farm and that was the year after he left office. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Oh, sorry. Okay, I'm ready now. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker], his secretary, Mary Whiteman, Ragni Lantz of the Johnson--Washington bureau, and publisher, [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And the one below that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon on the left, at the time future [U.S.] Supreme Court justice Thurgood Marshall, and Clarence Mitchell [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.], the-- Speaker 1: The Washington bureau chief. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], also known as the 51st senator. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sorry, once again, the 101st senator. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hundred and first. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hundred and first. Story_ID: 571606 Speaker 1: Introducing Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.]. That's Vernon Jordan, isn't it? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Right, that's Vernon. Speaker 1: At a National Press Club luncheon. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, sir. Speaker 2: That's my mama [Roberta Waring Booker] and father [Simeon Booker, Sr.] at Youngstown, Ohio. Home. And that's my sister and who is that, me? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's your brother, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's my bro- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) What's your sister's name? And your brother's name? Speaker 2: Carolyn [Carolyn Booker Holland]--who is that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I don't know. Speaker 2: Who is that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I can't tell. Speaker 2: I can't tell either. It's not me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's not you. You told me it was Ray [Ray Booker]. Speaker 2: Ray. Is that Ray? Yeah, it could be (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Ray and Carolyn? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Ray (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Whenever you're ready. Speaker 1: --Youngstown, Ohio, my mother and father, and that's me, huh? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Did you point to your mother? Speaker 1: My mother's right here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And this is Mr. and Mrs. Underwood [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Mr. and Mrs. who? Speaker 1: Underwood. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Underwood. Speaker 1: Funeral home directors. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead and tell us about this. Do you know anything about this photograph? Speaker 1: What about that photograph, Carol [Carol McCabe Booker]? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You're posing for GQ. Kidding. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter) He does look like he's posing for GQ. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And trying to get that job with Mr. DeMille [Cecil B. DeMille]. Speaker 1: Oh, is that what it is? All right. Didn't even know it was me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Is this taken for a specific occasion or? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Was, was that photograph for a specific occasion? Speaker 2: No, that's just-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Who's that? Speaker 2: That's my first wife, Thelma [Thelma Cunningham]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, yeah maybe it is. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, that's just people visiting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's at Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --the Washington office. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, I see, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that the Washington bureau? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's just people visiting. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yep. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, what are we looking at here, please? Speaker 2: Who's the--oh, that's reception Ethel Payne had for the Nixons [President Richard Milhous Nixon and Pat Nixon] after we returned from Africa. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that's Nixon again? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, Mrs. Nixon, back's to the camera. Speaker 1: Where was that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I have no idea. No, that's Stan Scott [Stanley Scott] on the right and that's--oh, who's that in the middle? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Was, was he the first chairman? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I thought it was Diggs [Charles Diggs], the first chairman. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Named Gus, Augustus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] from California on the right, Simeon [HistoryMaker Simeon Booker] in the middle. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Who's this, James Brown? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, on the left, James Brown. I don't know who's on the right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This is one we should get also we don't have. Can't think of his name, though. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, put it up. Put it-- Speaker 1: That's the mayor of Newark [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. So that's the mayor of Newark? Is that it? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Who is that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon is second from the left talking with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte in the center. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And his wife? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's probably his wife, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) him on the left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I was getting ready to say two rap stars. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon, III [Simeon Booker, III] and on the right, James [James Booker]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next up. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): About it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): These are all-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): About 1973. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All of these are done. Speaker 2: What's her name, Carol? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who's manager? Speaker 2: Congressman Diggs' office manager. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, we don't need to worry about that. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) after this picture. Speaker 1: If that's me, I need a haircut. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 1: Reception at their house. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, you did? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, this is the Carol McCabe Booker on the left and Ernest Y- Love [Ernest Love], Simeon III, James Booker, Simeon, and Vauda [Vauda Hall Love], V-A-U-D-A, Love at their, the Bookers' wedding reception in August 1973. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon Booker and Carol Booker and I don't know that lady, but that's the guy who wrote 'The Million Dollar Negro' [ph.], right? What--no, no, or was it the mayor of High Point [North Carolina]? Remember that? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I get them mixed up. Parks? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, that's the photographer. Oh-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We still didn't get the wedding picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, you did. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Actually, I, I don't know those--I'm too confused about those two. I don't-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, don't worry about that. Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DICSUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): On the left is Stan Scott, in the center is Vernon Jordan, on the right is Don McGannon [Donald McGannon], president of Westinghouse [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company], and far right, Simeon. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that's Teresa Booker [Teresa Booker Bryant], Simeon's daughter, Simeon, and Stan Scott who was advisor to President Nixon, right? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nixon. Speaker 1: Yeah, at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): White House. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, who is this? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Frank Wills. Speaker 1: Frank Wills, the Watergate (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) He found the tape on the door [at the Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay, who is this, sir? Who is that? Speaker 1: Frank Wills. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Frank Wills. Speaker 1: Watergate hero. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you tell the story about it, sir, just real quick like? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): He did during the interview. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well, this is separate really from the interview. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm just saying from a practical standpoint (unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Sir, can you explain who Mr. Wall is? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you just explain, Mr. Wall? Speaker 1: That's Frank Wills. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And who was he? Speaker 1: He was the guy that found the tape on the door of the Watergate that brought down President Nixon. You know, he was a hero there for a while. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, sir, could you tell me about that photograph? Speaker 1: Well, that's our son. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Teddy [Teddy Booker]. Speaker 1: Teddy. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. All right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well, can you give--okay, all right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And I'm on the left. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You wanna say Mrs. Booker-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Simeon (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Carol Booker, Simeon-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And Teddy Booker. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --and Teddy Booker. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The youngest, his youngest son...