 Story_ID: 655034 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Willie Brown, Jr. [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.], W-I-L-L-I-E, Brown, B-R-O-W-N, Junior, J-R. Speaker 1: Okay, now, is your first name, is it Willie or is it William, or is it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Willie, everybody want me to change it but they gave me the name Willie so that's what I'm using. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Willie. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) August 17, 1930. Speaker 1: And what's your place of birth, your place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, New Orleans. I was born in New Orleans, Louisiana. Speaker 1: All right. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Retired public school teacher, retired opera singer with the Lyric Opera of Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: What's today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: The 22nd I think (laughter). Is it, I think it's the 22nd. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Twenty-third. Speaker 2: Twenty-third, twenty-third I think, yeah. Speaker 1: Of September, right? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Of September? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's September--September 23rd, that's right (laughter). Speaker 1: Two thousand and-- Speaker 2: Two thousand six [2006] (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are, you mean you wanna know the address? Speaker 1: No, not the address. Speaker 2: New Orleans--I mean Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, yeah. Speaker 1: South Side of Chicago. Speaker 2: South Side, right. Story_ID: 655035 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: A favorite food? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Steak. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Brown, beige or something like brown. That's my favorite color, right. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: Fall. I love fall. It's beautiful, lots of flowers, and it has a, it, it has a, a sadness to it sometimes, but it's, I feel good in the fall, too. Not too cold sometimes, not too hot, but it's just beautiful. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Vacation-- Speaker 1: Destination. Speaker 2: Back home to New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: New Orleans (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: The saying I have is this song because I sing it all the time. "The Lord is my light and my salvation. Whom then shall I fear," [Psalm 27:1]? That's it. Story_ID: 655036 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and your father's [Willie Brown, Sr.] side. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: First, we'll start with your mother. Can you give me your mother's full name, and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Sure. Odessa [Odessa Jackson Brown], O-D-E-S-S-A. Well, her--married, so do you want her maiden name or--Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay and--okay, what was her married name? Her married name was Brown, I take it, or-- Speaker 2: Well, we as my father, by my father, but they divorced--Brown, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I beg pardon? Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She, 19-, let me see, I was, let me see here now. When I was, when I was thirty, she was--she wasn't but eighteen, so let me see, she was born in 1912. I would say 1912. I'm not sure, 1912. Speaker 1: Okay. And was she born in New Orleans [Louisiana] too? Speaker 2: Yes, New Orleans. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: That's my problem, it's just--all the, the stuff that I had, to be quite candid with you, my--and my mother had pictures that, that go just far as we can go, but as a result of leaving New Orleans and, and people not sending her what, what she had kept for so long, I would say, that I can only go back as far as, as my grandmother with my mother, and her mother, I, I should know it but I, but I can't--I can't remember. I, I, I have no recol-right now of my great-grandmother [Mena Roberson] on my mother's side, no. But, but I know her very well, though. Speaker 1: Well, what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Susie, S-U, I, I have a picture here, Susie Jackson [Susie Roberson Jackson]. I have that--her, her, but her name, her married, her maiden name was Robinson [sic.], Susie Roberson, Susie Roberson. Story_ID: 655037 Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family that have passed down (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Any what? Speaker 1: Stories. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. My grand, my [maternal] grandmother [Susie Roberson Jackson]--you want something funny or what (laughter)? Speaker 1: Well, I just--any stories passed down from that side of the family about what life was like, you know. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Well, my gran- her father [Brown's maternal grandfather, Emerson Jackson], was a preacher, very clean-cut man. I have--I had pictures of him, too, very clean-cut man. Her, her mother [Brown's maternal grandmother]--well, they had separated, and as a result of it, they all cared for me because of the fact of my--of this ability that I had as a young child to sing solos so well. I was their favorite. It, it wasn't a large family from her side. Well, yes--but yes it is; in fact, to be--from that side, Mahalia Jackson's sister [sic.] married her first cousin; his, his name was Robert--his name was Dave, Rob--Dave Robertson [ph.], yeah--Dave Robertson, and that was Mahalia Jackson's sister who married him. And they lived in Wilson, Louisiana, I know that too, and I think, to be honest with you, they lived in a, in a place that might have been a slave type, type environment in, in Wilson, Louisiana, because I used to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like a plantation or something like that? Speaker 2: Like a, like a plantation. I, I can see it because when I was a child, my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] and them used to take me over there during the summer when, when the school was out, and I would go to Wilson, Louisiana, and I can see this great big house where you have to go through this, this, this little road--never the car because it's too rugged, and they used to get their horse and buggy. He would--Uncle Dave would get his, his unc- hid horse and buggy and drive us back there, and we would leave the car in--right near the, the town there and, and--until we get ready to leave. But I could see that little--I could see (unclear); I loved it, I loved that little kid (laughter). But, but you can go right through this road--down that road and, and this road, and this big house was right--they would block it and you go no farther, and his house, my Uncle Dave's house, was on a little place adjacent to the north side, and I believe he was a share, a sharecropper, a sharecropper, and remained there until his death. But in my mind I, I, I--now that I'm older, this was a slave house I think it was, and some--this, this is the way I can see it, you know? 'Cause it, it, it was an older house; it wasn't something that was just built, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some it's like a remnant from some--from the days of slavery; it was--it had been there since the days of slavery. Speaker 2: I would think it, it had been there since the days of slavery, right. I often, I often think about that, you know? I said, "Hey," you know. My--now, my grandmother left, but her brother, Uncle Dave Roberson, he stayed there with, with his other wife and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, they, they never talked about slavery as such, or did they ever-- Speaker 2: No. My grandmother said they weren't slaves; she said her mother [Mena Roberson] was a slave, but they weren't a slave. My, my grandmother was born in about 19--no, no, 1870, something like that--1870. Now--and her brother was close to that, but her mother had her--it was right when slavery was out, but she and--but her mother did experience some kind of slavery (unclear); I understand that much as far as my grandmother was. Now, Uncle Dave--like I said, the only thing I know about him is that he was sh- I think he was a sharecropper because that's where he worked; he worked for this man who had this big house that blocked the road, you couldn't go any further, and when--I couldn't go over there. I wasn't allowed to go there. I could stay--I, I, I could play where his little place was. He had a few cows, not that many; a few cows, but he took care of this man. He had, he had a whole yard of, of cows and what have you and, and my Uncle Dave, like I said, he would be the one to work for him and say, "You can't go over here." So I never did--I never, never went there, no. Story_ID: 655038 Speaker 1: Now, her, her [Brown's maternal grandmother, Susie Roberson Jackson] husband, Emerson Jackson, that was his name, Emerson Jackson; that--that's how she became a Jackson. My (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's your grandfather then on that side. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: That's your grandfather on that side? Speaker 1: That's my grandfather, right. Speaker 2: On your mother's [Odessa Jackson Brown] side. Speaker 1: On my mother's side, right. Speaker 2: Emerson Jackson. Speaker 1: He was a (unclear) preacher; he was a preacher and very handsome man--dark, clean-cut, had to have a tie on, shined shoes, shave (laughter), had to have all that. But, but, very clean-cut man and--but I was his favorite grandson. Oh, I remember times when---in New Orleans [Louisiana] we would--where they had--what they had bayous there and, and different places like junkyard, and I'd go to junkyard and play, and he'd say, "Boy, what are you doing in that junkyard?" This is, this is my grandfather. He say, "I ought to call the police and put you in jail." I say, "Grandpa, please don't put me in jail." (Laughter) But he was--he look at me and say, "I won't put you in jail this time boy, but you--if I ever see you again, I'm a put you in jail." I say, "Okay, Grandpa." But he loved me; all of 'em loved me because when I was a young child, I had this gift for singing solos--a gift that God gave me. Speaker 2: Okay. So did, did your grandfather sing, or did your grandmother sing? Speaker 1: We had people in our family who'd sing. They told me that I, that I sang like--they called him Buddy, or--Buddy, or something, he was a great singer, but he wasn't anybody that had any renown, but he was a great singer, and they say, "You sound just like him." Now, my mother had a, a contralto; she--my, my mother was short, and a little one, but she had a low contralto voice and, and, and my father [Willie Brown, Sr.], you know, he was a baritone, too. They both sang, but my mother is the one. And her sister [Mattie Jackson Walters]--the family--her sister was a soprano and, and she was the contralto. Speaker 2: Now, what denomination were they? Speaker 1: Baptist. Speaker 2: Baptist, okay. Speaker 1: Baptist, right; they were all Baptist, our whole family. Um-hm. Story_ID: 655039 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] talk about growing up in New Orleans [Louisiana] and what it was like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother told me, she say I was a fast little gal, boy (laughter), but didn't have much and--but they enjoyed what they had, they had--they didn't have too much because half of the time--well, they lived in New Orleans but no, they didn't have too much. I know her, her brother worked for the WPA [Works Progress Administration]. My uncle, her brother, worked for the WPA; he didn't have much of a job though; his name was Herman Jackson and--but as far as her, she--my mother worked--you know, when she--during World War I [WWI], or was that World War II [WWII], she worked in, in the laundry place where the ladies would go and work while the men were overseas, and she worked in there; I remember that. And she always told little funny things about my father [Willie Brown, Sr.] because they separated when I was quite young, and he had a little song he would sing, my father, whenever he get ready to leave (laughter). But she loved my father and I loved him, too, 'cause everybody said we looked like doubles, and up and down New Orleans when I was a little kid, they say, "Look at that man, that boy looks just like his pa," you know. And, and his singing ability wasn't--he wasn't experienced as I am let's put it that way, but he, he sang here in Chicago [Illinois]. He, he joined Olivet [Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] and that kind of stuff, my father did--Olivet--that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he moved from New Orleans earlier? Speaker 2: Yeah, he--I must have been, I must have been three or four years old when my father left New Orleans and moved to Chicago. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they met? Did your mother talk about how your mo- she met your father? Speaker 2: My father--my mother--I say she said I was a fast little old gal, and she said--and my father--I favored him, but my father was nice-looking, but I'm not gonna say this--because of me, not her (laughter). So she saw him and she placed herself, his way, and so--oh, my father, you know, he more-or-less took care of himself at a young age. I'll get back to that, though. And so anyway, he, he got interested in her, and they eventually got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your--your mother went to school in New Orleans, I guess, right? Speaker 2: That's right, New Orleans. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No--boy, you know, at one time I had all these things at the tip of my head. She went to--she didn't go too high in school; I think it was Straight [Straight College; Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] that they called this school in New Orleans because they didn't have any (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the name of it? Speaker 2: I think it's called Straight. I have to--Straight-- Speaker 1: Like you spell straight (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) S-T-R-A-I-T [sic.], I think; I'm not too sure. Speaker 1: -G-H-T, Straight? Speaker 2: I had all that in the back of my head. In fact, I'm about the only one that can tell these stories now, 'cause all my family is--I was the--I'm the oldest one that's, that's alive now, you know; the rest of 'em--and my, my aunt, her sister, finished this what we might call high school, but it really wasn't; it wasn't no more than 'bout eighth or ninth grade and--but she finished, she finished--her sister who was--whose name was Mattie--Mattie Jackson, but she became a Walters--Mattie Walters [Mattie Jackson Walters], that I do know. And she finished their--remember what the--California--stayed there the rest of her life, you know. She didn't--she and my--well, she and my father [Emerson Jackson], the way I understand it, really didn't get along too well, and she really didn't get along with her father, too, 'cause--I think it might have been, might have been because he left my grandmother, I don't know, but she was singer--a excellent singer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then New Orleans was--it was--it hadn't changed too much from--the houses right there was--had been there for a long time; a lot of little houses in certain areas had been there for years, you know. I imagine they were there during slavery, some of those houses down there (unclear). Speaker 1: What part of New Orleans did your mother grow up in? Speaker 2: Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana], Uptown. Speaker 1: Uptown. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Let me explain. New Orleans had a place called Uptown, Downtown [New Orleans, Louisiana], Frontatown [New Orleans, Louisiana], and Backatown [New Orleans, Louisiana] (laughter). Uptown--she was born, she told me, around Miro [Street]--around Miro and--First [Street] and Miro, or something like that, and I was born, they said, on Galvez [Street]--on, on First and Galvez; not too far from where she was, and my father who was--oh, my father was reared--not reared, but maybe in Zion City down in New Orleans, Zion--(unclear) area called Zion, Z-I--Z-I--Zion, yeah, Z-I-O-N, Zion City. And they all knew him, yeah, so he was a boy. My father was a boy in, in, in Zion City, right. And--because when we--I moved there too, and everybody see me they say, "Boy, you look, you look just like your daddy," you know. Story_ID: 655040 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father [Willie Brown, Sr.] now. What was your father's full name? Can you give me his name? Speaker 2: Well, his name is--well, I'm Willie Brown, Jr. [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.] so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. That's right. Speaker 2: I, I just found out what my name was when I went to the service (laughter). Speaker 1: What did they call you before? Speaker 2: Willie Chester Brown. My father went by the name Chester, he didn't like Willie. So I thought my name was Willie Chester Brown until I went to [U.S. military] service and they got my, my birth certificate and my birth certificate has Willie Brown, Jr. on it (laughter). I didn't know that until I was in the service. And so, but, yeah, so my, my, my father--his--he went by Chester, that was his name, Chester. He didn't like Willie Brown at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, what his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father was about seven years older than my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown]. I think my father was born in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That would have been about 1905? I think about 1905, I guess, if she was born in 1912. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah around, around--yeah, you're right, around 1905, yeah, that's right, my father was born. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], too? Speaker 2: He was born in New Orleans, too, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? How far back can you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All I know is that his--well, my father's father was named Rufus, R-U-F-U-S, Rufus Brown [Rufus Brown, Sr.], or his, his--he left home to start taking care of himself but however, he was also reared by his grandmother, who was a Cherokee Indian [Native American], 'cause his, his grandfather married or whatever--lived with, with this Cherokee Indian--this Cherokee Indian, and they halfway raised him to--or reared him, that is. Her name was Lilly--Lillian--Aunt, Aunt Lillian. Now how do you spell--I had her picture, too. L-- Speaker 1: L-I-L-L-I-A-N? Speaker 2: I-A-N, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: L-I-L-L-I-A-N, Lillian. But I knew her; she died when I was about twelve years old, something like that. She was over a hundred or something. She, she didn't know how old she was, but she had to be over a hundred, yeah, because she didn't talk too much. And that's not--her mother--her fa- her father--his father, he left home, he start taking care of himself, my father did--he and his brother Rufus [Rufus Brown, Jr.]. And Rufus (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, why? (Background noise) Is there a reason? I mean why did he leave home? Speaker 2: He--you know, back in those days--back in that--you know, boys took--just, just left home and, and, and made it by himself, you know. He just grew up. He took care--he and his brother Rufus who--and named after, after his father, he just left home and, and thought (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About how old was he when he left home? Speaker 2: Let me see. He was almost like, back when he and my mother married--that must have been six--when, when--in 1916 because my--I, I, I had a daughter that--I mean I had a sister [Dorothy Brown] who died, I think, and, and, and I think she was sixteen when she died, and so--but my father was living by himself even then. He, he, he started taking care of himself--he, he started living by himself as a young man, so I'm gonna just say he had to be a, a young teenager. Speaker 1: Okay, and so he was a teenager when he left home? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: He was a teenager then when he left home? Speaker 2: Yeah, when he left home, yeah. Speaker 1: Young teenager (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and took his brother. His brother and he were very close but, but he--they were very close, and he almost supervised his brother, and his brother did what he said do, Chester. Story_ID: 655041 Speaker 1: Now, where was his [Brown's father, Willie Brown, Sr.] mother [Alice Cooper Brown]? Where was his mother during this time? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: I mean you father's mother. Where was she? Speaker 2: I think that she died early, and--yeah, and I think they both died early, Rufus [Rufus Brown, Sr.] and his mother; I forgot what his mother name but I should know it. I knew all this before now, and when you get--when you start getting this age that I am now, things don't come up as quickly as they would. Speaker 1: Okay, so, his, let's see. All right, so is that the Cherokee [Native American]? Speaker 2: Cherokee, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lillian, right, Lillian. Speaker 2: No, no, his grandmother was a Cherokee. Speaker 1: His grandmother, okay. So his, his mother, though, wasn't. Speaker 2: No, his mother was not, but his grandmother was a Cherokee, and she half raised him after a while-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --until he got--I guess he left--oh, yeah, the reason why he left, he couldn't get along with his grandfather, that's it. He couldn't, he couldn't get along with his grandfather-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --back then, back in--let me see, he left home, yeah, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay, so--all right, so his parents died early. He was raised by his grandparents, and they finally (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Early, and you know, you don't--you know, and they had no--they didn't have any good medicines or nothing like that, you know. He, he also--like I say, my, my, my little sister [Dorothy Brown] who I didn't know, she died when she was about two or three years old, and they said because of bad eating; she died of worms, you see, worms, yeah. Speaker 1: Did your father have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: My father going to school. I don't remember anybody saying anything to me about my father going to school; he had a natural talent for carpentry--a natural talent, but him going to school though, I don't know that. Speaker 1: Okay. So he was a carpenter. He was out on his own early in life (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On his own early, very early, very early, yeah. And he and my--he and my mother's brother, whose name was Herman Jackson, became friends and, and Herman didn't go to school too much either (laughter). They were great buddies but, but Herman didn't go--he didn't go to school either too much, you know, but they were buddies, you know. Uncle Herman, Uncle Rufus [Rufus Brown, Jr.]--in fact, there were a threesome--Uncle Herman, Uncle Rufus, and my father, and they was running buddies. So that's how really, I think he got together with my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown], yeah; I think that's how it happened. Some of it's coming back to me a little bit now (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So are there any stories from your father's side of the family that, that are passed down? Speaker 2: Stories? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They told me that my father--don't--they said don't treat him wrong, don't, don't beat him--don't try to beat him up, they said, because my father could throw a rock around the corner. They said once he threw that rock, you hit the corner, for some reason that rock gonna follow you around the corner (laughter). And, and that's the way he was. Everybody knew him but they called him Mr. Long. They called him--he was a little taller than I, but they called him Long Boy, Long Boy. Don't, don't both- don't treat him wrong or, or call yourself beating him up 'cause he gets angry, and he'll never forget it. And he'll throw a rock or a brick, whatever is there, and run you around the corner, and you might as well just stand there 'cause they're gonna hit you (laughter). My mother used to tell me all those kind of stories about him, you know. But he was a, was a, was a very friendly guy, but like I say, he and Uncle Herman, they all was like my Uncle Herman, kind of short, but they were all great friends, right. Story_ID: 655042 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Yes, and not--for some reason, you know, your memory comes in, in, in segments, you can remember this year but you can't remember your name, which you should know right now. Somehow, people's names I don't know now, but I can remember what happened when I was a baby--when my--my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] say, "No, boy, you don't know remember that. It's impossible for you to remember what you're saying." Yes, I do have a, a lively memory of my very young age--yes I do. Speaker 1: Okay, what was your first, very first thing that you know that you remembered? Speaker 2: The first thing I know that I remember--well, it's so many of 'em. Speaker 1: Well, the first. Speaker 2: I must have been--it was pre-kindergarten, pre-kindergarten. My grand--my, my mother lived with her brother, Herman Jackson, and his wife [Lillie Mae Jackson], and Uncle Herman had control of the family, and so I remember when I was living with him, he--my father [Willie Brown, Sr.] used to--well, my cousin lived with us too, and my mother's sister's [Mattie Jackson Walters] son--his name is John Walters [John Walters, Jr.]; we call him Sonny Boy, but John Walters. Well, anyway, during that time, Uncle Herman, if he would lose things around the house, he'd search you--search you to see who, who might have taken this from him. Speaker 1: Well, how would he do that? Would he line everybody up, or what? Speaker 2: He might, he might. Uncle Herman might line you up and search you because he's looking for something that he can't find. He's a little man, but he was a tough little man (laughter). He's a little man--oh, man. I believe that's the earliest. But no, it's not because we were living on First [Street] and Miro [Street] then. I remember--yes, I was a little boy then; this was before kindergarten. I remember that my aunt, her sister was coming to visit us on Miro, and dropped me by accident. My momma said, "No, you don't remember that, you were a baby." I say, "Momma, I remember." I can tell you right now just as though it happened yesterday. She was--we were going up the stairs and she was--and, and she knocked on the door and my, my--when she knocked on the door, I guess she slipped or something because she dropped me to the ground. I was a baby then. And another time I, I remembered, my aunt and her husband used to fight a lot--argue and fight a lot; his name was John Walters [John Walters, Sr.]. And I remember them--her running down the street because he was after her; he was after her, and she run--and see, this is when--the time that she was running to my mother's house because she running away from her husband and, uncle, and so I remember my momma say, "You don't remember it 'cause I told you, you were a baby." I also remember there was a friend that used to take me to church and carry me to Sunday school. She say, "You were a baby." I say, "But I remember it, I remember it very well." I didn't like him, I didn't like him but he carried me--'cause he and his wife--I used to know all these names but I, I can't remember now, but they would take me to, to Mt. Gillion [Gloryland Mt. Gillion Baptist Church, New Orleans, Louisiana], that's where--that's the first church that I know, and--that I know, but I was a little boy in Mt. Gillian, so--and I also remember--but I was a bigger boy then. I must have been in, in--oh, I, I remember kindergarten, too; I, I remember kindergarten. I went to Miss Hicks, H-I-C-K-S' kindergarten, and after--and, and that's when I started reading, in Miss Hicks' kindergarten. And I also remember how she used to go on Galvez [Street], I think; this is around Fourth [Street] and Galvez. This is where my, my mother's sister and Uncle John used to live, and I used to go there from, from kindergarten, or pre-kindergarten, on my bicycle. I had all these pictures, had all these pictures--on my bicycle to spend the time with them while my mother was, was working; she always worked. My mother always worked, in the laundry; she worked in the laundry then, yeah (simultaneous). Story_ID: 655043 Speaker 1: Were you raised in your [maternal] uncle's house [Herman Jackson] basically then? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Were you raised in your uncle's house? Speaker 2: Basically, until we moved to California, or moved to the projects, to chi- New Orleans [Louisiana] pro--the same--the Lafitte Projects [New Orleans, Louisiana], that's when we moved away, period. But I had gone to California with, with my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] to visit her sister [Mattie Jackson Walters] in Redondo Beach, California, but we didn't stay up there long. And then my mother, when she finally came back--'cause we lived in Watts [Los Angeles, California] for a while too, but I was a bigger boy then, when I was in Watts. I was a bigger boy then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you then? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: How old were you then? Speaker 2: I was in about the fifth--I remem- I was about in fifth grade when she moved back to New Orleans. Speaker 1: What, about nine or ten? Speaker 2: Huh? About nine or ten or so, yeah. Okay. Speaker 1: But anyway, but there's some other things I can remember. I, I used to take part in a--where--I can't remember the name of the place where the boy and girl were getting married and--but it was a comedy thing, and I was always the one marrying the girl but I, I was a little boy then--pre-school. When I was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they would--you're describing what they call a midget wedding or something? Speaker 1: What now? Speaker 2: A midget wedding, or what they call that. Speaker 1: It was, it was a midget wedding, but there's another name for it, though, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, I heard it described in the weddings where they, they stage a wedding for entertainment purposes. I mean it's a fundraiser or something because little kids (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A fundraising thing. Little kids thing. I was always the fa- I was always the one that--I, I, I could sing. I started singing; I remember that, too. I started singing that I know, very definitely, when I was in kindergarten. I could, I could sing so, so--I, I could sing parts, and if I was singing parts, the whole choir--the whole class would sing my part. The teacher trying to--Miss Manadate was her name when I was in the first grade--Miss Manadate; I'll tell you something about her, too. I loved her (laughter). I loved Miss Manadate, and I saw a lady when I was singing in the (unclear) down in New Orleans. I'll tell you about that. But anyway I, I would sing and she would play, and she would say, "Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.], you sing the alto." I was a boy alto, and when I would sing, all the kids, the kids start singing alto, but they was supposed to be singing the melody and I'm singing the alto, me and another young lady name Audrey Richerton, Richardson [ph.], she--anyway--but I, but I had this talent, this controlling talent over, little kids; I just had that talent. And I remember the bicycle--I always remember my [maternal] grandmother [Susie Roberson Jackson] taking pictures of me in these little things that they had--the, the man had the monkey, the little monkey and, and he would take pictures on the side, and I remember my grandmother had me to take a picture and I was scared. (Unclear) I had these pictures, man; God knows I did. My mother was a picture freak, she was. And so I, I was looking in there, and I, I started to crying because I was scared of taking the picture with, with my grandmother. Now, I was a little boy then; I was--all these little boys. I remember also when I was a little boy, this guy name was Coco [ph.]. Coco was friendly then. Now, this is another kindergarten place where I went. I went--after Miss Hicks [ph.], I went to this--and Mr. Coco was, was afraid of, of dead people because back in those times, they used to have funerals at the house, at the house, and he wouldn't, he wouldn't even go where the dead person was, or where the one that they're waking was, and--but anyway, that was pre-school too; a whole lot of it was pre-school. And so anyway, I--that's, that's--I remember one time, yeah, I, I remember one time that my cousin [John Walters, Jr.]--my mother was living in, somewhere on, in one a these little houses--a series of houses--make little apartments there, and my cousin, who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like row houses? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Like row houses? Speaker 1: Row houses, yeah, but they were up on--they were up in the--yeah, they were all connected, but up like little rooms. And I'll never forget at this time my cousin got in a fight with somebody 'cause he was always was fighting, he always fighting. And I remember one time I sat on the side--I meet people there, I say, "Well, I'm going to set aside here until you get through fighting 'cause I hate violence," (laughter), hate violence. I still hate violence. And so I say--and so--'cause he, he was bothering the kids and they started fighting, and I just stood there and wait 'til the fight was over, and then I, and then I--we went on 'bout our--it wasn't a, a terrible fight 'cause they was all little kids, you know. So I remember that, and--see, now, I can talk about this for--I can talk about this forever, as far as, as far as that part of my life. Story_ID: 655044 Speaker 1: What was the name of that neighborhood again? It was the--you called it up- Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New Orleans had--Uptown, Uptown. Speaker 1: That's great, okay. Uptown, yes. Speaker 2: New Orleans [Louisiana] had Uptown, Downtown [New Orleans, Louisiana], Frontatown [New Orleans, Louisiana], and Backatown [New Orleans, Louisiana]-- Speaker 1: Frontatown and Backatown. Speaker 2: Backatown. Speaker 1: Well, can you talk about those? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, why do you call one Backatown and one-- Speaker 2: The one that was Backatown was really--and Frontatown. But Backatown was where you would really leave and going out of town maybe north, the way I can, I can see it. Because I remember it's, it's Uptown, and this--and Backatown--oh, at this time it was basically white in this area and we couldn't-- Speaker 1: In Uptown? Speaker 2: Uptown, but Backatown was where they had the beautiful houses and things, but I remember now. And this way you hit the road going outta town, if I remember that now. Now, Frontatown or--in Backatown is just about as close--Uptown, Downtown, Backatown, and Front. Frontatown was, was near the riverfront--was near the Mississippi River, that's the Frontatown, yeah, 'cause Backatown was going outta town, that's right. And it's where the Superdome [Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana] is right now; the Superdome is Downtown heading--because it's, it's near the Mississippi River, so it would be Downtown, but if you keep on going back, you hit Backatown, which is where some of the river, some of the river docks were because the, the river ran from Backatown all the way to, to Downtown near Basin Street area there, yeah. So, anyway, Frontatown, like I say, was near the river, near the river, which leads to Backatown. The riverfront--now you keep on going back, you were Backatown. Now, Uptown was where a lot of the people lived that didn't have too much--Roman Street, Jackson Street, Claiborne Street [sic. Claiborne Avenue], and Washington Street [sic. Washington Avenue]--all, all those areas was Uptown in, in little spots where, you know, where the black people lived, right. Speaker 1: Is that contiguous with 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] now where--that got flooded (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The 9th Ward is, is down a little past-- Story_ID: 655045 Speaker 1: You leave Downtown [New Orleans, Louisiana], and before you know it, you in a kind of a Backatown [New Orleans, Louisiana] area, I think, but it's--it was all-white, you know. I couldn't--I can't say that I knew too much about that because of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean in those days it was all-white? Speaker 1: Oh, in those days--oh, and now it's--oh, man, the world-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: --the world is changed enumerously [sic. enormously]. Oh, you couldn't, you couldn't compare with what I'm talking about, you know. Speaker 2: Okay so in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], and you were going (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thirties [1930s] and '40s [1940s], yeah. I wasn't allowed to--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was all-white, it was all-white. Speaker 1: It was white back then, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A little--a few little spots where you might see--you know, there a lot of Indians [Native Americans] and things down in New Orleans [Louisiana], and back in that area, you might have a few Indians in that area in them little small--but they didn't consider themselves black, you know. And, and Filipinos--we had, we had a lot of Filipinos down there who, who didn't consider themselves black, and they was dark as I was, you know? But they were, they were in these areas, too, but they had, they had a lot of forests and things in this area, so I didn't--I really couldn't say that I know it too well 'cause I wasn't allowed to go back there, not until I, I, I became a grown man, you know. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Now, now, there were (unclear)--Downtown, around the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], if I can remember, the 7th Ward was Downtown where, where I could live--around Lafitte Street [sic. Lafitte Avenue] in Lafitte Projects [New Orleans, Louisiana]. They built projects for them, and that week we blossomed; we started living much better then, in Downtown; we were living much better 'cause we, we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the projects were an improvement. Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh, yeah. You had yards with grass and, and a, a furnace of some kind, and refrigerators, 'cause at one time, I think, we had those, those iron things that you had to put coal in, in order to even take a bath, you know, before I moved there. We didn't have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A potbelly stove? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: You mean a potbelly stove? Speaker 1: Potbelly stove--that kind of stuff, yeah. So, that's what we had before we moved to the projects, and that was a uplift there, my gosh yeah. That's 7th Ward. Now, the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], you keep go--you keep from the 7th, from the 7th Ward and keep on going down St. Bernard Street, that's the street--St. Bernard Street, and that goes, that goes from--to--from the Bourbon Street area, and that area that they keep on--if, if, if you keep on down St. Bernard Street, you gonna go right straight to the 9th Ward. Story_ID: 655046 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Of what now? Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: And smells? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Oh, down in New Orleans [Louisiana]--down in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], they had a big--this was, this was leading to a Lake Pontchartrain--that's the one that, that actually flooded, Lake Pontchartrain, and it was very slippery and wet, and they had blackberries that--we could go pick blackberries and, and rattlesnakes, too (laughter), rattlesnakes. And bananas, oh, my gosh. We used to--in 77th Ward [sic. 7th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana], we used to--kids--we used to see the, the, the trains stopping with the bananas and, and we run down there and see if we can get a few. Speaker 1: Well, these are bananas coming from the Caribbean, or from Central America, I guess? Speaker 2: From Central, yeah, from Central America, yeah, bananas--banana boat. In fact, I worked down there. I was a bigger boy then, though, but I worked on the riverfront where I actually unloaded some a these things from Central America, yeah, like the banana boat. I was water boy--peanut boat, oh, my God, don't ever get the peanut boat 'cause it's stinky, oh, my God. Oh, Lord, 'cause they would pay you extra for that, but I was water boy, and so I--my job-- Speaker 1: Why were the peanuts so stinky? What was the-- Speaker 2: Because they were at the bottom of the boat and, and, and the hull stunk, and it was stinky, and they would pay extra for that--for, for a banana boat--anything that would decay like that, or a peanut boat (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the peanuts--some of the peanuts are rotted at the-- Speaker 2: Rotten at the bottom. Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay. Speaker 2: And I, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you got the good ones out and left 'em in the-- Speaker 2: I don't know what they did 'cause they, they would unload them because they--it was a trading thing. They would, they would get the peanuts--bring the peanuts over to New Orleans, and then trade them for some other things, but my job was--oh, and also, boats that had, well, some cotton, I guess, and wool, I remember that kind of stuff, where they would--and my job consisted of, of bringing water to the men on the boat, and then getting me something to eat, like excellent food they would give me, and so I--and I would bring some of the water to them, and they give me some food to eat, as a water boy. But I had to go on the boat and lift buckets down, down to the men, and they would drink from the bucket. Some of 'em be chewing tobacco--(imitates spitting tobacco) pa-choo, and give it to the other guy. I think, oh, my gosh (laughter), and--but I was the water boy, and I did a little sack sewing. I mean sometime the bus--sometimes the sacks would break and I'd have to ride the sack and sew it as a sack-sewer. But I was a bigger boy then, bigger boy then, yeah. So now, you say other smells? Well, when I was living in--now, this--lot of dead odors. When I was living near the canal, we would call it, not too far from Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] where I graduated from, they had this open spot that, in order for me to get to my school when I was in first grade and so forth, I had to go across this bridge--a rockety bridge, that would go across what we'd call--it, it was really a water drainage; we called it the canal. But anyway, it was filthy, and dead animals and what you wanna call it; all that was going through here, so we would have (unclear). In order to avoid this, we'd have to go about two or three blocks, but that was too far for us little boys to be walking, but we could go through there and smell all those dead animals, and sometimes--well, people got molested there, too, and murdered there in that, in that area. I remember that very well, but I was scared to go there, and so we would go there in groups. Story_ID: 655047 Speaker 1: Sylvania F. Williams [Sylvania F. Williams Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] was the name of the school, that I remember. I went, I started Sylvania F. Williams at, at first grade. Speaker 2: Okay, so can (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sylvania F. William. Speaker 2: Can you--Savanah, S-A-V-A-- Speaker 1: S-Y-- Speaker 2: S-Y? Speaker 1: L-V-A-N, Sylvana [sic.], A, I think, or I-A. Speaker 2: I-A, Sylvania, like Sylvania, yeah. Speaker 1: Sylvania, yeah, Sylvania. Speaker 2: Sylvania F. Williams? Speaker 1: Yeah, Sylvania F. Williams. And the principal there was Mr. Bell [ph.]. I'll never forget him. Speaker 2: Now, who was Sylvania F. Williams? Was that a famous person in New Orleans [Louisiana] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, Sylvania F. Williams; I can't remember it now, but yeah, he was a famous person. Mr. Bell, who was a middle-class man, he was the principal, I remember that very well. And--but I, I left there when I was in third grade because it didn't go any higher than third grade. Speaker 2: Now, you said that you, before you went to kindergarten and all that, you could read and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, sir. Yes, sir. Speaker 2: You knew your timetables? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Yes, sir. Speaker 2: How did that happen? I mean how did you learn? Speaker 1: I had a good memory for one thing, and I just had--I just had a good memory. Speaker 2: Well, did you have a teacher? Did somebody in your family teach you the timetables, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, I--none a my family even had--none a my family even went to--only one that even went to--supposedly finished this so-called college--high school, was my mother's sister [Mattie Jackson Walters], the one I was telling you about--about eighth grade, ninth grade; that was considered a--but anyway, no, I just, I just--I stuttered a lot, too. Everybody just I used to--I was always--see, I had no brothers and sisters except my cousins and, and I had another problem when I was down there. I must tell you the truth--color. When I was down in New Orleans, if you--I always carried this thing--if you were what we call bright, but light-skin. If you were bright, you were all right, if you were brown, you could stick around; if you were black, get back, way back. And seeing that I was black, it, it was a problem to me. And so I think the reason I learned because I said I, I wasn't gonna let nothing stop me from being the best that I could be, and so I learned to, to, to develop as a singer, as a singer. I became--I wanted to be the best, and I, to some extent, became the best. Story_ID: 655048 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a hero in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paul Robeson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Paul Robeson. They told me about this guy Paul Robeson. I thought Paul Robeson was a slave. I didn't know he wasn't a slave. I thought--and so I used to try to imitate Paul Robeson like a--just in slavery. I met him, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, where did you get the idea that he was a slave--from the movies or something? Speaker 2: From the movies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From the movies. Speaker 1: I think he was in 'Show Boat,' I think, originally. I mean he was one of the original cast members in--when he sang 'Ol' Man River.' Speaker 2: Well, no--oh, before 'Show Boat.' Well, he--I have--I should know that name, I, I should know that. Speaker 1: Oh, the name of the movie that you saw? Speaker 2: No, the movie that we was seeing was--it have these 'Huckleberry Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain] type things--'Huckleberry Finn,' and he was always one of the slave boys, Paul Robeson, in his 'Huckleberry Finn' type things. And--on, on the water; they'd be on the water. That was Paul Robeson, but he didn't like--but he--but 'Huckleberry Finn'--a lot of those kind of movies. If I would a known--I, I have a booklet there that I, that I explain to people, but I'm not using that now. Yeah, 'Huckleberry Finn,' and oh, I got books that I can't even tell you right now. Speaker 1: Okay, so Paul Robeson was your hero. Speaker 2: My hero. He was everybody's hero who had a pretty good voice at that time. Speaker 1: Now, who told you you had a--I know your family was--they were telling you you had a good voice (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody, ever since I was (unclear)--I use this term, ever since I was knee high to a duck (laughter). That's the use I (unclear) when I was small. Every--everybody say, "Boy, you're gonna be another Paul Robeson." Speaker 1: Now, did you--you sung in your [maternal] grandfather's [Emerson Jackson] church, right? Is that true? Speaker 2: You mean my grandfather? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I sang at the church that he--he wasn't the pastor, but I sang at the church. I used to be the kind--see, I would walk down the street and the preacher--I'll be barefooted, and the preacher would hear me outside and tell one of the men, say, "Come get that boy and tell him to come to church and sing for us." So, I would leave--I'll have on my, my, you know, shorts, whatever it was, and I'd go in this church and I'd sing a solo for him. I was a little boy; I was second--second, third grade or something--no, first, second grade. Yeah, I had that ability. Wherever I go, people wanted to hear me sing, even in--even when I was in school they had these little programs, I was always one a the ones that had some part that involved singing, it was a God-given, a God-given gift. And not only that, I had a tremendous ear; I could hear parts well. Speaker 1: Now, is there any particular person that, that got you started, I mean singing or, or recognized your talent or tried to organize you? Speaker 2: Yes, there are--now, here again, this--my teachers. My teachers would recommend--I was recommended from grammar school, once I graduated, to the upper grammar school--that was in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]--to Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] because they, they were looking for singers for their operettas. Story_ID: 655049 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when I, when I was a little boy, all my teachers--all of 'em, not half of 'em--'cause I just had--I went to California when, when I was in second grade and, and they heard me sing in second grade and they had me singing for the school. We went back to New Orleans [Louisiana] and I went back, I went back to, to California, to Redondo Beach [California] and, and I became a--I was in the fifth grade then, and they heard I could sing. I used to sing every Friday on the on-com [sic. intercom] for the school to hear; that was, that was--and I--and my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] and them left before--you know, I really wanted to stay because I figured I was gonna be somebody there, 'cause in, in school, I--it was an all-white school, all-white school, and that's another story. But anyway--but, oh, I just can't remember. This one lady who had this quartet--but I was a young man even then. I have to go back farther. Well, my mother and my father [Willie Brown, Sr.]--my mother and--oh, my mother and her sister [Mattie Jackson Walters] used to, used to sing a special, 'The Lord's Prayer,' and it goes, (singing) "Our Father, which art in heaven"--I can still remember it--"Hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy kingdom come, thy will be done"--that's my mother. Her sister would say, "Thy kingdom come, thy kingdom come, thy will be done," that's still my mother. "Thy will be done, thy kingdom come, thy will be done"--(unclear). "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done." And they would tear up a church with that (laughter). Now, I knew that. And I was coming right behind 'em. And my mother, by singing with these choruses and things, they say, "Watch me," and--because I was, I was becoming a rival of theirs, yeah, so--but all I can tell you is, as far as I can remember, all my teachers--all of them. Speaker 2: So, your parents and your teachers recognized (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Parents, teachers, and the church-- Speaker 2: And the church, okay. Speaker 1: All them say, "That boy gonna be another Paul Robeson." Story_ID: 655050 Speaker 1: I don't care what church I sang--I was in contests and I always--not always, but most of the time won if there wasn't any prejudice involved in it. Speaker 2: Were these school contests or church contests? Speaker 1: School contests I would win, and-- Speaker 2: So, that's an interesting comment, though, about the color thing. So, it was really bad in New Orleans [Louisiana] then, in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Lord have mercy, man. A dark--as far as I was concerned--I was teased, and I just knew that I wasn't, I wasn't what they wanted to call nice-looking, even, even I thought this way about my family on my [maternal] uncle's [Herman Jackson] side, 'cause his family was lighter than I, 'cause his wife [Lillie Mae Jackson] was, was lighter than I. He wasn't that dark either. But-- Speaker 2: Well, let me just put this in perspective. I would imagine most people in New Orleans were probably dark; most black people were dark-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but the ones that were in charge of stuff were the lighter ones, is that it? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Or like the ones who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so that's what made the difference, right? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, they were the school teachers, basically. They got the school, and the post office was, was just full of them. The, the, the post office was--people from Downtown [New Orleans, Louisiana], Catholic, or what have you. And that's another thing, Catholic--when I went to school in Sylvania F. Williams [Sylvania F. Williams Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], the Catholics ate together, and the non-Catholics had to eat sandwiches, but the Catholics ate in the lunchroom and we couldn't go in there. And then kids were so--you know, kids teased us so much. In fact, my cousins called me Black. "Hey, Black!" (Laughter) "Hey, Black!" He can, 'til the day he die, "Hey, Black" (laughter). So--but it, but it--it--I told, I told my wife [Clementeen Brown], I said, "You know, my voice became my weapon." She said, "Why do you say that?" I said, "It carried me from depression perhaps, to growing and meeting people that I never thought I'd meet in my life." My voice did this for me and it, and it was my weapon to carry me from this, you are black syndrome. I used to--when I would laugh, I would, I would--I kept my mouth (demonstrates) because I didn't wanna show my lips. I'm just as honest with you as I can be. I say (demonstrates) and somebody say, "Why are you so mad?" "I ain't mad (demonstrates) I'm hiding these ugly lips." Speaker 2: Hm. So, you would internalize that, that kind of-- Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: That, that kind of prejudice was so intense that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, intense. I used to, I used to--by my friend, and, and, and the term good-looking was very popular down in New Orleans. Everybody wanted to be one of a good-looking person, and my voice carried me, carried me where my looks didn't carry me because I--and I had, I had Billy Eckstine--I had him. Speaker 2: You could sing the songs. Speaker 1: Definitely. I mean when I was in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], everybody wanted to hear Mr. Billy Eckstine 'cause we used to have programs in high school, and every, "We want Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.]. Willie Brown." And, and I would (singing) "Everything I have--." I, I, I had him down, you know. Speaker 2: Give us a little bit of it; I mean, just a little bit. Speaker 1: (Singing) "Everything I have is yours, you're part of me, everything I have is yours, you're my destiny. I would gladly give the earth to you," ['Everything I Have is Yours']. I mean I'm too low, but anyway, I had him down. I've lost it, but I had him down. Speaker 2: I believe you. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I had him down. Speaker 2: I believe you. Speaker 1: And that gave me a--that gave me places to be him in high school. I, I started being accepted (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now--okay, okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, but I'll come down, I'll--because in grammar school, like I said, I was--that's it; I was singing all in grammar school. Story_ID: 655051 Speaker 1: You started at Sylvian (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sylvania. Speaker 1: Sylvania F. Williams [Sylvania F. Williams Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: F. Williams. I went to, I went to several schools. Speaker 1: Then you went to school in California, right? Speaker 2: Then I went to California for a little while, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember what school you went to there? Speaker 2: At the time that I went to school, it was--the first time I, I stayed there--oh, I don't remember but I do know the second time I went there, I went to Central--to, to Redondo Beach [California]-- Speaker 1: Is this in Watts [Los Angeles, California], the central high school? I mean-- Speaker 2: Central? I'm trying to get--Central, Redondo Beach. I went to Central, to Central Grammar School [Redondo Beach, California], and (unclear) Central, and the high school was--I, I had pictures of all that. Central High--I went to Central Grammar--Central, and Redondo Beach. It was called Redondo Beach, I think, one a the schools, 'cause my teacher there was Miss Thompson [ph.]; I remember her name. I had a picture--I had all of that. Redondo Beach. It was either Redondo Beach or, or Central. Speaker 1: Now, you were in California for a couple of years, you say? Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple a years before my stepfather [Joseph Thomas] decided to come back to New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, and I remember it very well. I was in sixth grade then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was--I, I had developed--my voice had developed, you know, to--with adolescent sound, you know. And I--and from there--but I went to other grammar schools, though, from Sylvania F. Williams. We left Sylvania F. William--oh, boy. I went to Central, oh yeah, I went to--I said Nelson--Bienville [Bienville Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. In fifth grade, when I was in 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], I went to Bienville, Bienville. When I, when I was in fourth grade, I went to Bienville. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: B-I-E--the big time explorer [Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville]--B--Bienville, B-E, B-I-E-N-V-I-L-L-E, explorer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was in--went to explore all that area, Bienville. After the fourth grade and fifth grade, that's when we went back to California. That's, that's, that's the way it was. And I went to--and I was going to Central--I don't believe it was Central. Then, I went to Redondo--Redondo Beach--Redondo grammar school. I'm really mixed up on that, but it was--I won--it had two--it, it had Central, and Bienville--and Central and, and Redondo Beach. Speaker 1: That's okay, let's get you back in New Orleans. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, you're at Bienville School, and where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Oh, then I went from there to Nelson [Medard H. Nelson Elementary School; Medard H. Nelson Charter School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and that's where I missed--Nelson. Speaker 1: Okay. And Nelson was a-- Speaker 2: Six through eighth, and they changed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the middle school--do they call it a middle school, or-- Speaker 2: Middle school, yeah. It was sixth through eighth, but eventually they changed with my group. It, it went from sixth to the ninth grade, so I didn't leave there until I was promoted to ninth grade. But the kids before me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--A junior high school? Speaker 2: Junior high, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And from there, from there, I went to Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] where I became very, very involved as a singer then--very involved. I did my operettas then. I, I was one of the stars in all the operettas; anything by Victor Herbert, I can--all that's on my resume there that I did. I was always one of the stars. Anything that involved a voice, I was--that was my part. Story_ID: 655052 Speaker 1: Now, you just did some Billy Eckstine for us, but do you have many memories of the popular music in New Orleans [Louisiana] that was going on in those days? Do you remember Mardi Gras and the blues, or jazz? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I used to know 'In the Evening (When the Sun Goes Down),' that was one a the--I should know (unclear). Mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] used to (unclear) those blues. And then Louis Armstrong was popular there. Ink Spots [The Ink Spots], I, I would cry--downright cry when The Ink Spots sang. Bill Kenny, I just couldn't stand it. Speaker 1: Now, are they from New Orleans? Speaker 2: No, but they came there often. And then again, eventually Duke Ellington. Where I was, they was trying to make life pleasant for the teenager, so they built the Rhythm Club [New Rhythm Club, New Orleans, Louisiana] right around the corner from where I was living, Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana] there on Roman Street, and I used to go to, to--that was where all the stars would come, all of 'em--The Ink Spots, Billy Eckstine, Arthur Prysock, Calloway--[HistoryMaker] Earl Calloway [sic.], all of 'em--the Three Blazers [Johnny Moore's Three Blazers]. Speaker 1: Cab Calloway-- Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: You mean Cab Calloway, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Cab Calloway. The Three Blazers, the--the Three Blazers and the--well, I, I loved the Three Blazers. And then again, they'd allow me--I, I had a quartet then, 'cause I, I was very talented in giving out parts, and they used to let--I, I was in high school, too; I was in high school, I'm giving out parts, and I--but--go to the Dew Drop Inn [New Orleans, Louisiana] with my quartet, and they would let us sing there. Speaker 1: The Dew Drop Inn. Speaker 2: The Dew Drop Inn. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's where we were. We were popular, and when Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.]--they used to call my quartet, Willie Brown and his Boys [ph.]. We used to sing in high school, and we had some songs that we would--steal anybody's show, and it was--I--oh, that Dinah Washington--'I Wanna Cry' ['I Want To Cry'], man, when we would sing--when, when my quartet would sing at talent shows in high school man, wasn't nobody gonna win that contest (laughter) but Willie Brown and his Boys. And we used to sometime be, be in the, in the bathroom ditching the class in high school singing; show you how stupid (laughter) high school boys are. And they knew we, they knew we were in there. But Miss Jones--Gladys Jones is the one that set me 'cause she the one that, that had me do the 'Messiah' [George Frideric Handel]. I could almost read the 'Messiah' in (unclear), 'cause I did it at this--at her church. I did a bass solo when I was in high school, and she say, "I want you to go to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]," and, and that's how I got a scholarship, partial scholarship, to--in the music department at Xavier. But when I was in Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I won contest after contest, you know? Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student otherwise? Did you get good grades? Speaker 2: Average student; I was an average student. I wasn't the, the, the most--because, you know, I was an average student but I was--I was good in--I was good in something like, something like--that had to do with thinking, solving a problem, that kind of thing. But when it come to memorizing people names, no (laughter); I wasn't--I've never been too good at that. Speaker 1: Now, was high school--did high school have a color problem, too, like (unclear)? Speaker 2: Man, everywhere I went (laughter) was a color problem--Booker T. Washington--they all had it, man. My friends had it, those who admired me was kind of--I wish I had met--let's say it this way; they were kind of wishing I had just a little bit lighterness--if I were a little bit lighter. It's carried me. I, I will--I will carry that until I leave this world because it really bothered me, and motivated me, and that's why I called my voice, at that time, my weapon. I said, "That's gonna carry me," because I saw where I was superseding, I was, I was singing above all my friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I just knew it. Story_ID: 655053 Speaker 1: When you graduated, and you graduated from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] in what year? Speaker 2: Forty-nine [1949]. Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949]? Speaker 2: And I wrote--I, I created, not write, the high school graduation song to the tune of 'Blue Moon.' I did it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Singing) Blue Moon-- Speaker 1: Now, that's a New Orleans [Louisiana] song, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah--no, no, that was Billy Eckstine. Speaker 1: Billy Eckstine? Okay. Speaker 2: I'm--begin that, (singing) "Tell 'em, Washington." The words were, "Washington, we're sorry that"--let's see, "Washington, we're sorry that we leave you, but if we must go through life to do the things that we were taught by you. Washington, oh now that we're on our way--," I'm, I'm skipping some of it--, "we'll make you glad you spent the time with class of 1949." But, but I taught it (unclear), but I did it, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But I'll be coming in--I was coming into my own then. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went on to, to Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Xavier. Speaker 1: Right there in New Orleans. Speaker 2: And that's another story. Man, that's another story, good God a-mighty (laughter). Speaker 1: So your teacher helped you get accepted? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was there. It, it wasn't a vocal problem, it was the director there. I had taken the part, and it was city-wide contest, and I was in high school, and Frank Davis, my buddy, my colleague--and when I was young, man, all I had to do was sound like Frank Davis and I sound good, as far as I'm concerned. But anyway, we had a contest and it--the last people to be--contest--you had to win a lot, and then the contest winners (unclear), and I tied with Frank Davis, and he was, and he was at Xavier then. And so when I--once I got there, the--and, and there's another guy there, his name Alfred McEwan, that was very close to the director, and when I got there, he had a attitude about me right, soon as I got there because I think he was not pleased with the fact that I, that I scored higher than McEwen, and that me and Frank tied, and I felt proud I tied with the great, the great Frank Davis. So--but, but Miss Jones [Gladys Jones] was really the one that--she, she cared for her kids, she wanted to put you in places where--that would be good for you. Oh, yeah, she cared for us and--because I was always in the operettas, and I had my part always. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that built up my image of myself. Story_ID: 655054 Speaker 1: So Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] was--so, you had kind of conflict with the director of the music department (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Oh, man, they could tell you a joke about that 'cause I was smart in music, but now I had this natural ability. To give you an idea of my natural ability, I learned the Solfege system very well. I knew--I could hear pitches with the Solf- with the Solf- the Solfege system, I could hear any, about anything that wasn't so bad. Give me a song, 'God Bless America.' Doe-chee-la-tee-ah-so-ray, doe-ray--I'm not even thinking. Doe-tee-la-dee-lah-doe-ray-doe-ray-me-fah-la-fah-me-so-doe-ray-me. 'The National Anthem,' doe-so-me-doe-me-so-doe-me-dow-me-fee--now, that's accidental. So-me-doe-me-fee-so-so-soso-me-me-doe tee-like-a-doe-doe-so-me-doe, me-me-doe-me-fee-so--it's, it's here, it's a talent that I had. So, once I learned how to write notes with that, and, and, and apply it, I could, I could take dictation. That was just a gift, and that got me through the opera, too, 'cause Maestro Lepore [Michael Lepore] told me, he say, "How in the world you learn your songs so quickly?" I say, "Man," I said, "All I need is just to hear it and I'll put Solfege and I got it." That's, that's the way it was. It's gone, it's leaving me now (laughter). I'm not so sharp with that now, but it's still my style. Speaker 1: Now, what's that system called? Speaker 2: Solfege, S-O--it's, (singing) doe-ray-me-fah-so-la-tee-doe. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: And the accidental that come with fee-fie-fee-so, that's the in-between, that's accidental. I had a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell it? Speaker 2: S-O-L, Solfay--L, S-O-L, Fay, F-E, Solfe. It's the Solfe [sic.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, probably music students who listen to this, or anybody in the music, they know what it is. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they know very much. Speaker 1: I just wanna make sure. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they'll know it. When I say Solfege, they know what I'm talking 'bout. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, but I've demonstrated this many times. Story_ID: 655055 Speaker 1: What was outcome of this conflict with you and the teacher? What happened? Speaker 2: He told the choir there one time, "I'm gonna leave Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] because, well, I don't like the way Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.] wear his hair." Willie Brown me. "I don't like the way he wear--." We were on tour somewhere we were (unclear), and he stopped going with the class; he--but this was deeper than that. And so he say, "I can't, I can't--," I used to stutter a little bit, and I do that right now too. They laugh when they see me right now, right this minute. They would say, "Willie Brown, you sat there and you told Mr. Bell [Norman Bell]--," and he was the director of--not Fred Wynn [ph.], the other one. He was a major--a director of a big-time--one a those big late programs. And so he said--I told him, (stuttering), "Mr. Bell," (laughter), "I can't help it if my hat don't fit right, you see? I have a long face." And when I said that--I remember this, man. The whole choir got on the floor (laughter) and fell out, they fell out. They say, "Mr. Bell--" the, the last time I saw Fred Davis--he's dead now. He say, "Willie Brown--" I can see it right now, "Mr. Bell, I got a slim, slim face," and man, I--but I remember this. They got on the floor. And see, he had stopped going with us. He drove, or he would meet us to our next engagement. Speaker 1: And he said he didn't like the way you wore your hair? Speaker 2: My hat. Speaker 1: Your hat. Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: What was wrong, I was very--my ear carried me. When I was in college, I didn't become the great, the great pianist in passing a test, but when it come time for a test in, in, in college, you don't have the piano there with you, and when he give--and when they give you songs to, to modulate on or what have you, I'm in the briar patch; all I gotta do is--and I would--he'd sing, he'd sing a melody, I got it. "I'm through, Mr. Bell, I have it." And so he started having words with the--'cause when you're learning to sight-read, you see--you have a partner; one person sing one part, the other person sing another part. I might sing alto, and this other person sing tenor, but it's in the book. This is part of, of music classes. But anyway, I had to sing with him, and he'd read and I'd read right with him. He didn't miss a note and I didn't either. And I think (cough), I think that got next to him because everybody was saying, "Willie Brown, you are the best sight-reader in this department." And I felt I was in the, in the vocal department, that was. So--and other little things. Oh, another thing--I, I used to throw papers to get me through school, with extra money. I threw as many as six hundred papers a morning--each morning--six hundred. I carried two routes, and I'd be so tired because--especially on Sunday when I had--I would have to take the papers and, and, and put 'em together--put this part together. And the guy that was over us, he would position the papers here, and the next four blocks, next eight blocks--and once I get there, I have to put 'em together, and I'd be so tired 'cause on Sundays--on Saturday nights, I'd go out with--and have parties with, and I, and I would have my suit on, I'll have my suit on going through the papers 'cause I was, I was a devoted paper boy. I don't care if they had--I had no--Hurricane Katrinas, I was throwing my papers. I was, I was just--that, that was just me. And I wanted to get that (unclear), so I had six hundred papers and, and then after that I would get home at daylight. I would get--I would start throwing papers at about two in the morning 'til about six, and I'd be tired sometimes at school, and I'll fall asleep in rehearsal, and he would give me, "Why you sleeping Brown?" "Mr. Bell, I'm tired, I hadn't had any sleep." "I don't want you sleeping." But didn't mean I didn't know my stuff 'cause I knew my song (laughter). Doesn't matter anyway 'cause I knew my songs better than the best--better than the rest of the (unclear) anyway, 'cause I--that wasn't it. I knew the song but I, I, I'd nod off 'cause I'd be tired, and he didn't like that about me either, and one time, he put me out of the--no, he wouldn't put me in--he wouldn't put me in, and I saw guys who I went to high school with [at Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], but was getting into this special choir that was here that traveled around the country and, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He didn't, he didn't put you in the-- Speaker 2: No, I went through Sister Emmy Leese [ph.] over the (unclear). I say "Sister Leese, I don't know why I'm not, I'm not in the traveling choir." Story_ID: 655056 Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about the struggles with the choir director, and you were trying to get in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, and the choir, and the choir-- Speaker 1: --in the choir, right. Speaker 2: --the choirs knew it; the, the kids knew it. They knew that he did not like me, they knew it. I told Sister, I say, "Why am I not with the traveling choir that go out 'round the country?" And he says--she say, "You're not in it?" I says, "No." "Tell him to put you in the choir." And that made him dislike me even more (laughter). Speaker 1: I can imagine, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, huh? Yeah, see. That, that made me--him dislike me. Anyway, he left the school disliking me. I think Sister Leese [ph.] kind of realized it, but she couldn't see it 'cause he was the director of the choir. Speaker 1: Now, who is she? Speaker 2: Norman Bell was his name. Speaker 1: Norman Bell, and who was she? Speaker 2: Norman Bell. Sister (unclear) was head of the music department [at Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I, I've seen her here several times. She asked me, say, "What about you start a opera here?" I say, "Miss Emmy Leese [ph.], I don't have that kind of patience or that kind of--." She say, "You ought to." I say, "Okay, one a these times I will," (laughter). But she wanted me to start a, a, an opera here. Story_ID: 655057 Speaker 1: Now, tell me more about Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] before we get you outta Xavier. What was it--I mean did you take part in a lot of campus activities or--other than the choir? Speaker 2: The choir, we weren't allowed to because we were too busy. I couldn't become any fraternity, nothing like that 'cause you see, each year we used to take this trip--this annual trip for about a month around different parts of the country to raise money for Xavier, and so--and after that, opera time was following that, and so--and I was in all of the operas there. Speaker 1: So, in those days--I just wanna make this point, too, that, I guess, with other people I've interviewed, I found out that the choirs and the basketball teams--a lot of those are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm not a sport man. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, but a lot of the extra-curricular-type activities, when they would tour, were essentially making money for the school, right? Speaker 2: Yes, but--yeah, they were essentially making money for the school, for Xavier, but we were well-known 'cause we sang in Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] and wherever it was, we were there. Dave Garroway show, I sung solo (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dave Garroway had the first 'Today Show,' ['Today'] right on NBC? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I sang, I did a solo with him. I sang at Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana], I--it's a lot of places where I sang. I did prompters to the Mass for the Cath- I'm not Catholic, but I did prompters to the Mass at the St. Louis Cathedral [New Orleans, Louisiana], we sang in there, too. Speaker 1: That's the famous--that's the big one right there in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big one. We did commercials, I sang in--on Bourbon Street, there was a, (cough) excuse me, whatever they might have in a college. They have courts, courts like they would have in some college. I would--we would go in--go on the boat, no, go into this court and sing--some of us would, and I would sing 'Ol' Man River' at this--it's still there, unless it's been messed up by Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]. Speaker 1: What's that? What is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The court, C-O-U-R-T, court. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--well, some kids, some people be out there dancing--doing tap dancing. I remember Meat Bone and his Kidney Stew [sic. Pork Chop and Kidney Stew], they were excellent tap dancers, but we would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Meatball and Kidney Stew. Speaker 2: Meatball and Kidney Stew. You see, he would his hands on the other boy's--on the other guy; one was tall and one was short. He would put his hand on here, and that guy would tap, man. He'll have you rolling boy (laughter), 'cause they could really dance, really dance. But they were outside; they didn't get in the Quarter [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana] and so forth, you know, but we could go inside, where the restaurant was, and sing because we were from Xavier, you know, or something like this, you know. And I represented Xavier, too, in contests--college contests, too; I did that, too. Story_ID: 655058 Speaker 1: Now, I think off-camera we mentioned that you were--that you knew [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis and John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.], and other people that went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] then. Speaker 2: I didn't catch that. Speaker 1: I think we mentioned that off-camera. I just wanted to get it on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --on tape that you knew Norman Francis-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very much so, and his brother [Joseph Francis]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I mentioned about John Stroger, you know. We were great, great friends. Speaker 1: Stroger is a Cook County [Illinois] commissioner. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: He just retired didn't he, from Cook County? Speaker 2: Just retired. Great, great friend. Whenever he had his inauguration, I was featured--for every one of them. One time John Stroger--I was singing for Black History [Black History Month] in the state building [State of Illinois Center; James R. Thompson Center, Chicago, Illinois], and I was featured, and John Stroger got up there and told them, he says, "You know Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.] is one of the best singers in the world (laughter), that's him." And he says, "The reason why he's such a great singer," he says, "is because of me." He say, "You know, I taught Willie Brown to sing." And Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]--they were all there. I don't know if he want to remember that, but he was--they were all there, all those, standing right by me (laugher), and so I stood up there. I said, "Before John Stroger speak, I must comment--make a comment because you see, John Stroger did teach me to sing." I say, "Yes, he taught me to sing all right." I said, "That's why I have all this white hair." And everybody cracked up (laughter). Even J- all of 'em. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And where to, now? Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about John Stroger and Norman Francis (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, John Stroger and I were great friends. He was telling 'em about: "I taught him to sing." I say, "Yeah, John Stroger, he taught me all right, that's why my hair is gray," (laughter). And then they cracked up, yeah. So-- Story_ID: 655059 Speaker 1: So, when you graduated from Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], what were your prospects? What did you do? Speaker 2: I didn't graduate in four years because when I went to Xavier, I was--I had to take some remedial courses, reading and math, and it kind of caught me, and I couldn't, I couldn't go into the regular college courses until I passed those courses, and Xavier was very strict about that; you gotta pass a standardized test, and I couldn't pass it, and so I just kept on, kept on, kept on until I--I think I memorized the whole grammar book; I'm not kidding. I had to because I wasn't gonna pass--but it took me--I didn't finish in four years, and so I was drafted into the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Okay, now what year is this? Speaker 2: This was '53 [1953], 1953. I, I entered the service in August--the 28th, I think it was. Or was it July? Anyway, it's the day that they became integrated and that I was in the Korean War, and we were the first ones to be part of an integrated base; we were among the first. And I stayed there for two years, and I did a lot of singing in the service, too, you know. Speaker 1: How did you actually go to--did you serve in Korea? Speaker 2: No, I didn't go overseas because--I didn't go overseas. Speaker 1: Okay, so you stayed stateside here. Speaker 2: I stayed stateside, yeah. Speaker 1: And where were you stationed? Speaker 2: Fort Worth [Texas] base. Speaker 1: Forth Worth, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Was there a name of a base there that you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carswell Air Force Base [Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base Fort Worth, Fort Worth, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in the [U.S.] Air Force, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean you were in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we were there to protect it. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was the Army protected Air Force base. Speaker 2: But I sang when I was there. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I was--took part in a lot of contests. Speaker 1: All right. So, when did you come out of the service? Speaker 2: Fifty- June '55 [1955]; June the 1st, '55 [1955]. Speaker 1: Now--but before we leave it, though, let me just ask you--since you were one of the first groups to integrate-- Speaker 2: To intergreate-- Speaker 1: --and we know it was tough when it was segregated. I mean what kind of challenges did you face in the Army, or did it go smooth--I don't know. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we were all integrated. We had to be 'cause this was under Truman [President Harry S. Truman], I think, when they integrated the whole thing. And so we slept together, we became friends, and we kind of felt as though--well, no, I was lucky enough to go to a school there called the Skysweepers school, whereby it was a pretty important position because if I stayed in there, I would have made rank, you know. And I was selected to go to the school, but it--or a maintenance school because they weren't letting us go to the regular school that, that last for eighteen months. So a lot of times, the white fellas that was there, they would go eighteen months and then they'd quit (laughter) because they thought they would (unclear) there, so what happened when they, when they wouldn't stay there, they got us to, they got us to go to Fort--to go to school there for about six months. What do you call this training school? Troubleshooting school, and I was lucky to be one a the ones that passed this pretty good, and that's what I did until I--except for singing, that's all I did. Story_ID: 655060 Speaker 1: What happened when you got out of the service? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I wanted to go back because I liked singing in the churches and things when I was off. I used to sing in the church. They used to call me Coffer Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.]. I used to sing in the churches, you know. So, anyway, I--after that, I went--I came to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: So this was about 1955 then? Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955], yeah. I started living with my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] and my father [Willie Brown, Sr.], and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now your--was your mother in Chicago then, too? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. What happened when I was in service, my father came down to New Orleans [Louisiana] and my mother cry on his shoulder and say, "Everything I have is gone, in the [U.S.] Army." Say, "I have nothing, it's all gone." And so she cry on his shoulder. He say, "Well, come on back to Chicago with me." They had been separated for eighteen years, and so she wrote me. I asked her for some--and then she wrote me and told me, she said, "Will, I'm living in Chicago." "Chicago." She said, "Yeah," she said, "Your father came, and we're back together." Then they start living on 6446 Marion [Avenue], and they moved from there, my mother encouraged my father to buy a house at 1254 South Christiana [Avenue]. Speaker 1: On the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: West Side, right. And that's it, you know. I drove a bus for a while, and left there and went back to New Orleans. I wanted to--I wanted to finish college because I needed about nine more hours, and I went back to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], that's when I met John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.]. Not John Stroger, not John Stroger. That's when I met the tall guy, Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois]--oh, man, man, man. Speaker 1: Oh, uh, I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders. Speaker 1: Warner Saunders, right. Speaker 2: We were there together. And I'll never forget when I got there (laughter). It making me laugh. We were both, we were both being featured by the alumni; he was speaking and I was singing. And he said, "You know, with all this singing, and all this athletic stuff that I did--I was football, I was basketball player, this kind of player--," 'cause he was a sports man, and then he said, "And then we had a meeting, and the nuns said, 'I got a surprise for you. Mr. Ol' Man River is back.'" He say, "Who in the world is Ol' Man River?" And she said, and when I got up, she said, "Talking about him." And so anyway, she say, "And he's gonna sing for us." And I sang 'Ol' Man River' and they gave me a standing ovation. And so--but he mentioned a lot of time, he says, "Here I am singing, doing all this singing--I'm doing all this playing football, basketball," whatever it is I was--he was playing, and he said, "She talking about somebody singing 'Ol' Man River'." Laughed, yeah. So, you know--and so that's one thing that happened after service, but I got a master's [from Governors State University, University Park, Illinois]. I got--that's when I, I graduated--in '57 [1957]. I should have graduated in '53 [1953]. I graduated in '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 655061 Speaker 1: So what did you do after you graduated [from Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What did you do after you graduated in '57 [1957]? Speaker 2: Uh. Speaker 1: Did you come back to Chicago [Illinois], or did-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I became, Chicago, because at that time I had been coming off and on with my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown]--with, with my father [Willie Brown, Sr.]--visiting my father, and so this is where I was discharged [from the U.S. Army] to, to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I lived with them permanent then, and that's when I really blossomed here; I blossomed. When I start, when I start singing I met--well, the singers here with, with my 'Messiahs' [George Frideric Handel] and, and a lot of things. A guest appearance here in this church, that church, every big church here; every large church here, I think I sung in it--every last one, doing what I do best, you know, the Paul Robeson star. I'm not a gospel man, I'm not the one that's going to promote--now, I did gospel down in New Orleans [Louisiana] now. In New Orleans they knew me--the opera singer on one side, a gospel singer on the other side. But that's not my voice. I'm a melodious kind of singer, you know? And so (unclear)--any of 'em. I've sung Bishop Brazier [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur Brazier], I was on his television show when, on Christmas. I sang with them many times, many times. And Greater St. Johns [Greater St. John A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois], any--all the big ones here. I would say anything that was big, I sang--yeah, that's how I got my popularity until I--my wife [Clementeen Brown], who--oh, I became a director of a choir, at Ebenezer's choir, I became the choir director. Speaker 1: Is that Ebenezer Baptist? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ebenezer Baptist Church [Ebenezer Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]. And after that, I start singing more solos, getting more popular beginning--getting to know more people, and I got a job here teaching school, too, because I, I, I had finished school; I got a job with the Chicago Board of Education. Speaker 1: Now, when did you start with the board? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: When did you start with the Chicago Board of Education? Speaker 2: Almost as soon as I got here. I got here in '57 [1957], and I started teaching in '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And after that, I had a little problem with the board. I was a sub [substitute teacher], and that was another story. I took the test several times--the music test several times--two times, each time I got a failed, failure, with a review. Some people got passed, some people failed, but I got a review; about three of us got a review. And the review only meant that you convinced them that they should have passed you, but I would get that, and man, I'd get a bigger F then, 'cause I knew, I knew what that was; they didn't have enough, enough high school for--I suspected that they didn't have enough high schools for, for out of towners because you--out of towners, you know, you had people from DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] for the high school that's gonna be here, and I wasn't that great where I can supersede DePaul's graduates--Chicago State's [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] graduates, or Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] 'cause they--I think some of them were on the board; I--this is, this is just my thinking, I don't know. But anyway, I couldn't pass it, and so--and they--I was working at (unclear) School [ph.], I'll never forget, where they say I couldn't sub anymore. They said something--my classroom conduct--whatever it was. So I, I went to the post office, and I worked at the post office for ten years, and my wife didn't like the popularity I was getting as a singer (laughter). Story_ID: 655062 Speaker 1: You're working at the post office like--a lot of black people with, you know, college educations worked at the post office, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With college degrees. The reason why they were scared--a lot of school teachers were there because they were scared to take the test under Willis. If you fail it three times, you can't teach in Chicago [Illinois] period. You can't--you couldn't sub but you couldn't do anything and--period, and a lot of them had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the famous now Benjamin Willis, right? He was superintendent of the public schools [Chicago Public Schools]. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: That was Benjamin Willis, who was superintendent of the public schools? Speaker 2: Willis, yeah, right. Yeah, yeah, he-- Speaker 1: Of the Willis Wagon fame, right? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Of the Willis Wagon fame. Speaker 2: Oh, that's it. I couldn't--and I realized then that 96 percent of your subs [substitute teacher]--of your Chicago public school teachers were black substi- were non-whites--96 percent. Speaker 1: Of the subs? Speaker 2: Of the subs--no, of, of, of the teachers. what is--90 percent, 96 percent of the subs--yeah, of the subs. Anyway, it was way over there, I know that. Speaker 1: So, we're saying that the most majority--the majority of teachers were white, but the majority of the subs were black. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ninety-six percent. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And that's when they decide to, to strike, or something like that. But I had fortunately passed the test then. By the time I had passed I, I went back and--when I was at the post office, they said, "Man, they (unclear) asked some principals to say something good about you." But I did, and I did singing in the parks and I--and they all wrote letters for me--good letters. And so they gave me another review and so I start subbing full-time then. I said--and then I said, "I'm gonna take this test, take this test." That's when I flunk it two times, and then I said--then I went to Gary [Indiana], and--because they claim they were making--they were, they were paying more in Gary. That's another story; they wasn't, they wasn't gonna hire me. And so anyway, I told 'em, I say--then, the National Teacher [National Teacher Examination; Praxis Series] came through. I said, "Hallelujah." See, with the other test they, they could grade some parts by somebody marking you down or up, that's why I kept getting a width, one point off; I might be one--the score might have been nine hundred--no, ninety. I might have gotten eighty-nine (laughter), just enough to let them know that I (unclear), but we don't have any face paint; that's the way I interpreted it, you know? (Laughter) So consequently (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they could take a point off for something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A point, yeah. And one time they gave me, they gave me something--I say, "I know I should pass this one this time, the second time," 'cause they gave me something that was ridiculous. I made one mistake on a essay, or something that I was supposed to write and, and he gave me, oh, a, a big point. I say, "Mr.--." I was (unclear)--I was supposed to write for my review. I said, "I, I wrote that note thirty-two times, and one time I might, I might have had a, a Freudian slip, and I might have wrote it kind of--I was going fast, and might have missed the line, and they gave me a great big--just enough to flunk me (laughter). That's what I thought, that's what I thought. I'm gonna tell it like it is, now, and--but I know, I said, "I know I should have passed." But anyway, I got through; I got through when the National Teacher came through. I took a dry run and I said, "Hey, I think I can pass the National Teacher." So I went to different schools, got some--I went into special elementary education then, and I went to special ed. I love special ed. And so anyway, I decided to take the test and I passed, and I passed the oral, too. I said, "Now, if they fire me now, they gonna see my lawyer," (laughter). 'Cause we was stronger, man. But I was really glad that I got through here. Speaker 1: So, when did you, when did you finally pass? I mean-- Speaker 2: It must have been seventy, ten years later, '77 [1977], I believe, is when I passed, is when I got that job. Story_ID: 655063 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You started with the post office in '59 [1959], I think it was? Speaker 2: In about--I was post--'59 [1959]--yeah, '59 [1959] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To '68 [1968], that' what's on the sheet that you filled out. I don't know if it's true, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'bout '59 [1959], yeah, '59 [1959], yeah. That's when I left the post office, and I joined the opera. I was, I was at the post office a little bit between the opera and--I was at 'em both at one time, until it got too, tight for me, so I joined the opera in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Now, how did you come to join the opera? What happened? Speaker 2: Auditioned. And the Maestro Lepore [Michael Lepore] said, "You are in." Speaker 1: Now, were there any other blacks in the Lyric? This is the Lyric Opera of Chicago, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lyric Opera of Chicago. Speaker 1: There're like--how many opera companies here in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: In Chicago? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, at this time they had one--they had one downtown. Speaker 1: There's a Chicago Opera [Chicago Opera Company], right, or something? Speaker 2: That's what it was called; it was called Chicago Opera, or something like that, yeah. It was downtown (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then the Lyric Opera. It was two, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. The Chicago--it's downtown near, near Fullerton [Avenue], near the-- Speaker 1: Well, one's near the train station [Chicago Union Station, Chicago, Illinois], I know. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: One's--one of 'em is near the train station, I think, right? Isn't it? Speaker 2: Train station? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: They might have a--I don't know what they have now but, but this was the one that they had when I started on--it's on Fuller- right--not too much far--yeah, here I go again. Not too far from-- Speaker 1: Well, that doesn't make that much difference, I'm just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I tried, yeah. But anyway, I got in, that's the main point. And the opera-- Speaker 1: Okay. This is the Lyric Opera. Speaker 2: Oh, O'Banion was there in the supplementary. Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Delano O'Banion, right? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Delano O'Banion. Speaker 2: Delano O'Banion, he was there before me at that time, and there was this other guy name John Cleveland [John H. Cleveland, Jr.]. Now, he was a regular man. So he was about the only real, regular-course man when I joined, and then after-while, they hired several more, they hired several more after that, but eventually they all scattered out, and I was really--it was me and a Mexican; he was a tenor, and me. We were there for a while, and then the others, then the others got out for whatever the reason might be, and they start getting rid a people, too, and I became a--a lot of time in the opera 'cause I was the only one there. Even though they were there, they weren't in the operas because they were supplementing-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you see; you'll see these people in the opera and you think they're (unclear), but they are supplementary, they have--people who would just like to be in the opera to, to be on stage but they weren't, they weren't real members of the opera, but I was it. I was in it and I was a contractor (laughter). So-- Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like a full-time job. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --full-time job. So I was teaching school, and I was with the opera, full-time. Speaker 1: Gee, so that's two jobs. So you teaching school by day and at night you're with the opera. Speaker 2: That's right, with the opera. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--yeah, full-time, until I decide that my memory is not as sharp as it was. Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], I say, "I'm not gonna be in the opera in '99 [1999]." And so I, I went up to the personnel office and I told 'em after we had got through doing this, this opera--"; German opera. It'll come back to me. When I got there, I walked up, I say, "It's over." "What's over, the opera season?" I say, "No, for me." And she says, "What do you mean?" I say, "Now, you know I can't--I'm resigning." I had my contract. "But Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.], you had your contract, you can't--." I say, "Well, no, I been here for thirty years, really," I told 'em. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so I said, "Now, you know we can do better than that." (Laughter) I said, "It's time for me to go." She says, "Go home and think about it. Did anybody bother you here?" "No, no, it ain't that, it's time for me to go." And so she say, "Well, come back tomorrow and bring your letter." So the next--that, that next day, I gave my letter, I didn't know it, they had, they had planned a party for me (laughter). I got pictures of that. I was crying, they all was crying to see me go, you know. I say, "Well, I gotta go." And the maestro [Bruno Bartoletti] was crying, and the members were crying and I was crying (laughter). But--and that--and 'Lohengrin' [Richard Wagner], that's the opera we were doing, 'Lohengrin.' Speaker 1: La Wagner [Richard Wagner]. Speaker 2: No, no, the, the 'Meistersinger' ['Die Meistersinger von Nurnberg,' Richard Wagner], the 'Meistersinger,' they still the same thing, Wagner, and we do the 'Meistersinger,' that's what it was. And after that I, I said, "It's time to go." I got solos there--minor solos, but I got solos. And, and just about any opera there, I was in it, and I was in just about all of 'em. Story_ID: 655064 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you now for some of the highlights of-- Speaker 2: Of the opera (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of the Lyric Opera of Chicago in your thirty years. Speaker 2: The highlights was when they cast me in specific settings where I was seen quite a bit. When, when I was first there, I was always in the front, and I would have, partner that they would give me because sometimes I was almost the only one performing, you know, and they gave me a, a partner to--and that part, it happened--all of a sudden this lady would say, "I'm your partner." And I know that that was deliberate, you understand. So, the highlights was the operas that I did, and when I had the partners that I liked and they liked me. And I felt very, very comfortable, so I had many highlights in that respect. I felt comfortable, I felt needed, and at one time I--especially when I was with Lepore [Michael Lepore]. Once I learned everything, everybody's supposed to know it, Lepore would say, "How you learn to play your part so fast?" But I had a Solfege thing that I did, you know. Speaker 1: Now what was the director's name again? You said-- Speaker 2: Lepore, L-E-P-O-R-E. He was like the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lepore. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was the maestro when you started-- Speaker 2: When I started I was (unclear)-- Speaker 1: In '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: --and told me, "You in, man," (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's the way he said it? Speaker 2: (Laughter) He said, "Come back for your second interview." Whatever it was, you know. But I was in the (unclear) when he heard me (laughter). So anyway, I liked the opera--I liked 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet]. Now let me tell you my highlights. I liked 'Carmen' because I have done 'Carmen' several times in New Orleans [Louisiana]. I told you I was Escamillo in, in 'Carmen,' and I also told you the time I was--and that was in Municipal Auditorium [New Orleans, Louisiana], and that was for their 150th anniversary. And I was called from here to do Escamillo. Speaker 1: Is it in New Orleans? Speaker 2: In New Orleans, in the Municipal Auditorium with New Orleans Symphony [Louisiana Philharmonic Orchestra] and some of Xavier's [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] crew, because this, this was celebrating their 150th university--their 150th anniversary, and they wanted us in there, and so I was called down to do that. And guess who I saw there? I said--I told you when I was in kindergarten I was in love with Miss Manadate? I saw Miss Manadate (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell her name? Speaker 2: Manadate--I spell her name M-A--I would say M-A-N-A-D-A-T-E. I loved that lady (laughter); I told her that (laughter). I said, "Miss Manadate, I'm in love with you." She says, "I never thought that I would see that long-headed boy on the stage in--that you are now. I would--never would have thought it." And she say--I said--tell me, she say, I said, "Miss Manadate," I say--I wanted to shout (laughter), "Miss Manadate." I grabbed her and I hug her, I said, "Lady," I said, "You don't know how good you're making me feel." And we did it in French, we did it in French; it wasn't in English--we did it in French. And I said, "This is the biggest thrill I think I wanna see, and that is all these years, all these years--do you know how long that's been, Miss Manadate?" I say, "I'm a full-grown man with a family, and you remembered me." But she don't remember how much I loved her (laughter). I'll never forget that, man. Yeah, I think first grade or second grade, something like that, you know. But I met so many friends at that time. And Debria Brown, I told you she was Carmen. They had given her the key to the city, and they got other people from outta town who did the solo work and, and I had done 'Carmen' at Xavier many times. I was Escamillo, but I had been many parts, but I was always Carm--I was always Escamillo, the bullfighter. Story_ID: 655065 Speaker 1: And at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], that's when I got really introduced to the opera. And 'Rigoletto' [Giuseppe Verdi]--I did, I loved 'Rigoletto' because I could become Rigoletto. I told people, when I do a concert now, and if I would do 'Rigoletto,' I would tell people why I love 'Rigoletto.' I say, "I could do it." The story of 'Rigoletto, I say, is about a man who was kind of hump-back like, and they used to tease him because he has a beautiful daughter [Gilda]. And they stole his daughter from him and took them into the court, and the Duke [Duke of Mantua] liked him and, and, and they molested his daughter. That's the story of 'Rigoletto.' And so Rigoletto got angry, hired a killer [Sparafucile] to kill the Duke, but in the end the Duke got mixed up and killed his daughter--(unclear). Well, his daughter. And so--but I did that excerpt from that in New Orleans [Louisiana], and I was Rigoletto. Now, I like 'Rigoletto' because I see myself in New Orleans. I told you we went in the court, we went to the court and we could go in--and Meat Ball and Kidney Stew [sic. Pork Chop and Kidney Stew] would, would be out there dancing for money, but we could go in, to an extent, to just sing--not at that time though, and not at that part of my history; this was only when we got permission, something like that. But anyway, I saw myself as Rigoletto, who had a beautiful Creole daughter, 'cause there's some beautiful women out here in New Orleans, and I could see my daughter working in the restaurant, and I couldn't go and see her. And I could see myself out there with buck dancers as tap dancers; they wouldn't let--and, and I wanted to go see my daughter and they wouldn't let me see my daughter. I say--and so that's just--it's for the--as far as I could get as far as comparing Rigoletto with New Orleans, and so when I, I say--I, I become Rigoletto. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My color isn't, isn't blinding people because I see Rigoletto as a black man. Speaker 2: So did they, okay. The other one, it just dawned on me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet]. Speaker 2: I don't know as much about-- Speaker 1: 'Carmen'? Speaker 2: --opera, but-- Speaker 1: But 'Carmen'-- Speaker 2: 'Carmen' is--you play the bullfighter; that's the one where they do the, (singing) dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, right. Speaker 1: (Singing in Italian). Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. Speaker 1: He says, (singing in Italian). I always had--that was me. And that was--he was a lover's man, the troubadour, everybody loved the troubadour 'cause he was a bullfighter--a rich bullfighter. Everybody loved the troubadour. So he come in, people, "Oh, here come Torro." Women like him--everybody like him. And so I enjoyed that, and I enjoyed singing it at the opera but I wasn't the lead. But it reminded me of when I did sing it so many times down in New Orleans with the orchestra, symphony orchestra [New Orleans Symphony; Louisiana Philharmonic Orchestra], everything just as grand as anybody would wanna be. And, and 'Rigoletto' and 'Carmen,' that's the two-- Story_ID: 655066 Speaker 1: But I've done, in New Orleans [Louisiana] I've done more than that. I was, 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi]. In 'Aida,' I was Ramfis, the high priest, Ramfis, high priest. Ramfis was the high priest and I was, and I was that--and also (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, 'Aida' is more of a--that's a--you always see a lot of black people in the--because it's an Egyptian theme-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. What's the name? Leontyne Price. Speaker 2: Leontyne Price, yeah. Speaker 1: That's what she's known for. I was there with Leontyne Price singing it in opera. All the big shots I knew 'em--Pavarotti [Luciano Pavarotti], you name 'em (laughter), I was there with them. I'm singing here--Paul Robeson here, and here I am, you know? I know 'em all, you know, and they all know me, you know. So, anyway, I was also in 'Aida,' yeah; I was, in 'The Marriage of Figaro' [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] I was Figaro. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was Figaro. I was tutored by [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis who was with the touring--he was big-time, but he tutored me in 'The Marriage of Figaro,' and I was in 'The Tales of Hoffmann' [Jacques Offenbach]. I was that, and I had a part in that too, when I was in New Orleans. So, so it kept me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, did you stay in New Orleans for a period of time doing opera or did you come-- Speaker 1: No, during that time I, I was a student [at Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] then, but last time I wasn't, when I did 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet]. I, I had just joined the opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago]--well, getting ready to join the opera here [Chicago, Illinois], but I went--no, I wasn't--I forgot, but I know it was during the time that I was at the opera here. No, I was in the opera here, that's right, and I left the opera after the (unclear), I don't know what it was--during the (unclear), but I, I sang it there, and then I came back here, you know, to the opera. When I was here, I sang with Lena McLin [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Lena McLin], you have her there. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I sang with her. I became very special with her, in fact. I did the 'Trial by Jury' [Arthur Sullivan and W.S. Gilbert] with her, I was the judge [Learned Judge]; I was--no, I was one of the leads, and I did 'Cavalleria Rusticana' [Pietro Mascagni]. I was--oh, come on Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.], you were the lead. The bass leader, Alfio, A-L, I think it's F, A-L-F-E-O [sic.], I think--Alfio, I think it was, and then--and in 'Pagliacci' [Ruggero Leoncavallo] I was the person that sang--I was, 'Pagliacci,' oh man my memory's gone, I was the baritone star [Tonio], and she had another white fellow who was Pagliacci, it'll come back to me. Story_ID: 655067 Speaker 1: But I was there with--with Lena [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Lena McLin] also, and also I went down to Atlanta, Georgia where I met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], not met him, but I sang for him with Lena, and Lena wrote a song ['Free at Last!: A Portrait of Martin Luther King, Jr.'], a tribute to Dr. King, and he heard me sing it, and he invited me down to Atlanta, Georgia where I sang a tribute to Dr. King. And it's a great number, great number. Now, she has a whole slew of songs that she added too, but she had that one song when I, when I sang with, and that is--she would call it a tribute to Dr. King; I sang it at church here, too. That's when King first heard me sing it the first time I was at Quinn Chapel [Quinn Chapel A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois]. I'm a member of Quinn Chapel Church, and that's my--he heard me 'cause he was preaching there, and I sang this (unclear) and, and he was fascinated. A lot of people don't know that I knew that Dr. King's running mate was Bennett--Reverend Bennett [John C. Bennett] (laughter), Reverend Bennett, it wasn't Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy]. They weren't really that close. Speaker 2: Okay. So, Reverend Bennett-- Speaker 1: Reverend Bennett. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Wherever you saw Dr. King, you saw Reverend Bennett (laughter), yeah, they were, they were buddies, yeah. He took me to his house, he showed me around--all that kind of stuff, you know, and I became a friend, we became friends. They wrote me after a while, you know. He wanted, he wanted to record me--why, I don't know. We went on Dearborn [Street], at about 1100 North Dearborn, they made the tapes, but I was supposed to sing, and for some reason it didn't go any further, why, I don't know, but I know he wanted to tape it, and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte--no, the, the big-time pianist, they were friends to King, they were gonna promote it. Oh, this big time song he wrote. It'll come back to me. Speaker 2: Oh, a piano player? Speaker 1: Yeah, big-time player. Speaker 2: Not Earl. Speaker 1: Big time guy. Speaker 2: Not Earl Hines [Earl "Fatha" Hines] or-- Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: I think he's (unclear). Speaker 1: I can't--right now, I--oh, he wrote things like, well anyway, he's a big man, big man. And he and King were popular, and he was going to promote it. Speaker 2: Not Earl Grant. You remember Earl Grant? Speaker 1: No, no, this is a white fellow. Speaker 2: Oh, a white guy. Speaker 1: He was a--he's (unclear). Harry Belafonte heard me singing, you know--hear me sing something there, where they were, and they were great friends, too; I met him there when I was there. But anyway, Rosen [Charles Rosen], ah, it'll come back to me, it'll come back to me (laughter). I can get some of the music, the music I have right now, and get serious--some of the songs that he wrote big-time, big-time. But he was gonna promote this and never got any further, but I know we taped a bunch of tapes. Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: And that's it. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You don't remember the name of the company that recorded it? Speaker 1: That was supposed to record it? No. That taped it? I don't know the taping of it, I really don't. I can't say who was taping but I know who was supposed to promote it, but I, I just can't remember, I just can't remember. I really don't know who did the taping, but I know it was on--oh, about 1100 North Dearborn--Wabash [Avenue] or Dearborn, 1100. Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you--I'm gonna ask you, now who was Reverend Bennett? Now you said he was Dr. King's friend, but like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His best--his, his running buddy. Speaker 2: What church did he pastor? Where was he? Speaker 1: Reverend Bennett didn't--I don't think he pastored a church. Speaker 2: He was just a part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]? Speaker 1: Yeah, part of SCLC, but they were good buddies, though. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, Reverend Bennett was there when we were taping this here. Story_ID: 655068 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanna go, go back and ask you about 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet] too. Around, I guess, this, I guess around the same, in the '50s [1950s] [1954], they made 'Carmen Jones.' Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked that. Speaker 1: Yeah, what did you think of that? Speaker 2: Well, like anything else, being an opera singer, I didn't really like the setting because they made him, there's a lot of, if I remember, a lot of fighting and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte was in it, Dorothy Dandridge. Speaker 2: Was Harry Belafonte in 'Carmen Jones'? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the, he didn't--I think they dubbed his voice in, but he was the-- Speaker 2: But see--but they were using voices that weren't the best voices for opera. Now, somebody had done it after that. I've done excerpts from 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], but I've done, I've done--I know the solos from, you know I've nev- 'Carmen Jones,' they did it bluesy, if I recall. I never did really care for it 'cause I thought it was pretty (unclear) 'cause good voice--'cause they had some good voices back in those days, and because my--either [HistoryMaker] William Warfield or Paul Robeson was in 'Porgy and Bess,' I know that. I think, I think it was Paul Robeson [sic. William Warfield] in 'Porgy and Bess'--it might have been that. But I've done excerpts for that, and--but no I'm, I'm bein- I'm not--see, I, I'm, I'm, I'm in the higher class former of music, and when I heard--now, now, Harry Belafonte, they were good actors, they had the--good actor or good acting thing, but-- Speaker 1: They got to reduce the musical part of it with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Huh? Speaker 1: You think they sort of reduced the classical part-- Speaker 2: Reduced the, the part that--yeah, the, the vocal part of it--I thought they could've been better vocally. But it became popular, you know, and that kind of thing, but it--and, like I tell you, the story--I might be getting it mixed up with 'Porgy and Bess,' too. I, I think my mind's on 'Porgy and Bess' when I hear it back 'cause I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was done around the same time. I think it was a couple years later, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was, but I just didn't like--and there's a solo--a soloist--well, the soloist that's singing 'Porgy and Bess,' I didn't like his voice either, really. At that time, there were little--for black people who were popular to, to do starring roles. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause they had Sidney Poitier play Porgy. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: They had Sidney Poitier play Porgy. Speaker 2: Yeah, Sidney Poitier, yeah, that's right, yeah, Sidney Poitier. And they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had to dub him in-- Speaker 2: And, and then they had--they had a lot of--it wasn't--who sings, (singing) "It ain't necessarily so." That's this guy who was--I can't remember. Anyway (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was Sammy Davis, Jr., I think. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Sammy Davis? Speaker 2: Sammy Davis. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Sammy Davis, yeah (unclear). He did a good job, but he--that fits him fine (laughter). I mean nothing wrong with that, huh? Story_ID: 655069 Speaker 1: I'm going to tell you something else. In the opera, I could have joined the opera school, but I didn't wanna lose what I had accomplished already in the school system, the singing, the 'Messiahs' [George Frideric Handel], the solos, directing, and so I didn't, I didn't join because at that time they weren't giving leading roles to, to, to the black singers, I thought, 'cause you know, you know the Three Tenors? Well, one of 'em talked to me 'cause they call me, Grandfather of the Opera, I want you to know that (laughter). Him--he did, too. He said, "Man, you the grandfather." Dixon [ph.]. Dixon's a tall guy, the taller guy, and they did this jazz form of the 'Messiah.' But anyway, he and I were great friends. And he never did like the opera, to be honest with you (laughter). And--but he--I remember when he, when he got started, but he says--he didn't like what's happening, and so he got out of it and they put him in--and he start doing 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], that kind of--any, anybody who has something going for 'em, they start doing 'Porgy and Bess.' It's just changed now; that rule has changed now. I'm not saying--when I came around, when I came around, the, the, the opportunities just wasn't there. You had to give up so much, so much for it. But I was, I was offered a opportunity to travel around the world though. I want you to know that. Somebody called me and said that they wanted me to travel with 'em, but I didn't, I didn't do that. And I believe somebody called me about this 'Porgy and Bess', about this here--this, this 'Show Boat.' Somebody told me they say, "Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.], I got a part for you. We're doing 'Show Boat.' Come and join us. You don't even have to audition. I told the person, I got the man for you." And I think they were meeting in Texas. And she said, "Just come in and meet the man." She said, "But I know you ain't gonna come, Willie Brown, because you're not gonna leave the opera," (laughter). And I had my family then; I said, "No, it's too big of a risk." Because my friend Frank Davis, my (unclear). He went to Fred Waring and he was a soloist; he travelled with Fred Waring and didn't too much happen to him, really. But he was a star, he's one of the black--he was one of the first blacks that Fred Waring, that Fred Waring--'cause he, he did this 'God Trombone' [sic. 'God's Trombones'], "Then God stepped out on space and look around and said I'm lonely. I'll make me a world." That was Frank Davis (laughter), my running boy (laughter). So anyway, we went to school together, too. That's--remember how I told you when I heard him sing and, and they asked me, they said when I heard him they said--I say, "Who is that?" They say, "That's Frank Davis." And they said--I said--somebody said, "Well, is his voice as big as Willie Brown?" They say, "It's bigger." I say, "Aw, you must be kidding." But I met him and we became--that's the one I told you I tied with when I went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. The maestro was mad with me. I tied with the great Frank Davis and McEwan [Alfred McEwan] didn't, didn't get a showing, and then McEwan was his friend. McEwan had, had a good voice. But I tied with the great Frank Davis, you know? And that's--and I was in high school first, and then, you know. So, anyway--what else was I gonna say about 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet]? Yes, here I was the--at one time--I'm gonna tell you what's on my mind. Here this black man (laughter), at one time, who felt a little depressed at his color, was the lover man, Escamillo, and when I did 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi], 'Aida'--and the great part about 'Aida' is you have dancers dancing around him; all of 'em were Creole women dancing around Willie Brown. Speaker 2: And as the high priest [Ramfis], right? Speaker 1: As the high priest (laughter). All those things made me feel good, so that's the two--you asked me a question. I enjoyed doing it. Whenever I see (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And those are the two you enjoyed the most? Speaker 1: I enjoyed the most because it brings back memories. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It brings back memories, you see. Speaker 2: And you said like 'Rigoletto' [Giuseppe Verdi] was a story that reminded you of New Orleans [Louisiana] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, of New Orleans. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and 'Carmen,' well I did it so many times. I knew it and I did it with friends so I knew it (laughter). Story_ID: 655070 Speaker 1: Now, you did some traveling, too, didn't you? Didn't you travel with someone (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The traveling that I did when I was with the group, we went to Massachusetts, when I was a soloist, Massachusetts, New York, all around there. Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], oh, I can't name so many of 'em, but when I was in the [U.S. military] service I did, I did a lot of singing, too. But I, I always had this little problem with airplanes; I ain't gonna lie to you (laughter). I don't wanna get in no airplane (laughter), which is true. I had this phobia, that's why I didn't--and one of the reasons why I wouldn't accept anything going around the world--I would have to catch a plane to go there. So no, I didn't really do too much outside of--oh, I did 'Messiah' [George Frideric Handel], I did 'Messiah' in--oh, where did I do the 'Messiah?' Outta the state, outta the state, but no, no, I--no. Story_ID: 655071 Speaker 1: We mentioned earlier that you met Paul Robeson when you were in school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, when I was in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Did you have a conversation with him? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Do you remember what you said? Speaker 2: I was telling him I was--that he was my idol, and my--(unclear) my high school, Miss DeJohn [ph.], took me and another singer to--one a them old singers, with me 'specially, and I told him that I enjoyed--that one day I hope to, you know, "I'll never be you," I told him that, "'Cause you're too big." I say, "But I hope that one day I can sing like you." And he--I, I went up on stage with him and talked with him that--I'll tell you when that happened. That's the time when he was running for this, this--he was not running, he was supporting this socialist club, this socialist group, and, and he was supporting him [Norman Thomas]. And a lot of my friends went to the places where he was speaking at this, during this same time, and, what's this, what's this guy's name, this Socialist running for president of the country? And they arrested some of us in New Orleans [Louisiana], not--I didn't arrest--because my mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] didn't want me to bring nothing home, but a lot of my friends from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] got arrested--from high school--got arrested because it was an integrated couple. Paul Robeson was involved there but I, but I had sung for him a little before, at one of the playgrounds somewhere, yes. Story_ID: 655072 Speaker 1: I was asking you about Paul Robeson and you were saying you met him. Now, where did he sing when you met him? You were in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was at a park in New Orleans [Louisiana], Russell [sic. Norman Thomas], that's the guy he was supporting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Russell--for the Socialist Party [Socialist Party of America], he was running for the president of the country here, you know. So, anyway, I went up to the stage where he was, they let me come up there--go up there, and I told him I was a singer and I was singing, and people tell me that I had a voice just like his and, and I admired him. I said, "You're my idol." I said, "One day I hope that I'll be able to sing as well as you." And I'm sure he said something: "Thank you, and keep on," or something like that, but after that, he keep on doing his concert and I didn't--that's the first time that I really talked to him. And the other time--well, I didn't do too much talking because this was a little before they had the Southern Christian Leadership [Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)], this is a little before that. A lot of my friends who, who went to where they were having this meeting in some closed place where they were integrated and, and he was speaking to anybody there and--but anyway, the police arrested a lot of people there, but I had left. I had left because I didn't wanna--I didn't know that was gonna happen, but they did. They say that--I don't know why they was arrested, to be--actually, but I know they arrested them-- Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: --but basically because they, it was integrated, I guess, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that's--that makes sense for those days. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: That makes sense for those days. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes. Story_ID: 655073 Speaker 1: Now you were friends with [HistoryMaker] William Warfield, too, right? Speaker 2: I, I wasn't actually a friend, but I was a person who people compared. People compared Warfield and I; he had the name, but I was compared to William Warfield by a lot of people, especially my, my rendition of Handel's [George Frideric Handel] 'Messiah.' He would sing, and a lot of times they were their soul singers backing him in the, in the choir. Well, I guess I had a little ego in me; I never did do that. I often tell people, whenever William Warfield sick or something, let me--I'll do his, his singing and--'cause he was singing (unclear), and Miss Love, Dr. Love [ph.], she was the director of that, and she and I were good friends, too. But anyway--and I've sang places with Warfield. I told you I did a, a tribute to him. I told you that, yeah. I did a tribute to him, and I've been featured some places where he didn't make it for whatever reason he didn't make it, and I sang a 'Messiah.' And I'll tell you who was getting me to sing, this--my dear friend Irving Bunton, a great musician in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. He would get me to sing several times when William Warfield couldn't make or something--I don't know; that's what they said (laughter). But he had heard me sing, he had heard me sing when we had the Three Tenors [sic.]--me, and I think Bob, what's the name, O'Banion [HistoryMaker Delano O'Banion], and somebody else; he heard that, too. Speaker 1: It wasn't the Three Tenors, was it? Speaker 2: The Three Basses [ph.]. Speaker 1: The Three Basses, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he was there when he, when he heard us and--but he knew me; I knew he knew me, especially from my 'Messiahs,' 'cause people always compare my 'Messiah' with his rendition. Story_ID: 655074 Speaker 1: We were talking off-camera about some of the partners you had over the years, and, well, the casting, I guess, for these operas. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Was it difficult for them to cast you in roles, or were they afraid to put you with a white singer? Or something, was that it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's it, you see. It wasn't--not, not Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], I mean not the Lyric Opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago] itself, but some of the, some of the directors would, this is the way they would do it sometimes. They would say, "Pick your partner." And I could see somebody was standing next to me, they kind of walk away a little bit. And so they had their partners, and there's one without a partner (laughter), and that was me. And I've seen one time or so, or so, I, I told the director, I said, "Where am I? I'm still standing here." "Oh, oh, oh, all right." And they find some spot for me. I've had that (unclear) because I knew they were uncomfortable. And there were other times when they over did it. I was right in the front, right in front, and then one time they made me a special part, they thought I was one of the main casts the way they had me. That was in--it was a beautiful opera, beautiful opera, it'll come back to me. (Singing) Dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. Well, they had me right in front. (Singing). But they had me, I, I greeted the lady--Miss Etta [ph.], I think. I greeted--I flirted with her and all that kind of stuff, I sat in the front and she flirted with me, that kind of--I was in high style, I was right in front of the stage there. But there are some times when, like I said, they--for some reason, I always find my--I, I wasn't in the front, but for some reason, because of my voice, I was right there, right there, highlighted, you know. And I don't know the way that 'Billy Budd' [Benjamin Britten], by the way, 'Billy Budd,' I had a little solo part there. Then in 'Billy Budd' I had a little solo part, and in 'Rigoletto,' [Giuseppe Verdi] I think they give me a little solo part there, so I became a soloist with 'em, and I, and I became--and they elected me to the Board of Governors [sic. Board of Directors] for one year, but I didn't want that, but I took it for a year and, and resigned. So, but some parts of the opera, I felt very alone when they were casting. I didn't tell anybody but I did--I felt very alone. And to my friend--I have a friend who just--whenever she saw me, she came to me and she made the whole bright new day for the opera. And when I see her right now, when I go to the opera, I see her, she just lets me know that I was her friend. She would (unclear) grab me, you know, in my arm, but what a great friend. Elizabeth [ph.] was her name, a good friend until, until I resigned, you know? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's about it without going too deep. Speaker 1: All right. Well, you can go deep now if you want to (laughter). Speaker 2: No (laughter). No. The costuming thing, the, the costuming were pretty-- Speaker 1: Did they ever try to disguise you? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I was in one opera, I was in one opera, 'Satyagraha' [Philip Glass], it was very modern opera. It was about Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi]. Now, this was--I was the only black person in this opera, and I had to, I had makeup that, as light as they could make me because I didn't like Gandhi, supposedly, in the opera. And they had a great big picture of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. The group didn't really honor Dr. King, so I was one of 'em. When I tell people that one time that I didn't honor Dr. King, and--but I had--I was one of 'em, and it's 'Satyagraha' and the music was--oh my gosh, it was hard music, very hard music. Some of it we had to sing behind stage, it was so hard to memorize, you know. And people on stage weren't even singing'. We had to sing for 'em (laughter) 'cause it was so hard. The music was very hard. Story_ID: 655075 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you say that there are a substantial number of people in any opera that are really not singing that much, they're just kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, you had your supplementary, and then again you had the people who, what they call it, they, they were, they wanted, they came every year, they were just-- Speaker 1: Like extras on a movie set? Speaker 2: They were extras, they were extras to fill-- Speaker 1: So you need a massive cast for a-- Speaker 2: --people, they be there then. They'll be on--you wouldn't know it, but they couldn't sing. They weren't allowed to sing, but they could do the acting with us, though, yeah. Was it supers--supers. No, I said supers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, they weren't--they were supers. We had the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Supernumeraries? Speaker 2: Supernumer- no, that's, they were super (unclear), I just can't think man, right now. But they had the regulars like myself [at the Lyric Opera of Chicago], the, the--these persons where I was--there's a regular, there were the--and the super. The super were the ones that weren't paid, they were just supers. Speaker 1: You know, an opera is a massive production (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: --with a lot of different facets of it, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --do you have any stories about any-- Speaker 2: Any what? Speaker 1: Any stories about something that went wrong in a big opera (laughter)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, something about one person fell down a hole and-- Speaker 1: A hole on the stage? Speaker 2: Yeah, onstage, yeah. And then again, there were, there were times when we were doing something like--one opera we were doing. Well, they had horses on there, they had horses on there, and the horses would let their bowels out (laughter), and we had another horse behind that horse who would say, "Well, if you can do it, I can do it, too," (laughter). Speaker 1: And this happened during an opera? Speaker 2: During an opera (laughter). Speaker 1: Do they have some people waiting in the wings with shovels to make sure in case (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they had in this particular--in this particular incident, one of the, his, the guy who was training the horses, he had a costume on and, and, and his--was to more-or-less take care of the need of the horse, but he--but as far as the audience, I guess, might think he was one of the opera men, but he wasn't. He was a trainer. But he couldn't stop that; all he could do was scoop it, scoop it up, or something like that. But it was funny; Lord have mercy, it was funny (laughter). Speaker 1: Did people keep singing when it happened, or-- Speaker 2: No, you couldn't sing with that because the audience start laughing, too (laughter). And there were times, okay, we don't, you know, here in the opera, they have people right at the edge of the opera who help you with the words. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know that. Speaker 1: A prompter, or something, they call it, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Prompters, prompters, yeah. Speaker 1: They have a little door for something that-- Speaker 2: And there have been times when I knew that some of the stars might have missed a note or so and--because in the prompters that they have a (unclear). But basically, it's--oh, it was a fun thing, basically; I can only say basically, but--and the other part I just don't--a lot of the new ones who came in the opera could--had to get used to being around a, a, a person of my color. I knew that, I could feel that. I could just feel they were happy, they were friendly, but too friendly (laughter), too friendly, you know, and so I knew they weren't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Trying to over-compensate. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Trying to compensate-- Speaker 2: Compensate, yeah. But, but that was new. Eventually, I became very well-known, and I was very, very well-known, but I, but I still felt lonely, like when they had--oh, we had some other, other singers who, blacks who filled in with 'em better than I did, I think, because they socialized with certain special people better than I did. That's the best I can say. They socialized with 'em better. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They became friends to 'em, yeah. We had one black guy who assisted maestro [Michael Lepore]. He died from, I don't know; no one knows, but he died. What's his name? I tell you, since I've hit these seventies, my memory is, is not as quite as good as it was. Speaker 1: But he was like the assistant maestro? Speaker 2: He was the assistant maestro, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I sung for him at the--this big cathedral out in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] where one of the presidents' daughters or something there went. Ivy Beard, Ivy Beard, that's his name, Ivy Beard; he was assistant maestro, and I sung there for him, too. But I enjoyed the opera, I enjoyed the opera 'cause I could have quit if I didn't enjoy it (laughter), that's for sure. Story_ID: 655076 Speaker 1: Now what advice would you give to young people today that wanna get involved in opera, young black people (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've done it many times, I've done it many times. I've spoke, I've spoke to young people many times. I would tell 'em it's a good training, but watch yourself. I said, "Make sure you have something else that you can fall back on if the chips don't go right with you, or you don't like some--you don't make what you think you're gonna make." I would say, "I'm not discouraging it because it's good training for you." That's what I would tell 'em. "But just be careful, just be careful that you don't--." I've, I've known some to quit the opera because whatever reason, they just got--and they were regulars just like me, they were very--but, but they couldn't take it and they quit, and they told me that they were gonna quit and--because of--they didn't like the environment, or whatever it was, and--but now there's one girl there from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] that joined after I quit, and she's still there. She joined it from--I never met her as such, but she joined there, and she's doing pretty good the way I understand it. And there are, there are--but my friend Brown [ph.], heavy kind of girl, they put us together because she might be having a problem sometimes getting a partner too; sometimes she did, but-- Speaker 1: That's Debria Brown? Speaker 2: No, no, no, not Debria Brown, no; this is another Brown at the opera right now, yeah. So--she might still be there, but none of 'em reached me. When I, when I was there, I was (unclear) history. Historically, I, I, I sang in more operas in the Lyric Opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago] than any black man in its history before I quit. Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: Nobody came even close to me, as a regular. Story_ID: 655077 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on all these years and all the things you've done (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Huh? Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any particular thing, or anything that you would do differently, when you look back on all of it? Speaker 2: Ah, boy, I'm going to just tell you. I married too soon. If, if it weren't for the fact that I had kids, I would've taken the chance, number one, I would have joined the opera school, I would of been--I have no doubt that I would've travel around the world. Well, I'm a little afraid of the airplane, but I had to join that--I had to do that (laughter). Oh, no, I had no doubt; I was just that locked into it. Now, I could have joined it and, and just like I got in well at that time, I was, Lepore [Michael Lepore], I think he was involved there, too, but I would've gotten there, and therefore I'd have been speaking different languages, I would have had to. And the school system wouldn't have been such a powerful thing to me because I was single. Now, if I had something to do over, I wouldn't have married so early, right, 'cause I was here--I, I left New Orleans [Louisiana] in '57 [1957], and in '58 [1958] I was married. Story_ID: 655078 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Hope and-- Speaker 1: Hopes and concerns for the--our community. Speaker 2: Man, oh, boy. The hopelessness is for--I am concerned for the black community as a whole, is himself, to an extent. We've come a long, long way from even when I was a young child. There are many opportunities that's open that wasn't open when I was there, when I was young, and they are there on television. If they join the right school like Columbia [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], they can get work, and they getting the Emmys [Emmy Awards] and all--they, they getting rewards, their awards and things now. So, the opportunity is there except what we like. In our churches, and might a been going to, oh, Lord, they not gonna get me anymore. We are too deep into testifying gospel (unclear). He gave me bread, he gave me that, or this, that, and the other--bloom, bloom, bloom, bloom. And it's making young people run away who have good voices, and singing in, in, in these choirs and ruining their voices. The young men are not even singing anymore; they're doing this be-bop, no, no, they're doing this rap stuff that doesn't require, all it require is an instrument, the instruments (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A computer sampling keyboard. Speaker 2: Sampling. And, and they can, they can sing any way they wanna sing, and get--and make a tremendous hit and everybody like it. Sometime it's just talking, sometime it's vulgar. So a lot--that's why I'm saying a lot of it is us. And you can't control--and you can't tell a child not to, not to like it because they all like it and they all want to go that route, even in churches. All the churches wants, wants to get that rhythm, get that sound that the churches want, and people with, with good voices, and I mean good voices, polished voices, can't sing, and they gotta just sing this gospel stuff. At my age, I feel as though it could, if, if I would let it, I get frustrated myself sometimes. Maybe I ought to join 'em (laughter), I don't know. If you can't beat 'em, do like the Romans (laughter). But I been fortunate of my reputation, that everybody know me as Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.] the opera singer. Story_ID: 655079 Speaker 1: Now, what would you consider, at this juncture, to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My what? Speaker 1: Legacy. What would you consider your legacy to be now? Speaker 2: Well, my legacy right now is to be a role model for the young people, and I mean this from the bottom of my heart. I've got a talent that, at my age, is still very positive, and I think it's a duty of mine to be the role model. There is someplace I'm going now. I'm not--there's some--I'm going right now. I let them know my background, I've given them tapes of me, and I say, "I just wanna sing here one time to promote something for the young people to follow, because everybody wants gospel. I can be an asset to them. I have that ability and I have that feeling that I can be an asset. And to this very day, haven't been successful in singing in that place, but I'm not gonna give up because--I'm not gonna give up. My age--people look at my age, and a lot of them get fooled that this (points to head) means nothing; hair doesn't mean a thing (laughter). A lot of people say, "Man, you're better now than you was when you were young." And I feel that way. Why? I'm experienced, I, I feel it, I live it, and this comes from experience, this comes from age, wisdom. So the question you asked me, I wanna be a role model, and when I was asked by the mayor to become part of the, the philharmonic program in Country Club Hills [Illinois], I feel as though I had to be because the mayor wanted me there. And when I got there, he say, "You are the best we had in Country Club Hills." That was his statement. He told--he'll tell anybody, he say, "You're the best we have here, and this ain't no secret." He say, he say that in front of, in front of anybody. In fact, I'm singing for another mayor next month in Alsip [Illinois] and--because they're gonna have a program and they asked me to sing, and he told--I sang it last year and he told them, he said, "This is the best Country Club Hills has." He wasn't hiding it, and I, and I appreciate that, I do, because he, he wants to build the culture. You know, they have a amphitheater now there--Country Club Hills. I was supposed to open it, but it wasn't ready, but I believe I can go there man, I can get it ready, because they're showing big-time stars there in Country Club Hills. So, my, I have one hope, one idea is, that is to be a role model for the young people. You don't have to sing rap if you got a--I, I, I hear students, you know, when I was in 'Serendipity,' a senior citizen thing there, and the people told me that--they say, "Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.]," (unclear) they said, "That was your show." Everybody said I need to--I want to. I'm not gonna have this voice forever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's not gonna be there forever, but right now it's there, and I feel good, I feel, I feel, I feel anxious, and I'm ready to go. And one day--everybody tell me, say, "You're gonna sing here." Okay, I'm waiting for it. Story_ID: 655080 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about your family. I didn't ask you a lot about your family (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Well-- Speaker 1: But you have some grown children, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they're all grown. Well, what happened, I think the biggest problem that developed in my family was when my wife [Clementeen Brown] became a Jehovah's Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses]. I have nothing against them--nobody's religion--but by them being in a kingdom that's, that's basically their teaching, their--that's why they call them, their places Kingdom Halls. My wife became a staunch Jehovah Witness, and I can't, never could, never will, could be, I'm too deep in what I am, the vocalist, number one. I couldn't--I, I probably wouldn't even be interviewed with you if I was one a them. Speaker 1: So you're saying it's restrictive in a lot of ways-- Speaker 2: Not kind of (laughter). They don't say you--they don't say you can't, but it's, it's in our brains that you won't. So, therefore, I feel as though I kind of let my kids down because, of all my talent--and they--I had two that was very talented. One, in fact, went to England because he was told--he released, that album he has was number one. He came back, but he'll never make it because he's too tied up in that Jehovah's Witness community. I was trying to tell him, "Man, I had nothing to do with what you are," but that's about the only thing. I think there's some dissension developed between me and my wife, and I--we call it other things, but I, I know, as far as what I'm concerned, we got the ball to rolling, and that is when she decided to become a Jehovah Witness because she--my wife has a beautiful voice, we used to sing duets. And when she became a Jehovah Witness, the gap began, and the distance began, and the problems began. And to this time, we are seeing a lawyer. And that's about it. Story_ID: 655081 Speaker 1: Well, the last, the very last question is, it's similar to legacy in a way, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a man who contributed to society with a talent that God gave me, and don't (unclear), you'll make me cry (laughter). And I do, I feel tears coming. God has given me a gift, just like they giving other people gifts. I do, sometime when I'm in concerts, I am crying. When you know you got something to offer, and you see yourself being stifled, it hurts. If I felt in any way that I could not produce as a singer, what Michael Jordan produced as a basketball player, not have more money, I don't mean that. I don't mean money, I don't mean popularity, but I just want to, to, I sing this song all the time. "If I can help somebody, then my living shall not be in vain," ['If I Can Help Somebody']. I sing it all the time. That's what I want to do, be able to help somebody build a stronger image, and the young folks that I see can't get a job, don't want a job because they don't put forth their--they, they, they, they don't care. (Crying) I see 'em walking down the street with they pants down, and I don't see how in the world they can be walking down there holding up their pants. I think it's a terrible, a terrible, well, fad, whatever you wanna call it, for young people. And I do believe that the other race see them and don't like it, they don't like it. But no one wants to be taught, no one wants to say that if they would be candid about what they see about that, then you must be some kind of racist. They can't speak their mind 'cause I know people can't, anybody, if, if, if I were of another religion, another--if, if, if I were white, let's put it this way, I wouldn't want my kids to be walking with his, his pants down, and I have reserve--I be reserved about mingling, in such a way that they lose, they lose conservatism, they lose conservatism, to be quite candid. And now that we're in a integration thing, and I thank God for it, that what's happening now wasn't happening when I was a child, and I thank God for that because I think this is the way the world's supposed to be. But they need to develop more, more care for how they look going down the street. Story_ID: 655082 Speaker 1: We went to this here baseball game, men, too, this is not just, kids aren't getting it, this is men, grown men, watch 'em play ball, every word coming out their mouth was MF, older men. MF this and MF that, MF--just playing ball. "Oh, you MF." I say, "Oh my gosh." And little kids got it. I had one kid--I laugh about it. You don't have to tape this but I--let me tell you what it is. This boy saw me in a car, and he called me a monkey funk. You know what he was trying to say, the other words (laughter), monkey funk (laughter). Me and the person who was in the car cracked up (laughter). Yeah. He called me the monkey funk when I was coming home from the opera (laughter). And something else, too. When people say, "We have an opera singer," I'm not gonna be singing opera--they say--when I was--one Fourth of July, I was--they were announcing me, "We have Dr. Brown [HistoryMaker Willie Brown, Jr.] here who is an opera singer." Somebody groaned, and my family was there at the time, said, "We don't want no (gesture) opera singer." Grown people. But they didn't know my family was, was, was there, and so when I, when I got to sing, I was singing something that was very delightful. He say, "Okay, he got a pretty good voice." But I'm talking 'bout the first statement they made, though. We've got to learn, people, many of our big-time singers who are not--we're--not all of 'em, I would say, make what they are because of other races, and yet we don't wanna appreciate other races' contribution to music or what have you. Not if you're a listener. You don't have to pop your finger or shake your hips. Listen, let me show you something here. Sir, I have something here from the--I sing a 'Messiah' [George Frideric Handel] with, with people from-- Speaker 2: Korea, yeah. Speaker 1: Korea. Speaker 2: Yeah. We'll show the pictures. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: We'll show (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, very good. And they love the ground that I walk on. I mean I never been so, treated so, they just crazy about me, crazy about me. I sung, I sung with them more than once. But my biggest object is since God gave me the talent, and I still have it, to be a, a, a, a role model for my young people who have the talent. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That is my, I can help somebody to, that way, now, that has always been and that's gonna be the way I wanna be until God say--until my foot--my feet down there is not walking on the ground, and they like that (gesture) (laughter). When they like that then it's over (laughter). That's true. Speaker 2: Well, thank you, sir. Speaker 1: And so I--that's my dream. Story_ID: 655083 Speaker 1: My mother [Odessa Jackson Brown] became a beautician when she came to live with my father [Willie Brown, Sr.] downtown in Skokie [Illinois], and so since I was--she must have been in her, forty, about forty when she did this picture at one of the places where she was working as a, the person that, that, not the person that does the hair, she does the shampoo, she's a shampoo girl. She was a licensed shampoo girl then. She probably did that at that store where they are. But from that picture, she has to be about, about forty, in her late forties (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, about 1960, mid-'60s [1960s]? Nineteen sixties [1960s]? Speaker 1: I can't--yeah, about 1960. I came here [Chicago, Illinois] in '55 [1955], yeah, so she must have been about in--about in the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s], right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: At 'Serendipity' ['Serendipity: Celebrating Chicago's Seniors on Stage']. Speaker 2: Go ahead and tell us about this. Speaker 1: Well, this is a picture that I took with a friend of mines, he's a tremendous pianist. He's a Russian, and he plays extremely, extremely well. We took this picture after we got through doing 'Serendipity' in Chicago Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] the last, this year. So I was about the same age I am now. I was sixty-five, seventy-five. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In the Chicago Theatre, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Let me make sure I don't have any glare. Okay. Speaker 1: This is my [maternal] grandmother, Susie Jackson [Susie Roberson Jackson], so this picture had to be taken in the early 1900s when my mother was a child. So I would say either 1900s or the 18- the, yeah 18-- Speaker 2: Well, when your mother was a child would be what? After 1912? Speaker 1: Nineteen twelve [1912]. This might have been even before her, with the, even before her. So I would say, I would say this might be the early, the late 1900s, I'm sorry, the late 19th century, or the early 20th century. Speaker 2: Okay. What was her name? Speaker 1: Susie Jackson. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: All right sir, ready? Speaker 1: This picture was taken, this picture was taken, oh, I would say about five, about four years ago. Speaker 2: Okay. Sir, are these head-shots for the opera? Speaker 1: These were head-shots for concerts. I have, for concerts including the opera, I would say. This was done, oh, this must have been done during the, right before 21st century. This must have been done around, oh, yeah, I know when this was done, it was when I got my doctorate. Okay, this, the late '90s [1990s], around '96 [1996], 1996. I remember that now. Speaker 2: Okay, were they for a specific show, or-- Speaker 1: Yes. I was doing, for various shows that I was singing, you know from--I was singing for--oh, yeah, I did, for the opera. I did one for the opera. I did take a picture with the opera in one of these suits, yes. This was--I would say this must have been about--yeah, about in '96 [1996], or '95 [1995], like that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Doctorate. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996], not 1896 (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Wise guy (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, so you got your doctorate. Where was it that you got your doctorate from? Speaker 1: From Birmingham, Alabama at Faith--I had that here--Faith Grant College [Birmingham, Alabama], right there, yeah. Let me see. Yeah, Faith Grant College, yeah, '96 [1996], '96 [1996]. And, and in the Sheraton Civic Center Hotel [Sheraton Birmingham Hotel, Birmingham, Alabama], this is where, this is where this took place...