 Story_ID: 635352 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Queen Esther Brooks [HistoryMaker Queen Brooks], Q-U-E-E-N, B-R-O-O-K-S, middle name E-S-T-H-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is April the 23rd, 1943, and my place of birth is Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is artist and art educator. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: I have no idea (laughter). I know it's April--I think it's April 3rd. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Twenty twelve [2012]. Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Okay. We are at Star Arts art gallery [Star Arts Limited]. It's in Columbus, Ohio, 1465 East Broad Street, I believe. Story_ID: 635353 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth. There are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first question is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. I have a favorite food. My favorite food is barbequed ribs. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: California. Los Angeles [California], probably. Only place I've been (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think that I have a favorite one because I'm always looking at other quotes and I'm always listening to what people say. So I don't really have a favorite at this time. Story_ID: 635354 Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Pomp Brooks] side. But we're gonna ask about 'em separately so we don't get 'em mixed up. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Then we're gonna put 'em together. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: All right. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: My fu- my mother's full name was Hattie Steele Owens. It's H-A-T-T-I-E, S-T-E-E-L-E, O-W-E-N-S. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth was 10/10/10, December 10th, 1910 [sic. October 10, 1910]. And I've always thought her place of birth was Columbus [Ohio], but it's not and I'm not sure. I can't remember where it was. Speaker 1: Is it some other place in Ohio? Speaker 2: No it's not, which was strange when I found out, but I can't remember I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Is it a southern state or? Speaker 2: I think it is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I may remember it later but--it may have been Norfo- Norfolk, West Virginia [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. There's a Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 2: Okay. Norfolk, Virginia. I think that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I know that she was raised here in Columbus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's why I've always thought it was Columbus. Speaker 1: All right. Well--what can you tell me about your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Okay. Very little really. I never knew my grandparents on my mother's side. She spoke of her father [Ollie Steele] often because he raised her. I knew that my mother--mother--my mother's mother [Maude Scales Steele] was poisoned by som- someone or somehow unknown to me. My father [sic.] raised her. He was a very loving father she told me, but he was very stern. I did meet an aunt who was mostly Blackfoot Indian. And I stayed with her several times when I was a youngster. Initially, I was very afraid of her because she looked so much different than the rest of us. And that is--that is all I know of my mother's family. Speaker 1: Now let me go back a little bit and--so you said your grandmother was poisoned? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How did they--I mean is there a story behind how they knew that and? Speaker 2: No. It was the--it was just that my mother told me this and she was always very cautious about eating out. And she did not particularly like me eating out. Like kids go to other friends' homes and they eat and my mother was very, very cautious about me eating at someone's house. And she had to really know the parents--the people that I was going to see before she would let me have a meal there. Speaker 1: What was it? Is it the thought that her mother was poisoned deliberately or just caught food poisoning someplace? Speaker 2: No. I got the--I got the thought that it was, you know, something that they felt was done deliberately. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, it wasn't spoken of much except that she was--she had been poisoned. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's--that happened in, in Columbus? Speaker 2: I don't know because her father wasn't from Columbus and so I don't know. That may have happened where my mother was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Now--let's see--so the great aunt was a--how did you--she looked different from the rest of your--or how was she different? Speaker 2: She looked like a Native American. And a very squat, thick, thick hair, wore it in those traditional braids. And I didn't know why she looked so much different. But, she didn't look like an African American. She was--her skin was brown, but she didn't look like an African American. And then when my, my mother told me, you know, "Well, she's Native American," and then, you know, I was--I wasn't so much afraid then. I just didn't--I mean I was small, and I just didn't understand why she looked so different. Story_ID: 635355 Speaker 1: So your mother [Hattie Steele Owens] grew up here in Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: She grew up in the Blackberry Patch. Speaker 1: Okay. Now that's a neighborhood here, huh? Speaker 2: That is a, a, a historical neighborhood that's being documented and has been documented by another artist, in fact, Aminah Robinson. But, my mother grew up in that particular vicinity. It's also built around Poindexter Village [Columbus, Ohio], which was one of the first places that we had--not high rise but what's those government buildings? Speaker 1: Projects. Speaker 2: Projects, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Near, near, Poindexter Village? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's right in the same area. Speaker 1: Okay. Now would that have--is there a--that be- would that be considered the black business district part of town or the part of town that has the most black people then? Speaker 2: Then? Probably then, yes. Now, my mother grew up in that area, I didn't. And she spoke of that area as being, you know, very warm, everybody knew everybody. There wasn't--there was nothing negative that she ever spoke about it. It was just her home, and I had some pictures that I had seen and, and, you know, it looked--it--to us now it would look pretty dilapidated and, you know, and it looked pretty old fashioned. But, it was a place of their bir- of her, her bringing up, and she enjoyed that neighborhood. Story_ID: 635356 Speaker 1: Does she have any stories about growing up [in Blackberry Patch, Columbus, Ohio] that she shared with you? Speaker 2: My mother [Hattie Steele Owens] in general? Okay, yes. My mother never finished school. She went to the tenth grade. She went to East High School [Columbus, Ohio]. What happened there, a teacher reprimanded her for talking, and she said that she wasn't the one that was talking. And the teacher told her, you know, that she was a liar, and for her to shut up, and called her a nigger. And my mother hit her with the typewriting book and left school, and she never went back. Well, when she told me that, you know, I had no concept. I'm thinking typewriter book so what, you know a little (gesture)--but the typewriter books were about that thick (gesture) then (laughter) and so, so I can understand that she might've gotten hurt from being hit with the book. But yes that was one of the stories that she, she told me as to why she never went back to school. And she would tell me that her father [Ollie Steele] was very strict on her, and--but she would do, you know, she'd sneak and do little things that all kids do. She told me lots of things then--I, you know, she told me so often that after a while I stopped listening and I regret that to this day, because you know I can remember my mother telling me stories, and I wished that young people would listen. Because I was young then, and she would--she was older. My mother was like in her thirties when she had me. And my father [Pomp Brooks] was in his fifties when they had me. And so, when she got older she would remember these things and she would repeat them, and I would hear them so often that in my mind I was repeating them too. And then I just stopped listening, and they, you know, because I was young and I was doing my thing, so they weren't of any importance to me then, and now I regret it a lot, you know. But she told me she was, you know, she seemed to be a pretty wild young lady (laughter) and she was pretty headstrong. I know that her father, you know, would forbid her to see somebody or to go out or something and so, she just said, "Well, I'm gonna be my own woman," and she moved out I think at eighteen on her own. And she said that her and her father didn't speak for maybe a year. And then she took him something on his birthday and that rekindled their relationship. But, I--he was dead by the time I was born, so I never met him. Speaker 1: Did she have brothers and sisters too or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Just her and her dad? Speaker 2: She was the only child, and, and I grew up the only child. Because we--I had a brother [Cornelius Brooks] that I vaguely remember seeing once in the cradle but he died at nine months, so I was the only child, my son [Leslie Brooks] was the only child. Story_ID: 635357 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay. My father's full name is Pomp, P-O-M-P, Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S [Pomp Brooks]. There's a Cornelius in there in the middle, but I do not know how to spell Cornelius. Speaker 1: Okay, I got it (laughter) least if it's spelled the usual way I got it but, now-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: --is there a story behind the name Pomp? Speaker 2: If there is I don't know it, I really don't. You know, my father pretty much raised me. Because my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] worked, my father was, like I said, in his fifties. Speaker 1: Now was he born in around 1900 or what? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What's his date of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. So if he was in his fifties when you were born-- Speaker 2: He was--like, my mother--he was twenty years older than my mother, and she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, so 1890s then? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was--yeah. Speaker 1: So he was born in the 1890s. And do you know where he was born? Speaker 2: In Birmingham, Alabama. I do know that. Speaker 1: Okay, in Birmingham. Now, what do you know about your dad side of the family? Speaker 2: I know--I did meet my grandmother, his mother, and I met my uncle, his brother. My dad never went--he went to the third grade of school and then he later joined the [U.S.] Army. And in that capacity, he drove a motorcycle and carried around officers. He lost his leg. I think it was his left leg. And I don't know what year, but I know he lost it because of gangrene that set in his foot and then he had to continually have operations until it got up to his knee. Speaker 1: Is it from a disease he had or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I think it was from probably diabetics and he never knew it. I really--because otherwise--later on, he lost his other le-his other leg prior to his death. Speaker 1: So this is untreated diabetics? Speaker 2: Yes. And he never took anything. And we never saw him sick. He never was sick. I never remember my father being sick. He was a big guy. He was over six feet. He was very muscular. And like I said older man, but you never knew what his age was because he was always out and about. He had a wooden leg. He dressed really well. And he was always, you know, he was a street guy, you know, (laughter) he was--he liked to gamble. He was a--he ran a bar for a while, which was called the Vernon Grill. It was on Mount Vernon Avenue [Columbus, Ohio]. Mount Vernon Avenue was the avenue of a lot of black businesses and some Jewish businesses. But he was always out. He never stayed in the house. Although, he watched me--he watched me from a distance and I wasn't allowed to go outside of his view. We played together. He allowed me to read to him. I pretended to be a newscaster many days. He collected--he, he read--he had a lot of common sense. He could talk to anybody about anything. He was very good at the numbers game, which is different now. But where we play the lottery, then it was, it was the numbers and that was whole another black industry that I was aware of. And he was always--my mother and he were always good at it. They always seem to hit the numbers. Let's see, what else? He--many people thought he worked, they thought he went to work every day because he got up and he actually just went and stood on the corner and hung out with the guys, (laughter) or he went someplace and, and, you know, did some gambling or something when somebody else was watching me. But-- Speaker 1: So he didn't have a regular job most of the time? Speaker 2: He never had a regular job. He never--and he like--I think one time he went to work for a Goodwill [Goodwill Industries International, Inc.] and he was like, "I can't work with those people," you know, "I'm not crippled. I'm not handicapped." So he never worked. He lived off of his pension and his wit. Story_ID: 635358 Speaker 1: His grand- his mother--I remember we took care of his mother, and she had Alzheimer's. Is that how you say it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Alzheimer's disease. Speaker 1: Yeah, and--but we called it something else then and I can't quite remember what it was. I always try to remember that because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe dementia (unclear)? Speaker 1: No. They didn't have that name for it either. It was a, it was a like a, a folk name for it, you know. And I remember she came--I would go stay at her house and I always hated it because we'd have to go to bed so early, the sun would still be up and, and we'd have to go to bed. But she was very sweet. Her, her other son lived with her. He did very little to nothing, except dress well and stayed in the streets. I remember there was a lot of tension between the brothers because he lived with my grandmother. My grandmother thought the world of him. But she'd call my father [Pomp Brooks] to change a light bulb, you know, that kind of thing. And so, I, I sensed that there was a lot of tension in the family between my uncle and my brother [sic. father] and my mother [Hattie Steele Owens]. My grandmother as she--as the illness progressed, she came to live with us. My mother wanted her to live with us. I think at one point they--my uncle had put her in a nursing home and she kept walking away and we'd have to go find her. And we would always find her 'cause the nursing home was like in the neighborhood of--the black neighborhood, you know, and so we just took her to live with us. And we--a, a story. We would go to the drugstore which was on the corner by my house and she would always say, "I want some ice cream. Don't you want some ice cream?" And I was like, "Yes ma'am." So I'd take her hand and before we got to the store--my grandmother never had any money and I didn't have any money, I was just a little kid. And so, she would stop somebody and she'd say, "You know, I know your face but I don't know your name," and she'd say, "You wanna buy me and my grandbaby a ice cream cone," and they would. They would always buy us an ice cream. Well I never, until I got a little older, my grandmother never knew those people. It was just something that she did. And that would just--you know when I grew older and, and realized what had happened, that just tickled me to death, you know. But that's how we got our ice cream. We'd go--somebody would buy us an ice cream cone and then we'd go for a walk and I'd bring her back home. And basically that, that's how I remember her, you know, I don't remember her as a younger woman. I know I have a picture of her, you know, younger than when I remember, but I don't remember her as a younger woman. I do remember her as a proud older woman. Her hair was always done. She always dressed up, every day. She was immaculate with the clothes of her time and, you know, the sho- the high heeled shoes. The stocking, gloves. I remember that she always wore a coat in the wintertime and sometime a scarf and I guess because she was cold--I mean in the summertime and I guess she was cold. But she was always dressed, she was always--and she always had an apron on over her clothes. Speaker 2: And, and, she lived to be how old? Speaker 1: You know, I'm thinking that my grandmother lived to be in her ninties. She probably lived to be in her--ninety-three or something ninety-three, ninety-four, something like that. Story_ID: 635359 Speaker 1: Did your father [Pomp Brooks] ever--did he finish high school here (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he, he went to the third-- Speaker 1: Oh okay, so he dropped out before (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm the only one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that finished school. Speaker 1: And then he went to the war, you were saying, started serving? Speaker 2: Yes, he was in the [U.S. military] service--World War I [WWI]. Speaker 1: One? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: One? Oh, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, World War I. Speaker 1: That's right, I'm thinking II [World War II, WWII] he was in I. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he went overseas in World War I, right? Speaker 2: I don't think he went overseas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know. He never talked about the war. My father was like--I know that my father got in trouble and he went to prison and he was pardoned by the governor after a while. Speaker 1: Is this during the war or? Speaker 2: No, this was after--it was prior to my birth, though. But he knew--I think he knew my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] at the time. But he did say that he had been to the the Ohio Penitentiary [Columbus, Ohio], which was downtown at the time, it's gone now. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the famous Ohio Penitentiary they used for the movie 'Shawshank Redemption' [sic.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Right, yeah. And he was there when they had the Ohio fire when they had the penitentiary fire. He was there, and he was ex- he was excused by the governor because he was shot at by the police. But the police did not identify themselves, and they thought he was someone else, and he was carrying a gun at the time, and he shot back and he killed one. Speaker 1: Hm. Okay. Speaker 2: So he had, you know, I guess he had a rep in the neighborhood [Bronzeville; King-Lincoln, Columbus, Ohio]. But everybody seem to, to like him. My mother on the other hand--they liked her to but I would--I thought of my mother as a hellion in her early years of my growing up. 'Cause she worked and she worked at bars, and she was immaculate. If you had seen my mother you thought she was nurse. 'Cause she would always wear a white uniform, and white shoes, and she was famous for wearing this handkerchief that would be starched and stuck on her, her lapel. And--but she was going to a bar, and, and she would have to call home--well somebody would call home all the time, and tell my father to come up and get her because she was in a fight with someone, and so she had short temper. But my father--I--my father was never in any trouble. Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After-- Speaker 1: After he got out of-- Speaker 2: After I was born there was never--he was never in any trouble. But my mother was hellion. Speaker 1: Now is there a story 'bout how they met? Speaker 2: No. I don't know how they met. But I know that my, my grandfather on my mother's side [Ollie Steele] did not want them together. And my mother told me that so that may have been why they weren't speaking for a while. It may have been my dad. Speaker 1: Okay, now when you think about your parents' personalities and their looks and their talents, and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I see both of them in me. I--initially I see my father and then I--but I see my father physically and I see characteristics of my mother. And I'm like, oh mom (laughter) you know, but I see--I, I have a mole on my nose, which my father had, and although I have this stature--the shortness of my mother. I have the patience with other people of my father, and I have--in later years my mother be- became another woman when she married my stepfather [Leslie Owens], and she became a very spiritual woman. And so I have a lot I think of that too, of the spirituality that she passed on. Story_ID: 635360 Speaker 1: On that note, let me ask you about your name. I didn't ask you in the beginning and I'm sorry I, I always ask people the origins of their names, but, what, you know, I guess it's a biblical reference right? But-- Speaker 2: Queen Esther is, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there, is there a story behind how your parents, came, came up with that name? Speaker 2: Yeah, people always ask me and the truth is my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] told me that the nurse named me (laughter). People always ask me and, and I asked my mother once I was like, "Why did you guys name me Queen?" And they said, "We didn't, the nurse named you, so we just let it be." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: It's interesting now you go by [HistoryMaker] Queen Brooks-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --rather than Esther Brooks. Speaker 2: Right, I go by Queen Brooks, and when I sign my name or if my name is on art it's Q.E.B. or, it's Queen Esther sometimes, but very seldom. If a sign it on documents it's Queen Esther Brooks. But it's, it's very seldom Queen Brooks. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you like Queen better for the name even though (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I didn't like it when I was younger but, it's, it's my name. Speaker 1: Did you get teased about it when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Actually nobody teased me about anything (laughter). I got the hell raising thing when I was younger from my mother 'cause I fought a lot too. Speaker 1: Now, we saw pictures--we're, we're 'gonna show 'em later on in the interview of you as a baby, and then you were famous for a scowl. Speaker 2: Yeah, I frow- you know, I'm only frowning now--I mean smiling now because I'm talking with you guys. But, normally--I mean yesterday somebody said, "Queen what are you mad about?" And I was like, "I'm not mad about anything." But I think personally--I think it's a sensitivity to light. Because when I was younger--when I was in my teens I tried not to, you know, scrawl [ph.], and look all mean. And I'd go pass a window and see myself and I'd be frowning like, you know, but people left me alone, (laughter) nobody ever messed with me when I went down the street. Story_ID: 635361 Speaker 1: Your household consisted of then--was it your, your--you, your mother [Hattie Steele Owens], your father [Pomp Brooks], and--up to a certain point, and they split up, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: Then they went--now look--you wanna know the story? Here's the story. My--when I was younger--prior to maybe sixteen, yeah prior to sixteen years of age. Speaker 1: Well we can maybe, we can maybe hold off on that 'til we get you in, in your teenage years. We can build up to it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 1: But I was just trying to establish who was in the household? Speaker 2: Okay, my mother, my father and myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And sometimes we had roomers. Speaker 1: Okay, did your grand- none of your grandparents stayed with you? Speaker 2: My [paternal] grandmother stayed with me before, before she died. And then my mother took in a lady that I called Aunt Jessie [ph.]. And Aunt Jessie was a older lady that frequented the bar that my mother worked at. The bar had a history of seniors. It was called the O- it was called the Pythian Grill [Columbus, Ohio]. It was right across the street, from the King Complex [The King Arts Complex, Columbus, Ohio] now. And it was--the King Complex used to be Garfield School [Garfield Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] and the Pythian Theater [Columbus, Ohio]. Okay, and across the street was the Pythian Grill. Well, the Pythian Grill--only older people seem to go there, so it had the nickname the old folks' home (laughter). So my mother was--you know she was a younger woman working there and she loved all those old people. And she met this woman named Aunt Jessie, and I can't think of her last name, but she brought her home one day and said that she can't, "She's, she's going blind, and she needs somebody to take care of her, so we're gonna take care of her." Story_ID: 635362 Speaker 1: Continue that story. Now, you were telling us about? Speaker 2: Okay, I was telling you about Aunt Jessie [ph.]. And so we took her in. She was going blind. And while she lived with us she actually went blind. And she stayed in her room and all we were required to do, was to supply her with beer (laughter). She drank beer every day three times a day. So my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] would buy these big cases for her and my mother would, you know, physically take care of her, and then go to work and she would be there and I would go up and talk to her. And so, she lived with us until she died. And there was a gentlemen named Uncle Charlie [ph.] that would come by and visit with her. We called them boyfriend and girlfriend and they were just the cutest people. But I rem- yeah I do remember Aunt Jessie living with her--with us and I had almost forgotten that until you asked me that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved her. She was--she had a bird and the bird was Jerry [ph.] and that's--she would just--it was a canary and so she would just--her and Jerry and she would sit by the window, and I'd just go in and visit and sit and talk with her and she was just happy to be there. Story_ID: 635363 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I have several early childhood memories. Speaker 1: Do you have one that's earliest? Speaker 2: Early, early, early. The one that most people--my parents [Hattie Steele Owens and Pomp Brooks] used to talk about was this is--I'm so glad I'm older now (laughter) this--when I first got a tricycle okay, and a friend of mine--my best girlfriend at the time, got on my tricycle and she wouldn't get off so I jumped on the back and I bit her on the behind (laughter) and so she ran to my father (laughter) and she said, "Mr. Pomp, Queen [HistoryMaker Queen Brooks] bit me on my behind." Well she said, "You know, my butt" (laughter) and so he said, "Why did you bite her there?" And I said, "That was all I could reach," (laughter) that was on the back and so they teased me about that a lot. They teased me about that. And then, when I was learning how to ride a larger bike I ran into the wall, and I said my first curse word, the S word (laughter). Okay, s- yeah I, I had--but I had a great childhood, I didn't wanna grow up. Story_ID: 635364 Speaker 1: This is a question we always ask. What were--well first of all what was the neighborhood you grew up in and what, what were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, I grew up on--in the vicinity of 18th [Street] and Mount Vernon [Avenue]. On Mount Vernon was all the businesses. There was a shoe store, a bank, a grocery store, a clothing store, a drugstore. There was everything that you needed so you didn't have to go out of the neighborhood okay. And then, on my street which was not perpendicular but adjacent, I guess to that was all houses. Nobody owned--well there was a couple of people who owned their own home, but mostly we were renters, but we were proud renters, so the street was very clean. People would come out and sweep their yards and sweep in front of their houses. The doors were always open in the summertime, so there was a variety of smells, so because most parents stayed home, mothers stayed home on my street and took care of their kids and their husbands worked and they, they cooked. There was--the neighborhood was full of kids and I played with all of them and a lot them came to my home and hung out at my house. I remember we sang on our porch at night, the kids hung out and we sang on, on my porch or somebody's porch close by. We slept in the front room at night. Nobody had air conditioners when I was growing up and nobody feared anybody was 'gonna open the door and come in their house. It was a safe neighborhood. Everybody knew everybody and everybody knew everybody's child and everybody would tell everybody on you and (laughter) they would tell your mother. So the kids in our neighborhood behaved themselves because if they didn't they would find themselves in trouble. It was a pretty neighborhood, was lots of trees, lots of fruit trees, apple, pears, peaches, lots of mulberries--I ate lots of mulberries. Basically, it was a great neighborhood, great neighborhood, I loved it and I could go off--from one end of the block to the other and it was okay. Speaker 1: Now this is the, the--say the Blackberry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No this is not the Blackberry Patch [Columbus, Ohio]. The Blackberry Patch-- Speaker 1: That's where your mother [Hattie Steele Owens] grew up? Speaker 2: That's where she grew up. That's further down. Speaker 1: Okay. So where you grew up it's called? Speaker 2: It was just called--it's called--I think it's called the King district [King-Lincoln, Columbus, Ohio] now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: They just renamed it the King district. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we were in within walking distance of a bowling alley, three movie houses. Speaker 1: Was the Lincoln Theater [Columbus, Ohio] one of the? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lincoln Theater, Cameo [Cameo Theatre, Columbus, Ohio] and the Pythian Theater [Columbus, Ohio]. Story_ID: 635365 Speaker 1: Did they show like movies like, you know, when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, they sh- and every Saturday all the kids went to a Saturday matinee that was ma- was meant for them. It was usually a serial type thing, you had to come back next week to see it, but we went every Saturday, popcorn was a nickel (laughter) and we got the popcorn kernels. They even popped those at the Pythian [Pythian Theater, Columbus, Ohio] and they'd give you--they'd sell you a bag of kernels that was partially, partially popped for three cents. Those were the best things and yeah we, we had some really good experiences. I had a bad experience there that maybe you might wanna know later, but as a child, I did have a very bad experience. Speaker 1: Well what happened? What happened? Speaker 2: One of the usher at the theater tried to molest me and I went home--I went out and I told my mother [Hattie Steele Owens]. Speaker 1: Were you there by, by yourself? Speaker 2: Yes, we usually went by ourselves or with other kids, you know, we'd meet somebody there. But I had gone and he had, you know, come and sat down beside me, then he, you know, start touching me and then he asked me to sit on his lap so I got up and I left and I told my mother and consequently he was put in jail. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I thought you would say your mother gave him one (laughter). Speaker 2: No, she, she would have (laughter), I'm sure she would have. But my father [Pomp Brooks] might have killed him so yeah he was--he was taken to jail. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so how old were you when that happened? Speaker 2: I think I was probably eight, eight or nine, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so had--did, did your mother give you good instructions in terms of what to do in case something like that happened or did--was is it all new? Speaker 2: No, but I knew that wasn't right and my mother right across the street at the--'cause she had, you know, taken me down there, so she was right across the street. So I just went out, went across the street and told her. Story_ID: 635366 Speaker 1: Where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started school at Garfield [Garfield Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio], which is the King Complex [The King Arts Complex, Columbus, Ohio] now. Speaker 1: Okay, so the very building that's the King Complex? Speaker 2: Right, and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah I started there. I was there until the third grade, and then I went to St. Dominic's [St. Dominic's School, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay, and then St. Dominic's--well-okay, let, let's just go to Garfield--okay so at Garfield you, you went from first grade to what? Speaker 2: From first to the third grade. Speaker 1: Okay, first to third. And, did you like school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I--but the thing I remember most about Garfield is not so much the school or the teachers or anything about the school, is that two doors from Garfield there was a lady that sold candy apple suckers and candy apples (laughter). And that's what I remember the most about going to Garfield, is that I wanted to have money every day. I think the candy apples were like a nickel and the candy apple suckers were like three cents, so every day I was asking for money so that I could get some suckers and candy apples from the lady that sold them. Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Art (laughter). Art and when I went to St. Dominic's which was, of course, a Catholic school, I really liked catechism, religion study--the study of the Catholic religion; I really liked that. But art--I've always liked art. Story_ID: 635367 Speaker 1: Now, were there any special teachers there? Speaker 2: At St. Dominic's [St. Dominic's School, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, I remember Sister Mary Roberts [ph.] (background noise). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: What did Sister Mary Roberts teach? Speaker 1: Well at that time they taught all of the, you know, you go in--they taught you all the subjects, you know, in that one particular room. And I, I just enjoyed being in her presence because she was a younger nun, and she was just--had this joyful look about her, and she was a kind nun, and I can't remember the nun's name that I liked so much before I left St. Dominic's but she was the head director of the school, and she was very warm and motherly, and I liked her. But I liked going to Catholic school and I became a Catholic, and I was the only Catholic in my family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I got really caught up in it, and, and I couldn't wait to receive communion so I could eat breakfast, and nobody else could (laughter). Speaker 2: Now are you still a Catholic today? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay, so how, how long did it last? Speaker 1: Oh it lasted a long time. It lasted into my late twenties. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, and then I got disillusioned (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, okay, well maybe I'll ask you about that when we get you in the late tw- twenties. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 635368 Speaker 1: Were you the kind of person that, that drew all the time at home? Speaker 2: Actually, because my parents were older and I didn't have brothers and sisters, that was a form of entertainment for me, and it wasn't so much as drawing as coloring. I was always coloring, I had--in, in--my art is like--I create forms and I fill 'em in. So I, I still color, you know, so I, I always had coloring books, and crayons, and I always tore stuff apart, and I still tear stuff apart. I'm just a little bit better at putting it together. But my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] used to get really angry at me and say you know, "You have got to stop tearing up stuff," (laughter), you know, I'd be tearing up stuff, and then I'd take it to my dad [Pomp Brooks] and he's like, "I don't know how to put this together," so we'd get in trouble. But yeah that was my major form of entertainment, was listening to the radio, looking at books, and actually not the library books that anything--my father--I do remember that he made scrapbooks out of old books. He would just cut out pictures he liked and glue 'em on top of whatever page that was in the book, and he would share the those with me a lot, and I remember looking at a sepia tone photograph of a man sticking his head in the mouth of a alligator or a crocodile, and so I would look at his books, and, and he would read the paper, so I would look at the paper, and, and try to read to him, and try to be a news announcer, and stuff like that, and television of course. I looked at television a lot, but not like kids do now. I mean my mother would make me go outside and play-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I'd be in at a certain hour. Then I could look at television for a while, and then go to bed (laughter). Story_ID: 635369 Speaker 1: Did you get any art instruction outside the public schools when you were growing up? Speaker 2: No. I guess that was the, the real throwback or--of my trying to be the person that I am today, is that I did not have that encouragement. I drew when I was in high school. I even sold work when I was in high school, but it was still of no value to my mother [Hattie Steele Owens], she did not understand that whole concept of being an artist and she would say, "I don't know why you wanna be an artist. There's white artists and they're starving. What are you gonna do?" She had this whole concept of the starving artist and as a black woman, you know, I couldn't do any better than starve. So she would--she did not encourage me. My father [Pomp Brooks], you know, he was just like, "Well be whatever you wanna be," (laughter) you know, he didn't care, he didn't know anything about art. He didn't really have an appreciation for it, you know, he was a survivor and a man that lived by his wits, you know, he didn't have an appreciation for anything that was very cultural, you know, and so I was not encouraged. I, I was only encouraged by a teacher at East High School [Columbus, Ohio] whose name was Ms. Buckner [Betty White Buckner] and she has encouraged many other black youngsters on--during her time. And she was the art teacher there, but--and it took me the longest to even think about being an artist, I never considered it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I thought of all kinds of things to be, I never considered it, no. Story_ID: 635370 Speaker 1: What were you thinking of in grade school, for instance, and then in? Speaker 2: Had no idea. I remember when I went to East [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] and there was a English teacher that I admired a lot, Ms. Stacy [ph.] and she had us do this exercise where everybody--because we were about to gra- to graduate and she had us do this exercise about what we wanted to be and I had no idea so, I said something smart like, you know, first garbage woman, or something like that and she did not appreciate it, but I really had no idea. And when I sta- when I went to college [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]--I started in so many different things. Speaker 1: Now what did you do in high school I mean what--did you participate in, you know, student government or? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and what was the composition of East (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time it--I, I thought it was predominantly black, but as I look back it was, it was almost a 50 [percent] mix--it could've even been more blacks than whites, but there was quite a few whites. But to me, it seemed to predominantly black. And it was, it was a great school. I had--I enjoyed it tremendously. I enjoyed going to school. I was in--I don't kno- GAA, couple one, two, three and I think it's--Girls Athletic Association. I'm not quite sure (laughter) what it is now. Speaker 1: I think so, yeah. Speaker 2: I did office I think one year. I was art room helper several times. In fact, Ms. Buckner [Betty White Buckner] trusted me enough to step out the room and leave me in charge in my last year there (background noise). I enjoyed it. I, I had, you know, my friends--they--it was cliquish like all schools are and I probably was in a clique and didn't know it, but we--you know, I traveled with a little group and we--one of us in the group had a car (background noise), we went to school in a car, but only one person--now everybody seems to have a car, you know, but I had a good time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I did well. Story_ID: 635371 Speaker 1: Were there, there any special teachers at, at East [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes. There was Ms. Ward [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mrs. Ward was the POD [ph.] instructor and she was very, very strict and I, you know, everybody was so afraid of failing--they were so afraid of not graduating because she could keep you from graduating and I appreciated her because she showed a real interest in all of us and she just--she just wanted us to be prepared for college. And she, she would make us memorize the whole world map, not only the continents but the countries within 'em. So we spent, you know, like a semester memorizing that thing, you know, and then she wanted you to read the newspaper, so we had to read the newspaper. We had to know the difference between city, state, you know, county and federal. And I guess I appreciated her more after I entered college [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] than while I was in her class but I still appreciated her 'cause I didn't think she was mean, I felt like she really had our best interest. Ms. Sta- Ms. Stacy [ph.]. Did I say she was the English teacher? Speaker 1: You mentioned Ms. Buckner [Betty White Buckner]. Speaker 2: Ms. Buckner, yes that was the art teacher. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And Ms. Stacy, I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ms. Stacy, too. Okay. Speaker 2: She was the English teacher and she just had a flare about her that was like, "I don't take nothing from nobody, but I'll give you what I've got," you know, she just was a warm person but she didn't have, she didn't take no stuff when you was in her room and I liked her persona, she had a, a real independent persona. Story_ID: 635372 Speaker 1: So you, you were in the Girls Athletic Association. Did, did you play? Speaker 2: Basketball. Speaker 1: Basketball okay. Now these are the days they are playing that strange basketball right, where you don't really come all way down the court, I mean girls basketball? Or were you playing regular basketball like the boys play? Speaker 2: No. We played--you only played half court. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and now they're full court, aren't they? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, no we only played half court. Speaker 1: Yeah there was one where the guards stay on--one set of guards stays on one side and the other stays on the other--lines (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I really don't remember 'cause I really didn't like playing sports. Everybody just thought I should (laughter). They thought I should and I didn't, you know, it was okay, it was something to do, you know, but I didn't like, I didn't like people patting me on the behind. I hated that, you know (laughter) when you made a basket or something I didn't like being touched. I, I didn't like gym. I hated gym because I didn't like getting undressed, and taking showers. So, I really hated gym more than anything, but yeah. Story_ID: 635373 Speaker 1: So when you were getting ready to graduate, now did you--now did, did, did you take the college prep course or did they have, did they have it set up that way at Columbus [Ohio] where you take college prep, general course, or business course, or what was it--how, what was it like? Speaker 2: Now, okay, when I, when I got out of high school--yeah when I got out of high school I went right into Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] from East [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]. So I, I guess I had what was needed. But I don't remember it being outlined as, as college preparatory courses. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know when I was in school--I came a little later than you were, they, they, had us all tracked. You either go into business track, general track which meant you go in the factory I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know, I don't remember that. I do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) College prep, you know. Speaker 2: I do remember going in as an elementary ed [elementary education]. Speaker 1: Did you have like algebra, geometry that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had algebra. Speaker 1: So you were--well you were pretty much college (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had algebra, and I didn't have geometry, and I, and I begged the teacher--I, I started in geometry when I was in high school. I did not have a mind for it, I still don't, and I was--I asked her--I was like, "If I get out of this class," (laughter), "can you just get--can, can I just get out of this class?" She's like, "If you don't get in any more of my classes." I was like, "Fine." And--but so I did take algebra, but I never to- I never took the geometry. I just couldn't deal with it. Story_ID: 635374 Speaker 1: Now did you, did you do anything special art wise in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] that was--? Speaker 2: Well, when I was--I did--yeah I did some paintings, and actually sold them to--not anyone in school, but I sold them to--there was--there still is I think a C.D. White funeral home [C.D. White and Son Funeral Home, Inc., Columbus, Ohio], and I sold them--one to the owner of that funeral home at one time. I remember it was a waterfall, and years later he said--he came to me after I became an established artist and said, "I have your, you know, the first painting you ever sold," yeah. And then immediately (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So these are oil paintings? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they were oil paintings because when I--immediately when I got out of high school--even before I--no I had already had a year--yeah I had already gone to Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], but I called Ms. Buckner [Betty White Buckner]--I had commission I was working as a nurse aide. And I had a commission to do a painting and it was six feet by four feet, and I had done all this painting on the top of it, and the next couple of days I went in and it had all drained down to the floor (laughter) and I called her, and she told me that I wasn't ready for something like that, and so I said, "Okay," and I just went and did it anyway, and I still sold it. Speaker 1: You, you sold it anyway (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I just redid it. I--and I started painting a new way. Story_ID: 635375 Speaker 1: How did you choose Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think it was because some of my friends from East [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] were going there (laughter) so--in fact C.D. White--the--C--I think one of my friends was the granddaughter of C.D. White's, and I'm trying to think of her name, she went and I went because she went, and a couple of other people went, and she was very popular. Very warm, very loving, loving individual, and then she got brain cancer the year after she--a year after that, young--died young. Speaker 1: Okay, now you--so you go to Central State in--this--is this 1961 I guess, fall of '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. Speaker 1: All right, and now my brother was there at the same time, so I know the president was Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Is, is--was that the president? Speaker 1: Charles Wesley I believe at--so--Central, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, I know at that time it was a big deal because some of the Freedom Riders were there, and had come back, and I actually had a, a white roommate who was a Freedom--who her sister and her had been Freedom Riders, but her sister was still in jail, and she was my roommate, and I liked her so much, and we had another roommate, and neither one of us liked her. I actually got in a fight with her (laughter). Speaker 1: Over what? Speaker 2: She would always lock us out of our room, you know, and--if we were just going to the restroom right down, you know, right down the corner on the same floor, she would just lock us out. She was just mean, and, and so we just didn't like her at all, so and one time she just did it, and I just went in the restroom, and I tried to get her from underneath the stall (laughter). I was trying to get at her, so I got moved (laughter) or she got moved, she got moved, yeah she wanted to be moved, which was great. Speaker 1: Okay, now--so is your major art at Central (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope, it was education, elementary education. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, elementary education. Speaker 2: And the reason I didn't stay with it 'cause I could not master music. Speaker 1: So you have to be able to teach music to teach elementary (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, then you did. I don't know what you have to do now. I know as a educator, I've had to teach elementary ed [elementary education] teachers, and they have to learn art. So at that time we had to learn music, and I just couldn't--I mean I would be at the conservatory all day and all night trying to learn how to play 'Mary Had a Little Lamb.' So I just--like, "I don't 'wanna do this," (laughter). So it was also about that year that I got pregnant [with Leslie Brooks], and I had--I came home. Story_ID: 635376 Speaker 1: Though--so who was the father--I mean what, what, what happened? Speaker 2: Well the father didn't go there [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh okay. The father back here in Columbus [Ohio], or? Speaker 2: Okay, how do I say this? My son's birth was the results of child molestation. And his father is dead, and I guess the only reason I can say that is that my son [Leslie Brooks] is also dead. But it, it was, you know, it was, it was, it was really something that I found, and find still difficult to talk about, because it, it was carried on all the time that I was a child, and as--and then I grew up under that, and after that maybe last time I became pregnant, and I told my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] who the father was, but I never told her that he had molested me since I was probably five and--because she would've killed him. Story_ID: 635377 Speaker 1: At that time then did--what did you tell your mother [Hattie Steele Owens]? Did you-- Speaker 2: I, I told my mother--well actually I did not tell my mother, my mother sort of told me. I told my mother I was pregnant and I did not--I knew nothing about being a woman, a being a--pregnancy, sex, nothing because my parents didn't talk to me. We did not have sex education in school when I was growing up and when I was going to school. I knew nothing about it. I thought I was just eating way too much and I was getting bigger and then someone suggested that you know, I may be pregnant and I was like, how? You know, I just couldn't believe I was pregnant. And then I found out I was and I, and I wrote a long letter and told my mother that I was pregnant and that I was sorry, you know, and she came to the school [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], I was in bed and she woke me up and, you know, I was scared like you would not believe. She scared the daylights out of (laughter) me. And so, she told me it could be one or two people. She said, "You only been around two people, two males and so--," you know, I told her who it was, and then I just--that's all I said, you know, I never told her anything about being molested since I was so little, you know, because I really feared for his life--I mean I thought he was gonna be in trouble anyway. But had I told her all this, all this time that that's wha- that you know, he had been sexually, you know, molesting me. I'm, I'm sure my father [Pomp Brooks] would have gone back to jail for something like that. Speaker 1: So what did happen to him? Speaker 2: Nothing. He came over, he agreed to take, you know, responsibility and support the, the child, you know, he was very calm and cool about it. I guess he knew I hadn't told the whole thing, you know, and so, he did for a while and--but I--you know I wouldn't see him. But I, you know, I didn't find out until years, years later that that's what had been happening to me, you know, and I found that out and listening to Oprah Winfrey and finding out that it wasn't my fault, you know, so I just didn't like him anymore at all. And his family was well thought of and well liked by my family so I never told them either. In fact, I never even told them that he was the father, and he didn't tell them either. So my son [Leslie Brooks] never knew his father's relatives. Story_ID: 635378 Speaker 1: So you were at Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] al- al- almost a year? Speaker 2: I finished a whole year even though I was pregnant (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You did? Okay. Speaker 2: I, I finished a year and then I came home. I did not go back to school again for years. I tried to go back to school, but I didn't go back and really do anything substantial until I was in my thirties, late thirties. Speaker 1: So what did you do for a living? Speaker 2: When--after my son [Leslie Brooks] was born I became a nurse aide at Children's Hospital [Columbus Children's Hospital; Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio] and I worked there for several years. My, my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] took care of my son. At one point my dad [Pomp Brooks] and I lived together and then my dad went and stayed with my mom and my stepdad [Leslie Owens] and then I worked for Western Electric [Western Electric Company] for several years and then I worked for COTA and, and, and then my life starting changing. Speaker 1: Now what is COTA? That's a-- Speaker 2: COTA. Central Ohio Transit Authority. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my life started changing after--I worked at, for COTA I was injured. I injured my back and I wasn't able to work for a couple of years. And after that, I met [HistoryMaker] Kojo Kamau and a whole 'nother chapter of my life began. But that's when I started to becoming the artist that I am today. Story_ID: 635379 Speaker 1: So you were, you were basically working, raising your son [Leslie Brooks] and-- Speaker 2: Working and raising my son. Speaker 1: --and were, were you doing artwork at all during this period of time? Speaker 2: Not initially. I didn't start doing artwork until after I met Kojo. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so when did you meet Kojo? Speaker 2: Let me see, it had to--let's see, it had to be around 1970, 1969, '70, [1970]. I think it was 1970. Speaker 1: Okay, and--well tell us about what happened? How, how did meet him and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. After I was injured, I was living on my own and my son was--he was on his own pretty much. I saw an article in the paper about Kojo and he was [HistoryMaker] Kojo Kamau was a photographer and I saw an article in the paper about him and so I got out of bed and I decided to go see, you know, see this gallery that he was at. So I went by and I kept looking in the window and I went there like three days and looked in the window and never went in and that--from that experience I know how people can be intimidated by art, by something that they're not quite familiar with and so--because I was--I wasn't familiar with it. I was just so curious because he was black and he was in the paper. And he had these pictures from Africa and, you know, so I just went to see it. So he came out and he said, "Why don't you come in?" And I said, "I don't have any money." And he said he said, "You don't need money to look at pictures." And I said, "You don't?" He said, "Not in the art gallery, you just come in and look at pictures." And from that time on I went to the gallery every day. I sat around and I talked to him and then he gave me a job and he said, "Well, you wanna assist me in the darkroom?" And I said, "Sure." So I started as his assistant and then I started to take care of his gallery [Kojo Photo Art Studio, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Now tell us a little bit about who Kojo Kamau is? Speaker 1: Okay. Kojo Kamau is a wonderful person. He's a gentlemen, soft spoken, extremely knowledgeable about his community, (unclear) photographer, a friend to everybody and a stranger to no one, a welcoming person. He's a--he started the first--okay he had the first black, African American whatever art gallery and it was the first place that African American artists could go gather and meet each other, converse about art and show our work to the public. He made no distinction between the kinds of work we did. He loved fine art, he loved folk art. He just loved art, he didn't care whether it was photography or painting. And his wife--he--then he was married to Mary Ann Williams who was a professor at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], and she was into poetry, and there was another--Anna Bishop who was a living legend at the time, was a poet. Her and Mary Ann Williams were very close, and they spent a lot of time at the gal- at, at the gallery. Barbara Chavous was a, a well known artist, well known, Aminah [Aminah Robinson] is well known in Columbus [Ohio]--Aminah. But, at the time she was just a young artist like myself, and Barbara Chavous was the, the one that was the noted black artist here. And they would all come together. We'd come together and Kojo would just have a place for us to be welcomed in, you know, can collaborate and just, you know, encourage one another. Story_ID: 635380 Speaker 1: So the gallery [Kojo Photo Art Studio, Columbus, Ohio] was like a meeting place for the other artists--other black artists? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, you said--was there a workspace there too? Or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, no there wasn't it was just, it was just the gallery, and then his [HistoryMaker Kojo Kamau] workspace was in the back, and he had a large darkroom because he also supported himself with commercial photography. And so, you know, at one point we laugh about it because he was like, "You're not gonna make a living doing that fine art stuff. You better do some weddings," and I was like, "I'm gonna do fine art, you do the weddings," you know, and now we laugh because he's the fine art photographer. He won't take a wedding, so we laugh about that a lot. But, yeah he, he helped change my life, him and Barbara Chavous. He brought me into, as a photographer, Barbara Chavous was my mentor without me knowing what a mentor was. She was the first one to tell me that I was an artist. I would say, "But I'm a photographer," she'd say, "But you're an artist, you know, and right now that's what you're doing but you're an artist." And so I started to believe that, and, and learning that then that's what encourages me to talk to other people. Not only artists, I talk to anybody and I'm telling them, you know, you have a gift. You can come here with nothing, you have a gift, you just haven't found it, you know, and other artists I just encourage them, you know, they--we need it, we need it. Even as, you know, the age I am, I still need encouragement sometimes. But being older everybody thinks you got it (laughter) so you don't need it anymore. But, you know, I--my--that's my--that's, that's my thing, you know is to, to encourage people to use their gift, to find their gift, to not look at other people, and try to emulate them. Just look at them and, you know, be encouraged. But not--don't try to imitate 'em. Story_ID: 635381 Speaker 1: It's 1969, '70 [1970]. That's the--I guess the--like the middle of the Black Arts Movement I guess at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And so how was the black artists at Columbus [Ohio] influenced by that movement? Speaker 2: Well we were doing a lot of things. A lot of work that referred to Africa, referred to our ancestry, referred to our culture. I was shooting pictures that had--that were positive images of blacks, and people, you know, sometimes whites would say, "Why are you shooting all these pictures of black people?" And I would say, "Because they're my people and because I'm so tired of seeing them portrayed as gangsters, as hoodlums, as robbers, you know, and so I'm putting out here pictures that show that we're people of all different, you know, phases, and, and, places in our lives and occupations, and statures," and you know, and so that's what I was doing initially. And then I remember when a lot of young people were being killed by policemen. It's so strange 'cause not much as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'cause this is their problem in Columbus in 1969, '70 [1970]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and I did this one painting and it's of a--I think it's painting in collages, it's a flag, and in front of the flag is bla- is policemen in profile, and be- in below the policeman is a black youth and blood is flo- and flowing from the flag, so that was probably my most political statement that I've ever made. I'm working on one now that's the second most, but it's, it's really crazy that not much has changed in all those years. Speaker 1: So you got the African influence. You got like a need for social change, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. And then it was a time where we were connecting a lot with spirituality outside of the Western norm, and we were looking to symbols and studying other cultures, and, and how they, referenced God, and how they live their beliefs and what their different belief systems were, and, and I still tend to do that as well. But a lot of artists had started to look to Africa, to look to Native Americans, to Oceanic art, to other cultures, to see what they said about their higher powers and how they lived and what symbols they used, and how those symbols--how could those symbols refer to our--to us at our--in our times. Story_ID: 635382 Speaker 1: Now there was a music--a corresponding music to this art. Were there musicians in Columbus [Ohio], you know, playing, you know, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, jazz of course. We, we were all--I think at that time we were all jazz enthusiastic people, you know, we, we were all going to different places supporting different jazz groups. I didn't--as soon as I got into the arts I pretty much came out of the clubs, and, and there was a lot of jazz going on in the clubs. But I tended--soon as I got out in the arts I, I just started a whole another cycle of life, and the jazz that I got to see or hear was usually at an arts event, so yeah the jazz was the big thing then. Speaker 1: So you kind of disassociated from the club scene? Speaker 2: Totally. Speaker 1: Is that, is that--now is that a rejection of the smoking and drinking, and, and maybe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it, it had to do with personal time. It had--my--you know, I was a person--like a young person I really looked forward to the weekend to dancing. I loved to dance, I love to be out, you know, socializing. I drank just like everybody else, you know, but when I got into the arts it was just like, ooh Friday I don't have anything to do but to work on this piece, and that's what I did. I remember a lot of times my friends was like you, "You not going out?" And I was like, "No." "Can I borrow your car?" "Yes." (Laughter) So--and I was fine, "Bring me back a sandwich or something," and I was totally in it, and it was good because none of my friends were artists. They were just street folk and regular folk, and so they got to know me as an artist, so they--I made that bridge. I made that connection so they weren't intimidated by me, even if they might've been intimidated by going into a gallery, so you know, and so they were encouraging, wow you're an artist you know, and, and that was, you know, that was special. I became special to them because I was (air quotes) the artist, the somebody, you know. Story_ID: 635383 Speaker 1: So this is about nine years after you left Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I guess and you start really getting back into art again and you're working while you're doing this. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In nursing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I never, I never stopped working, you know, this is the only--well I'm still working part time now. But there's never been a period where I just stopped working and just did art, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you--so you didn't go back to Central for another ten years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never went back to Central. Speaker 1: You never went back to Central? Speaker 2: I went to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. I went there like three times, maybe the third time was a charm and I--and, and the only--I went the last time. I went back for edu- for social work and statistics and I couldn't (laughter) (unclear). Then I, I went back the last time for art. I never even knew that you could go to school for art. Speaker 1: So you never thought of that all this time? Speaker 2: I nev- nobody ever told me. I never--see I didn't know I was an artist. I didn't know that I could be an artist. No. Even with Ms. Buckner [Betty White Buckner] saying how good I was. She never told me I needed to go to school. She just said I wasn't ready to do the painting that I--she never said, "You need more education or go to school." She never said that. Nobody ever said that. So when I went back to school for social work and then I dropped out and I didn't go back to school for maybe another ten years and I paid off my loans. When I went back to school for the career that gave me my bachelor's [degree] and my master's degree, I started with a United Way [United Way Worldwide] grant and I was gonna go for art. I found out that they did photography and I thought I knew everything, which I don't (laughter) but I thought I knew everything so I just said, "I'll just go into fine arts," and I did. And I started with a grant. I said, "I will not take any loans. I don't wanna have to pay any." So I started getting,--you know, applying for programs, and I went through school on grants the whole way. Speaker 1: Now is this the--they call the Walter and Marian English Award from, from United Way (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yes that's what started me. Speaker 1: So this is 1987? Speaker 2: And yeah and I'm working at the J. Ashburn Youth Center [J. Ashburn Jr. Youth Center, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I left--I went there as an artist because I determined since I had been told I was an artist. That I was gonna believe that I was an artist. And that I was not gonna do anything outside of art. So I took a little portfolio of photography and marched, marched myself in there. And I said--they had a job for art instructor and I said--with kids, so I said, okay I can do this. And so I, I went and I presented myself and I presented my portfolio. And, and the director and the owner of the Ashburn Youth Center was Reverend Ashburn [Jacob Julian Ashburn] and so he looked at my portfolio and he said you know, "I like your work, but you can't teach the kids this stuff." He said, "And the nude stuff won't work," (laughter). I said, "I wouldn't try to." I said, "I know how to do all that stuff." And he said, "Are you sure?" And I said, "Sure." And so he said, "Okay I'll give you a try." And I stayed there eleven years. Story_ID: 635384 Speaker 1: Now what mode of expression in art did you particularly-- Speaker 2: Abstraction. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So, so you could, you could paint like nudes and--or draw from life. Could you do that, you know (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I, I could do it, but it's very difficult. I could do it--I've had to do it with techniques that I know, you know, that would work for me, but it doesn't come easy. So I do abstraction that--for me, Picasso [Pablo Picasso] was like the first person that really influenced me, that I knew anything about art, was Picasso. Speaker 1: And when was this? How old were you? Speaker 2: I think I was still in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] and I might've heard about him and saw his work. And the rea- the reason that I was so impressed because I said I've never seen anything like this. It has to be art, you know, it ha- you know nothing exists like this, so it has to be art, so I was impressed and so then after that I started to look at things and things come at--you know, I tried to create things that don't exist or that I can speak to in a way that hasn't been spoken to before and that's so abstract when you do that, you know, so he influenced me in, in the abstract expressionless influenced me and, you know, symbols influenced me so--and so I can, I, I know that I can do realistic because I've done it, but it's so hard for me. I have to pull on everything that I've actually learned, where all this other stuff it just comes, it flows. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you remember when you first saw some of the African American art or African art? Speaker 2: Yes, I saw it at Kojo's [HistoryMaker Kojo Kamau]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah because Kojo had African art. He had the mask, he had other African American artists' work there [Kojo Photo Art Studio, Columbus, Ohio]. Work from people that I've never heard of, you know, from other cities and other states, so that that was, you know, some of my education. But the most--the person who influenced me most was probably Barbara Chavous. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were they members of the National Conference of Artists? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't really know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know I wasn't a member of anything. It's hard for me to be a member of things. Speaker 1: Yeah I just wanted--are, are you a member now of NCA? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay, all right. I just thought I know--I know Bing Davis [HistoryMaker Willis Bing Davis] is really big in it, and Jon Lockard [HistoryMaker Jon Onye Lockard], and a lot of that generation of artists, black, black movement artists (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right they are, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 635385 Speaker 1: Now, just for the record here did you--did they ever teach you about black artists in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? Speaker 2: They didn't teach me about, about--about black artists at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] either. Nobody, that's something that, you know, we're gone have to learn to teach ourselves, or to learn from one another or to be active, in, in, you know, pursue it, and, and go out and look. Because there's black artists all over, all over Columbus [Ohio], all over America, and there was a black art--no not--there was art in America, something by this nun [Wendy Beckett]. There was a series ['Sister Wendy's American Collection']. Speaker 1: Oh the, the--were they on public television? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was little nun going to the galleries. Speaker 2: And I watched that, and I kept waiting for the Harlem [New York, New York] experience to come forth. It never did. Speaker 1: She talked about all kinds of art except black art right? Speaker 2: Yes, and that really blew my mind, yeah so. Speaker 1: Well that's--I guess that's why we were calling for black cultural centers and that sort of thing isn't it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. But now, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's different still, though. It's still different, and we have--black artists now have an opportunity to show just about anywhere. We're still not as, as we should be. As sought after or as acknowledged, but we are acknowledged. Where before we weren't even acknowledged. Story_ID: 635386 Speaker 1: Okay, so at, at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] you, you, you got--you're, you're in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]--at Ohio State with the United Way grant [Walter and Marian English Award]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And what--were there black artists on the faculty of Ohio State? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact Bettye Stull's husband, and Pheoris West, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell his name? Can you spell it? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think. P-H-E-O-R-I-S, I think it is. Speaker 1: Pheoris West? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And a Mr. Stull, Stull. Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. what is--Robert Stull. Speaker 1: Robert Stull, okay. S-T-A-H-L [sic.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right so, so they, they taught at Ohio State, and so what did you learn to do at Ohio State? Speaker 2: Basically I just learned to be myself (laughter). I honestly can't tell you--I mean, I learned the basics, you know, the basic elements of art, and how to put those together, and you know, but they pretty much left me alone to myself. For one thing I, I was so much older than everybody, and they thought--they couldn't understand why I was there. Because I was al- I already had a reputation as an artist in Columbus [Ohio], and they was like, "Well why are--," you know, "Why are you going to school Queen [HistoryMaker Queen Brooks]?" You know, you know most of the people knew me in the art department and stuff, and I said, "Because I need that validation," you know. Because I can be an artist without school. That's not gonna--I mean I can learn everything I need to learn without going to school. But I need those papers to go further, to validate me, to get me in the door as a, as an art instructor, and as a college professor, and, and I knew that I needed that because I saw Barbara--she was teaching at schools, but there was something's--some- the money wasn't quite right for her, because she didn't have the degree, I'm talking about Barbara Chavous, so I learned from her. I learned from looking at other people, that you know, having those papers don't hurt, and so I went back to school to get those papers. Story_ID: 635387 Speaker 1: What is the medium of Barbara Chavous, what, what does she do? Speaker 2: Mixed media. Speaker 1: Mixed media, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and she--in fact they just had a article about her last Sunday in the--Sunday before last in the paper. She made totems, I didn't--when I first saw 'em I didn't understand them, I was like, oh wow this--everybody's, you know, really making all this noise about this and I don't understand a thing I'm seeing. So I asked her if I could speak to her about her art, and she made an appointment and I was like, whoa she's big, she gotta make an appointment. (Laughter) So I, I started to, to hang out with her, and I had started documenting her working, and you know, we just became just very good friends. Story_ID: 635388 Speaker 1: Okay, so at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. Now, now did you know Barbara Bayless of the Ohio Arts Council in those days (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: When I met Kojo [HistoryMaker Kojo Kamau], I met Barbara Chavous. I met Barbara Bayless. I met a woman named Jackie Brown [ph.]. I met, who else. I met, I met all sorts of African American artists and arts administrators and art patrons all through--because we all met either at Kojo's or at Barbara Chavous' house. Everybody hung out at her house. Speaker 1: So those two people basically--did you keep saying, you know, from like the hub for the rest for the rest of the artist? Speaker 2: They actually did, yeah the really did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, in the other places of Ohio did--I mean were they--when you network with the other artists and around the state as well? Was there some kind of network through Barbara Bayless of the visual artists and other (unclear)? Speaker 2: I'm sure there, there was, I'm trying to think because there were so many dy- dynamics that were going on during that time and remember we were talking about police brutality and stuff. We were--Barbara Chavous had gotten arrested for crossing the street and we were all into that. And I was trying to think of some other things, like--I'm thinking that maybe some artists from Dayton [Ohio], but I can't remember--only Bing. Speaker 1: Had to have been Bing [HistoryMaker Willis Bing Davis] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bing is the only one that I can remember as being a part of the Columbus scene as well as Dayton. Yes, 'cause he was here all the time too. Him and his wife [Audrey Davis] at that time and that's how I met them. There was another gallery where we all went to--and I'm thinking--it wasn't Kojo's [Kojo Photo Art Studio, Columbus, Ohio] either. I think it was a white gallery that Barbara showed at, but all of us went there and I can see it on High Street. I can see it very plainly but I can't think of who owned the gallery and I really don't think it was ACE [Art for Community Expression Gallery, Columbus, Ohio] because we didn't move on High Street until Kojo sold the place on Washington [Avenue] then he moved on High Street. And this place was before, before he moved and I can't think of the name of it. Story_ID: 635389 Speaker 1: Well at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], now you're, you're at Ohio State from--what, '87 [1987] to--? Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992], okay. Eighty-seven [1987] to '92 [1992] and, so, you, you got your bachelor's in fine arts? Speaker 2: And then I went right into my master's [degree] and I got my master's. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now at this time had you had exhibits, you know, had you exhibited your work in the-- Speaker 2: Yes, I had, I had exhibited in, you know, several local places here. But I, I don't think that--I started to exhibit like at the Cultural Arts Center [Columbus, Ohio], the Columbus Museum of Art [Columbus, Ohio], those places until after I got an out. Franklin University [Columbus, Ohio] I exhibited during the years I had my B.F.A exhibit at Franklin University. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had a gallery myself so a lot of times--well at that, at that point in my life, I was exhibiting my work and selling it from my own gallery. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where was your gallery located? Speaker 2: My gallery was located in the southeast of Columbus [Ohio] in a none--it was in a residential area (laughter) but on our street was zoned for business so we were allowed to have our gallery. It was called Art Genesis [Columbus, Ohio] and a, a partner and I had it and we kept it--let me see I'm trying to think what year it was. I was out of school, yes I was out of school. I graduated, so it was probably '84 [1984] to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984] to--we only had about four years to '88 [1988] something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is Art Genesis gallery. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I exhibited my work there and I also--I was teaching at Otterbein [Otterbein University, Westerville, Ohio] and I would have the kids exhibit their work and so that they had some kind of knowledge about what happens and how it happens when you get out of school 'cause that's not taught. Speaker 1: So you're doing this before you even get out of school even before you finished Ohio State? Speaker 2: No, I had finished Ohio State. I was teaching at Otterbein then. Speaker 1: Oh okay, this is after your--okay so, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Art Genesis lasted--this, this was started before you went to Ohio State right? Eighty-four [1984], you said Art Genesis? Speaker 2: Okay, when--I got out okay, I got out of school in '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Okay it didn't start then. It had to start after I was out of school. Speaker 1: Oh okay, so maybe '94 [1994] maybe? Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, I'm jumping (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it started after I was--I'm telling you the dates (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Story_ID: 635390 Speaker 1: You got your B.F.A. from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] in '92 then you got your M.F.A.-- Speaker 2: No, I got my B.F.A. in '90 [1990]. Speaker 1: Ninety [1990], okay, all right. Speaker 2: And my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The M.F.A.-- Speaker 2: In '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: In '92 [1992], okay, all right. Speaker 2: I do know those two for sure. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, 1992. Okay, so we're straight now. So, what, what--now in terms of your artwork--I mean how, how did it progress it? What did you start doing or working on and, and how did it progress? Speaker 2: I started as a photographer, and it evolved into wood burnings because I started to--I was working at J. Ashburn Youth Center [J. Ashburn Jr. Youth Center, Columbus, Ohio] even while I was going to school, while I was in college and someone gave me some art burn- some wood burning tools for the kids to use. And the kids didn't wanna use it (laughter) they--it was like it's too slow, they might get burnt, you know, they didn't have the patience so at six--let's see, I worked from three to nine [o'clock]. And at six o'clock all the little people that I worked with left and they had to leave, and it was supposed to from six to nine was supposed to be for the teenagers, and the young adults. Well the teenagers didn't wanna do art. They wanted to be in the gym. The boys wanted to do gym and the girls wanted to watch the boys do gym, so I had to be there regardless of who was in the room. I had to keep it open so I started to, you know, just play with the wood burning instruments because I had time. And it evolved into an art form for me. Now wood burning instruments are usually used in--for crafts or like--basically it's an art form with people that work on ducks. Those little ducks. Speaker 1: Decoys? Speaker 2: Decoys, yeah. There's an art form that they used that with, so it's like a craft. But I just started to create images and burn the images into wood as if I was drawing them. So it evolved. I, I got a more sophisticated art burning tool, and I just went on from there. And then the wood burning--I just started to do paintings and drawings, and then the paintings led to assemblages and, and so I'm a mixed media artist now. I just work in all medias and I put them all together however they'll work for me. My thing is one medium just can't speak to everything that I wanna say. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I choose the best medium for whatever it is that I'm trying to express. Story_ID: 635391 Speaker 1: Do you have a philosophy of art? Speaker 2: If I do it's not--it's probably been said--when I--I can think of things when I'm writing much better than when I'm speaking. My philosophy probably is that it's a God given talent. But it's not just art--it's not just art, you know, we're given God--God gives us gifts and my, my philosophy is to honor him, to honor God whether it's a him or a her. To honor God by exercising those gifts for the benefit of bringing people together to talk, to speak, to know, to learn. Before I became this (air quotes) artist I was a very shy person. I played, I danced, I sang, but you had to--to get me to talk you had to approach me. I was probably, you know, more considered a loner, a loner that took part. But with my art, it gives me the opportunity to reach people, to talk to people, to affect people, and in doing that I've seen how people have been actually affected enough to cry. And I've actually experienced that with another art- artist looking they--their work. I sat down and actually felt tears, and it was an abstract work and I thought it was strange. But that's what happened, and it happens with me many times. People--especially women--most--I think it's all been women. They get really emotional--something touches them and, and I can only say that, that's through the grace of God. So, you know, I just give God the honor for being able to recognize the gift and that in my life--that I'm leading the life that I'am so happy leading, you know I can say, you know, I don't have any desire to be anything else or do anything else but what I'm doing, and I'm so happy just being able to do that, and I get to communicate with people that I had no thought in the world that I'd ever be able to communicate with. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's just about using the talent that He's given you and working hard at it, you know, I still had to go to school, and learn something. I can't tell you all that I've been taught. But I know that being in that environment, it helped me. If nothing else it helped me to teach somebody else. Story_ID: 635392 Speaker 1: I talked earlier about the Black Arts Movement. Do you think there's such a thing as black art or is there a black aesthetic? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really do, I think that black art even though a white person can do it and do it as well as we, I--it's not black art to me. Black art to me is done by a black person who had the black experience and that's what makes it art, it's the experience. It's not the talent 'cause they can do bad black art, you know, but it's out of that experience. What, what is that individual trying to say? Now I can copy and I do, I use Aborigine art. But it's not Aborigine art, it's, it's, it's, it's refers--it references their art, but it's not Aborigine because I'm not an Aborigine person. So yeah it's--black art comes from a black experience, that's my, that's my take on it. Speaker 1: Yeah I know--did you participate in the conferences the national endowment [National Endowment for the Arts] held back in the '80s [1980s]? They, they, had something called open dialogue with all the minority artists around the country? Speaker 2: No, I probably didn't. Like I said, I'm pretty much a loner type person. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I usually talk when I'm invited to or at a opening or if I'm in a place where I have the opportunity to, but I have to be invited. Otherwise I don't usually do anything but do my art. Story_ID: 635393 Speaker 1: What are the themes of your work? I mean-- Speaker 2: Most of the, most of the themes are spiritual, social. I'm doing--just finished speaking on a body of work called honoring God through art, so that was totally--it didn't have a bunch of crosses, you know, like would normally suspect. But, they, they refer--it had references to God, references to values. References to how you treat another person, references to how you feel about yourself. So my themes are usually about those kind of things. You know I'm usually thinking about how are we treating ourselves and why don't we love ourselves, and why don't you care about how you look and what you say, what you do, you know, and those things are very hard to bring out in art. So, you know, so, so sometimes it gives me great pleasure when people say, "What's that about?" You know, and then I can tell 'em. But it gives me more pleasure when they tell me, "That feels like--," and, "that seems to me to be about--," and as long as it some- means something to them. But if they hit the same thing I hit, I can't believe it's like, wow, you know, that I'm really surprised. But I did a self-portrait, a white lady came up and cried because she saw herself, and she said her husband would not let her buy it. Well it was pretty expensive 'cause I didn't wanna sell it so I put a expensive price on it, but she said she saw herself in there. And other people--when I gave the talk on honoring God a lot of people said, "I see myself in that." So, there's, there's things that speak to all of us as human beings in my work. Speaker 1: Okay. So even though it comes out of a black aesthetic it has a universal impact (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, it has a universal appeal. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And I--just looking around the room here you, you use a lot of bright colors, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, I do and it's, it's funny but I can not--it's very hard for me to use anything but bright colors, primary colors, they just--I did a painting called 'Strange Fruit' [Queen Brooks], Billie Holiday's--a person is hanging from a tree and it's in bright colors and it's very pretty--if you don't see what it is--if you don't know, if you see it from a distance, you think, wow that's a pretty picture, you know, it's a pretty--and then you get up on it and you go, whoa, there's nothing pretty about this, but that's the way it came out and I usually can't do anything that's you know, that's dark and ugly and you know, I just can't do that kind of work, there's enough of it out there so I don't worry about it. Story_ID: 635394 Speaker 1: So financially how's, how's your, your, your art doing--I mean how is it--can you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's like this (gesture). It's surprising, I'm--I've always felt so blessed because things come to me that just out of the blue it seems, that I, I don't go after, you know. In fact, I better even talk about this gallery. Star Arts [Star Arts Limited, Columbus, Ohio] was created by Priscilla Tyson [Priscilla R. Tyson], who is one of our councilwomen now. But it was about five years ago, I, I believe that she commissioned me to do a piece of art for her home and I did this art. It was a very large piece of art. It has references to her family and references to Africa. It's not totally abstract, but it's stylized where the figures, you know, there's a man and a woman and there's masks, so you, you know what it is. And then she saw my art and she liked it. She liked it so well that she felt like I needed a gallery to represent me. So she created this gallery and this, this space was formerly her husband's [Renny Tyson] law offices up here and she worked on it. I didn't put a single penny in it and she, she got it together and she represents me. And not only me, it helped others artists because she represents several other artists as well and--I mean, it just came about, you know, it wasn't anything that I had ever planned because I just do the work and God sends the offers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But financially I always make enough money to do the next show. Make--I've, you know, I'm not without food and, and I, I, you know, I look pretty healthy. So I have no complaints, you know, I have no complaints. I'm not a big money maker. There's been years when it was fantastic and but now, you know the economy being as it is art is a luxury item, you know, and so I don't expect to sell--I don't worry about selling, I really don't because if you start thinking money, you can't be the artist that God wants you to be, because it's not about the money. Although you need the money in order to do what you have to do, but you can't depend on being gainfully employed by doing art because it just doesn't happen like that, not for black artists and very few white artists, but there's a few because there's an intr- infrastructure that supports that, but you have to be a part of that infrastructure and you also have to be aware of it. And there's a lot people that just aren't. And you won't be aware of it unless you engaged in reading a lot of white literature of other galleries, white owned galleries and patrons and you see there's a lot of money. But we're just not privileged to it and it's not just because we're black. It's because, it co- it's white one, white artists aren't privileged to that either. It's a certain status that exists that people just don't know. Speaker 1: And before you opened your gallery [Art Genesis, Columbus, Ohio] or, or during that period time, did, did you visit a lot of the galleries that, that already existed to try to check out how they operated. Speaker 2: Not practically. I knew, I knew from having exhibited myself. I exhibited a lot before I opened this gallery--my gallery, not this gallery, but my gallery. I knew what I needed to do. The marketing I needed to do. The work that I needed to do. The lighting that I needed to have. The accessibility--and see because it wasn't a non-profit, it was a for-profit yard. I did not have to worry about providing handicapped ramps and stuff, accessibility. So there were some things, you know, I was aware of and it was a lot of work, it's a lot of work to have a gallery, to have it functioning as a gallery, as it should. Story_ID: 635395 Speaker 1: Now one of your influences is a African American folk artist-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --who lived here in Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Oh, Rev- Doc- Mr. Pierce [Elijah Pierce]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well tell us about him, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, Mr. Pierce is probably my major influence in terms of my internals self, my spiritual self, my mental self. I went to see Mr. Pierce speak. I did not know of him or his prominence. I just--I knew that he was speaking and everybody was saying that, you know, "We ought to go see him speak and support him." Speaker 1: About what, what year is this? Speaker 2: That was probably '72 [1972], '3 [1973] something like that. And I saw this gentlemen who was very mature in age, had this proud appearance about him. Not pride, but proud of being who he was, and knowing who he was. Spoke so softly, another Kojo [HistoryMaker Kojo Kamau] spoke very softly. He told stories, he told us how he left home because he didn't wanna cut cotton. His parents were cotton--you know, worked on a cotton plantation. Speaker 1: Where, where was he from? Speaker 2: Oh jeez, Mississippi but I can't think of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he told stories and how--his famous story was how God told him to read the Bible, and he wanted to look at the Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] catalog. Have you heard that? Okay, and so he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneosu) Tell us the story so what, what happened? Speaker 2: Yeah, he said he was sitting there and, and he was supposed to been reading his Bible, but he wanted to look at the Sears catalog, so he started looking at the Sears catalog and he just went--he just collapsed. He said they thought he was dead, and he said, he said, "I was just dead," you know, and they, they thought he was actually--had died. And he came back and he said--and God brought him back and he said he ain't touched a Sears catalog. After that read his Bible (laughter) so he was strongly--he, he strongly--he was strongly influenced by his Christianity. And so his art was Christian--it was based on Christianity, it was based on the Bible. And so he would stories about, you know, "Each day is a day in--is a page a page in the book of life." He liked to say that. And so I--you know, he was so humble and I said, you know, inside my spirit says that's the way my spirit needs to be, you know, I found it hard speaking about myself. Except to, to tell you or anyone if I can do it, you can do it. This is how I did it, this is how you may want to do it, this is what inspired that but, you know, I, I met another folk artist that said, "I'm bad, I'm badder than Pierce. I'm badder than So and So," and he was a folk artist too, Mr. Hawkins [William L. Hawkins]. He--and, and there was, there was Mr. Pierce, Mr. Hawkins, and It's the third one--they were real--and it's Smoky Brown. Those were the three major artists and folk artists here, and they had books and they're known. Maybe Smoky's less known, but all of them were here. But Mr. Pierce was the most humble one, you know, everything was, "Well that's the way guide instructed me to do it," you know, and he would, you know and they say, "Oh Mr. Pierce you're so and so," and he would just smile, you know, that and I was just like whoa he just gave me chills, you know, even speaking now, you know, he was just such a loving person and so I would go--he cut--he use to cut hair and my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] knew him, and she didn't even know that she knew him as an artist. She had lots of his stuff and she just threw it away, 'cause she--when she moved she didn't--she said, "Oh they was just toys." I said, "They would be would be worth a fortune." And she called him grandpa, that's how well she knew him. But, he had a shop and he has a statue here on Spring Street. And he had a shop right there in that vicinity and so I would go there every day and he was mentoring a young man, and he's name--can't think of his name but he's dead too now. But he became a sheriff in Macon, Georgia or something. But I would go there and I asked him I said, "Can I just have the scraps, you know, from the wood carvings and I just wanna put 'em in this bottle and put your name," you know, and he, he said, "No." He told her--, "Give her a piece of that stuff in there." Speaker 1: So he gave you a piece of original art? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I took pictures of 'em for a newspaper. We had a little magazine, a black magazine here and I hung out, you know, and he was just a wonderful person. Just like any grandfather that any kid needed in their life. Story_ID: 635396 Speaker 1: Now in 1993 you won a grant from the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest foundation [Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund; The Wallace Foundation]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to go to Cote d'Ivoire right in Africa? Speaker 2: No--yes, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: And I went there for three months by myself. Not a smart thing to do. Speaker 1: By yourself now--so nobody else went with you? Speaker 2: Nobody else went with me. Speaker 1: Did you--okay. Speaker 2: It was an international competition and I was the--one of the artists that won. And that's the--that's the place I chose, not knowing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They said they spoke English, well they can speak English but they do not want to speak English. They spoke French. They didn't understand why I was there and if--and so I went to a school--the school of arts there, and they showed me everything that they needed, and because I didn't have money to give them for anything that they needed, they didn't understand why I was there. Story_ID: 635397 Speaker 1: How long were you were--were you in Cote d'Ivoire? Speaker 2: Three months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I first went they were having political problems, so there was a shortage on the utilities. So they cut the utilities off at certain (laughter) time of the day. So the first day I got there I had no--the fan nothing worked in the apartment because it was that time of day. They cut off the, the utilities. Also, while I was there, I was on the third floor and there was a flood and fortunately the people--some people that knew me--that just knew that I was there, knocked on my door. I woke up and, and the front room was flooded. My stuff was floating across the floor. Speaker 1: This is the third floor? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: This is the third floor? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And what was happening. I don't understand but the way it was raining, that it was flooding into my room and it was flooding into the halls. There was no elevators so you had to take the steps. The steps was on a curvature so they got smaller and descending order. It was crazy and I'm standing out in the rain at what--I don't know time of the morning, but it was dark. I could not speak French. They would not speak English and I'm standing there. And I'm thanking God that at least I'm standing here and I'm watching water pour over my balcony--off of my balcony. So the American embassy, ambassador from, from United States came, got me, and moved me out into another place. But it was very difficult because there was just no understanding of what my experience was supposed to be. And then when I would go to the school and I would create work and I would try to work with the kids, a professor would come in and would make fun of me because I couldn't speak French. And fortunately there was a, you know, a person there that would say--tell me what they were saying, you know. I met a young man. I asked for a Amos. I asked God for an Amos. Amos was the brother of Moses [sic.], who spoke for Moses. I asked God for a Amos and I got an Ananias [ph.]. Speaker 1: Ananias, huh? Speaker 2: Ananias, who is a Jehovah's Witness, but who became like my son there and I still communicate with him to this day. We talk, we email, we talk on the phone. He became my spokesperson, my guide. And I understand he got a lot of ridicule for that. They thought he was getting something that they should've got in terms of money, you know, he was staying with this black American woman. It was, it was really not good for him, but I was blessed to have him because I went on--I would go--they invited me to a party for my--you know, to honor me. Nobody spoke to me. Nobody spoke to me at all. And then one guy who was from England and he said, "I'm sorry nobody's speaking to you," and he said, "The rest of us want to, the students," he said, "but we're afraid that our instructors will be angry with us." So I was like (gesture)--I, I kept a diary, it was--it's very interesting, but I made it, you know, I made it through. Story_ID: 635398 Speaker 1: A friend of mine--there's some people here that sponsored me, that I had to have a, a, a group sponsor me for the, for the competition [for the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund; The Wallace Foundation] and nonprofit and FACE sponsored me and I have to think of what FACE means. Friends, friends of the art for community enrichment [Friends of Art for Community Enrichment]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so they came down to visit me. Some ladies in the--you have a picture of them visiting, and it was wonderful having someone there to speak to. But it was not only me. I, I ran into some white Americans from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I heard them speaking. They heard me speaking. I had--another friend came down and, and we--she came down the last month. She spent her money to come and they heard us speaking. We turned around, we ran towards each other and hugged each other and we spent the night talking and just, you know, being together and, and appreciating being able to communicate with someone, you know, but they had--the president [Felix Houphouet-Boigny] died while I was there, so for three weeks, that was the only thing on television. They had an uprising there. They had martial law. So, then we were--shouldn't go out of our hotels. I stayed at the embassy for a while. It was crazy, it was crazy. I did meet a wonderful woman there, who had taken in over a hundred kids off the street, and she was building a school. She was a dancer and she was building--she had the dance part built. I'm trying to think of her name--she wanted me to stay, she, she said she would pay me to stay and teach her kids how to speak English and I, I was like, "I'm sorry, but I just cannot do it," (laughter) but I created some art and I, I gave it to her school because I was supposed to give it to the other school, but they didn't appreciate me so, I didn't think my art would be appreciated so I gave it to her school and I--and so she had her dancers come out. They were awesome, but she said that she had been discriminated against because she was trying to get to the people to accept and embrace their culture and they thought that--they didn't wanna deal with that African stuff. So I just learned last month that she's left and she's in New York [New York] now somewhere. But she went with a jazz musician and I can't think of his name. I'm so bad at names, but her, her hus- her partner he couldn't deal with, Cote d'Ivoire either. We were in Abidjan [Cote d'Ivoire] and she--and, and then the American embassy--the woman from the American embassy, she had a friend that couldn't deal--nobody can deal with that (laughter) country it seems, but my, my young man which is now in his forties, he's going back home. The, the war had stopped, but now it started again. But it was just chaos there, it was just chaos, but the people that I met in the streets were wonderful. They--and I went to the villages, they did take me to villages. The people in the villages were wonderful. It was just the people that was the administrators and the hierarchy there that was so (makes sound) (laughter), you know, you know, they was like, well what are you gonna give us, you know, and I'm like you don't understand I'm an artist, we don't, we don't have money like that, you needed somebody else. But the people were warm. The people I--before I left I--all the money that I had, that I couldn't, you know, change back, I just gave it to the people that lived on the street and told them, "Please don't expect other people to do this." I told Ananias [ph.] to tell them that. But I could--I--the people that came to see me from FACE, they had problems getting in the country because they were trying to bribe them. They had problems getting out the country. I didn't think I was gonna be--they kept me three hours trying to get me to pay them three hundred and some dollars that I didn't have. And then they said finally, "Go on." Story_ID: 635399 Speaker 1: Was there any aspect of the art of the country [Cote d'Ivoire] that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --really were impressed with? Speaker 2: Yes, that's why I went because I was creating Afrocentric work. And I wanted to go to a country that actually--I could see the work, and I did, and I did see the work, and that was the joy of seeing them create. I went to all the villages where--I went to the village of the wood carvers, and, and they actually ca- I have a mask at home that he carved, and that I'm supposed to burn, but I can't, I can't do anything to it, it just too gorgeous you know. I went to the potters village where it's nothing but the women do the pottery, I went to the village of the weavers which was nothing but the men do the weaving. And they--in the, the weaving is astonishing. I mean they're like a block apart almost, you know, we--I mean their looms are like (gesture)--almost a city block apart, and they're weaving. You have to walk all the across the field to get to the other weaver. It's amazing how they do that, and then I met painters, you know, I met painters who were willing to try to talk to me through Ananias [ph.], my interpreter, and then I met painters that could speak some English and, and we, you know, we communicated and I saw their work. And they had a big arts festival there from all the different art countries. And I was supposed to be in it, and I had created work, you had to look for it, they put it in a closet somewhere, near a closet. And we couldn't--we could barely find it. So, but after that there's a young man that came after me, and he spoke some French but then after that they dropped the country from the list. Because it just wasn't friendly and it wasn't, it wasn't healthy. Story_ID: 635400 Speaker 1: So you came back after three months and--what happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I did--I, I--it--I taught some classes, did some residencies that had to deal with my trip. I tried to show the better part of what I had seen and experienced. I in--fact I created the--there's a park that's a Afro- Afrocentric park here and I created the gateway, and I took that experience from my--I took the art from my experience in Africa, and Cote d'Ivoire to, to embellish my work with some of the symbols that I saw there. I don't know how much it influenced me in terms of my work, because I was already using bright, bright colors and I was already using symbols, so I can't say really how much it influenced me. I think more than anything it gave me appreciation (laughter) for being here, and that's sad. But it did so I needed an experience to go someplace else where I will really enjoy my African brothers and sisters. But like I said the village--the people in the village said, you know, "This is our sister from across the waters," and they were poor villages. And so one--you know, we weren't, we weren't allowed to drink or eat. We could eat but we weren't allowed to drink their water. So the man in the village--in this one village came out with a coconut, a half a coconut to share. And he poured his water over it to clean it off right, and I was like, Lord you will really have to help me, because I am not going to refuse this man's gift. And I, I, ate it, you know, I ate some of it, and I didn't get sick. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We--I asked my friend to bring over some clothes, and she brought over a lot of clothes for kids, little like sweaters--I mean t-shirts and underwear and stuff. And we took it to this village and the village was just as calm and, you know, it was very serene, very nice village when we went. When we went back with the clothes, it was a mad house. They ran over each other, they were throwing their children at us, you know, knocking each other down. As soon as--we had to run and hide inside of a building. And as soon as the clothes were gone the village was like nothing had ever happened. It was--and then we saw all the little kids running around with Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] t-shirts on (laughter). It was, it was crazy. Story_ID: 635401 Speaker 1: Well you come back from this awful cultural experience [in Cote d'Ivoire] to-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --back to the United States, and so you, you're teaching at Otterbein [Otterbein University, Westerville, Ohio] and at Ohio Dominican [Ohio Dominican University, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: I taught at Ohio Dominican, Otterbein and Rio Grande [University of Rio Grande and Rio Grande Community College, Rio Grande, Ohio]. I don't think I put Rio Grande down but I have taught there too. Speaker 1: That's here in Ohio, too--isn't Rio Grande? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in Ohio. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And they have satellite classes here in Columbus [Ohio] that I taught at. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I taught, you know, really teachers how to teach art. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: How to experience art (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 635402 Speaker 1: Your work has been displayed in Evansville Museum [Evansville Museum of Arts, History and Science, Evansville, Indiana] and that's back in the '90s [1990s], and--along with I guess the work of four other women--I mean three other women is that it? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: The title of the exhibit 'Four Women/Four Voices'? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: In Evansville [Indiana]. Speaker 2: That was, that was some time ago. Speaker 1: Yeah '96 [1996]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, what's, your--what's the exhibit that you're the proudest of? You have a particular one? Speaker 2: Oh well, I had a retrospective in--at the Mansfield Art Center. And it was pretty cold, it was during the winter and I didn't expect that many people to come and it was in Mansfield [Ohio], you know, and it was, it was a cold day but it was a beautiful day and, and people loaned their work. They loaned, you know, they gave them work that they had purchased and it was a beautiful exhibit and I was, you know, so happy to see these people that I hadn't seen for, you know, so long and pieces of work that I had forgotten--to see it again and to see it, you know, in a gallery experience, the experience was totally different than, you know, any other experi- any other space. And, you know--I was just--I felt so loved because these people were willing to part with their art. Only one person I understand that refused to let her art go--let their art go (laughter) but everybody else, they came and people that didn't own art, they came and they were so supportive and I, I was just so amazed that the love that was given to me. Story_ID: 635403 Speaker 1: I guess what are you doing presently, and what's your future plan? Speaker 2: Well right now I'm super busy and I am so grateful for that. I am truly grateful. Right now, at this present time when I leave here I'll go back to working on a piece that I'm working for in May, May 5th at The King Arts Complex [Columbus, Ohio]. It's a show called speaking different voices ['Speak!']. It's all women. Art group, our group--it's called Creative Women of Color and we've been given this opportunity to--again show--we showed last year too. And I'm working on several pieces for that show. It's funny, a lot of my patrons say they like my work because it's so different all the time. They never know what to expect and sometimes they like it because when I put it up you, you think that it's several different artists. But if you know my work you can see the string that runs through 'em, the cohesiveness that runs through the pieces because they--they're gonna all usually be some brightness in color and there's gonna be some pattern. But I'm working on paper pieces. I'm working on an assembly. I've done a painting. So I'm gonna put all these up and see where the cohesiveness exist. While we're speaking my basement is being renovated for--to better serve me as a studio. I just got a call to show in Grove City [Ohio], city hall what else? I may be doing a telecast. I'm so excited about the possibility of doing that in terms of art and religion. I'm putting together a body of work so that I can speak to honoring god through art. And I'm having a show here [Star Arts Limited, Columbus, Ohio], October of this year, in this gallery, a solo show. So I'm busy. Story_ID: 635404 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I guess they, they've never changed. I know that you can't go back, but I'm always hoping--you, you're talking about the African American community in general? Speaker 1: Yes. So it'd be Columbus [Ohio] and-- Speaker 2: Okay. I'm, I'm hoping that somewhere our young people will began to hope. Because I work with young people, I work with young people black and white and what I'm seeing is that there's no hope. Even with a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], who I feel gets no respect. And I feel that the community feels that and sees that and so the young people feel that and see that and so why would they wanna be that if they feel like, it means so little. But if they don't have a hope for the future, then they perish. They have no future, you know, if they can't see anything--I mean I've talked to, I've talked to young people who don't expect to live past sixteen and that hurts me because I know that they didn't come here with nothing, you know, and they can't see anything positive that they can contribute to the world. It's all about getting something, you know, and I'm hoping in that somewhere, someone will, pull their coattails and say, "Look brother, look sister, you're better than that. There's, there's something for you to do." I'm hoping for our community, that we can find love again for one another, trust, faith--there's no--there's so little trust in our, in our substantial organizations that we used to feel connected to and trust like our churches, you know, there's, there's not that, that strong respect for the church and the ministers. It, it's just not there. I go past churches and I see people sitting on steps drinking, you know. I see people in church dressed anyway and it's not because of my age that, you know, I'll look at people in terms of how they're dressed. I look at them in terms of their value. How do you value yourself dressing like that, you know? What kind of value you getting wearing your pants below your, your (laughter) your butt, you know? I--you, know, I need to understand that. There has to be more conversations between people of different generations. There has to be a, a desire, you know, we can't--as older people we can't just count 'em off, you know, and like, "Oh they just lost." We can't do that. And for younger people, they can't just say, "Oh they don't understand nothing we doing. They don't care. They don't know," you know. I think a lot of young people don't know why they're angry and I think they're angry because they don't have any structure in their life and they don't know that. They know that there's something missing, but they don't know what it is and it's what we've always had as older people that parents, that, you know, disciplined us. Not because they wanted to beat us or because they were cruel but because they cared and that's the only way they knew to care. And we have young people who have had--who are having babies or had babies that know nothing about parenting. They had young people be--they had babies because they wanted someone to love and they don't know how to love because they haven't been loved. So, I mean, my hope is that somewhere--I think that there's a lot more people in our community that are doing going good than bad and we need to see that, you know, we need to see that. All we see on television, in the news is all the crap that happens. That we have to be concerned about and worried about, and afraid of, especially older people, afraid. But there's young people that are doing things--good things that we never hear about hardly. One or two. Once or twice a we- a month. And we need to be exposed to those people because there's, there's fine young people with fine minds, those people need to be seen, so that the people that--young people that we're losing can see those, those people, their peers accomplishing something and doing something. And, and give them some hope to say, "Yeah, well maybe I ought to check out what that brother or that sister's doing." That's all I can hope for. Story_ID: 635405 Speaker 1: Now when you look back over everything that you've done to this point and you've received numerous awards and recognition. As we sit here today, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, when people tell me that I've helped them to see something in themselves. When they say, you know, by just talking to you the other day it did something for me, I don't, I don't see a overall legacy. I don't see a Rosa Parks legacy, I don't care. I only care about that one, two, three--that one person that came into my life and that I did something to better theirs. That's all I care about. If I can do something to better the next person's life. I don't care what color they are, I don't care what sex they are, I don't care what--anything about what they do as long as I can bring some positivity to their life, that's all I care about, that's all I really care about. Doing my art, and being able to bring some positivity to somebody else's life, means more to me than anything else. Story_ID: 635406 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about, 'bout your family. Now you have--now you've got a--well you, you had--do, do you have any children now? That, that are-- Speaker 2: I have no children. Speaker 1: No children. Speaker 2: I had one son [Leslie Brooks]- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that I adored, I absolutely adored him. And saying--not saying that he was better than anybody else's. But he gave me so much to adore him for. I never saw anything out of my son that was disrespectful, never. And I know that he smoked and he might've did something else, he might've did something else, but he kept it so far from me that the only way I found out--it was when he told me as a--he was a grown man and I never saw it. He was encouraging, he was the only one that seemed to understand what I needed to do as a person. And he encouraged me to do my art, he encouraged me all the time to, "Keep on stepping, mom. Just keep on doing what you're doing, I don't care what anybody says, you know, I love you and God loves you." And he became a minister. And he went to--he went to pick up somebody--he really loved being a minister to young people. He went to pick up someone in a really, really rough neighborhood, and he caught a stray bullet, and he was killed immediately. He was thirty-nine and, and I think for a couple years I did nothing. I just, I just grieved and I went in the bathroom one day and looked in the mirror and said, "Why, why, why not me?" Because I felt he could've done so much more being a minister, you know, and, and wanting to be with young people, and, and I, I didn't get an answer. But I heard--it seemed as though I heard his voice say, "Mom, just do your art." Just like that, "Mom, just do your art." I, you know, I just felt so strange and I came out and I said, "I gotta go back to doing my art." And so I did, he--we lived together and, and, you know, he was close to his grandmother [Brooks' mother, Hattie Steele Owens]. He adored the ground she walked on, he'd get a ticket racing to get to her if he thought she was sick, and in fact he had. And then she died, and then he died right after her, not soon--about, about three years after her. And then it seemed like everybody that I loved started to die. So I was like, God please for a minute--just hold up for a minute (laughter). Story_ID: 635407 Speaker 1: My childhood was wonderful. I learned how--I learned love as a young, as a young person, because my mother [Hattie Steele Owens], father [Pomp Brooks], and stepfather [Leslie Owens] all lived together. And I know that had to be the talk of the neighborhood. But from that experience I learned what real love was, and I learned that men could love men. It had nothing to do with sexuality. My father and my stepfather had been friends ever since I was a baby. And they lived next door to each other, and my stepfather, we knew his wife and everything, so when my mother and father split, my mother and I moved away and we lived together for a while. I had just gotten out of junior high [St. Dominic's School, Columbus, Ohio], I hadn't started East High School [Columbus, Ohio]. My father went to Dayton [Ohio] to the vets community (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Community hospital. Speaker 1: VA [Dayton Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Dayton, Ohio], yeah we went there to Dayton, and he wrote--and then, and then my, my stepfather's wife died, okay during that period and so my stepfather asked my mother if she would come and just keep house for him, and she did for a while. And then he said that it wasn't right that she should come and, you know, be in his house and keeping house for him. But we weren't living with him or anything, and--but I think he must've cared about her, because he asked her to marry him. And she was not like, "I don't particularly want to marry this man, you know, but I need help with you, you wanna go to school--," and blah, blah, you know, all the things that she felt that she couldn't give me, he could help her give me. So they married and she, she loved him, she started to love him. And it was so funny, I'm watching these two older people, you know, they're old to me, you know, falling in love. And he's like a little kid again--I mean he's just smil- I never saw the man smile when he--when I was little. But I never saw his wife smile, she, she seemed to be very stern. I never saw him smile, he was smiling, he was so happy, she was happy and I was confused. I was like, you know, wow, you know, and--it--but I was happy that my mother was happy. Well then my father wrote and said that, you know, he was very unhappy in Dayton. And he was gonna try to move back to Columbus [Ohio]. My stepfather wrote and told him to come live with us. And I was like, what? And, you know. Story_ID: 635408 Speaker 1: This is kind of a unusual situation here we have right? Speaker 2: My--yes my f- my stepfather asked my father [Pomp Brooks] to come stay with us. And then my mother [Hattie Steele Owens] explained to me that my father was gonna come stay with us and I was like, "I don't care," you know--I mean, I love my father, you know, I love my father. I love my mother. And I'm beginning to love my stepfather. And if, if my stepfather, you know, wants him to come, then fine. I'm still a teenager, you know, but I knowing--I know that our neighborhood [King-Lincoln, Columbus, Ohio] was rocking in terms of conversation, you know about this situation, you know. But it was--I was there in the house and I actually experienced what that was like so there was no hanky panky. It was nothing--there was two men who loved each other as brothers. They'd, they sit down, they drank and they talked. They had their coffee. They read their papers. They discussed things and my mother went about her business and did her thing. Then my mother and my father--my stepfather they went about their business as husband and wife, you know. And my mother at one point got angry with me after I had my son [Leslie Brooks] and I left the house--well she was very angry and she sort of put me out and my father came with me and so we, we moved in together. And then because I'm not the housekeeper, cook that my mother was, we only lived together about a half a year and he was like, "I'm going back," (laughter), "and stay with, and stay with Owens [Leslie Owens] and your mom 'cause you don't cook. I'm gonna starve here," you know, and he didn't cook either so. That's when I had my own apartment by myself at that point and he went back and stayed with them. And at some point I think they fell out, my mother and my father because--I, I don't know why. I think it had something to do with him drinking and him still wanting to be that street man that he used to be and he was way too old to be and so he, he just felt--I don't whether she asked him to leave or he left on his own, but he left and he got his own space. Speaker 1: So by that time did he have a wooden leg and all that too? Speaker 2: Oh he had all that before. But after he left he started--and even when we were together, he started hanging out with young men that drink, and, you know--and I think they was probably trying to take advantage him, but he was too streetwise but he was still drinking and that's when the diabetes probably kicked in more. And then the next thing I know. He was staying with me for a minute at a different space. He moved back in and then he went to the VA [Dayton Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Dayton, Ohio] to have his foot removed. Then they said they had to remove his leg. And he had told me if they removed his leg, he was gonna die. He did not want to live. He was not going to live, because he was not going to be dependent on anyone. We went to see him and the next week he was dead. And they said, you know, "We really don't understand, you know, what happened except he seemed to have caught pneumonia." But he, he had said that, you know, he didn't wanna live. I, I just believed he willed himself to die, and God accepted that. Story_ID: 635409 Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to see you become a successful artist? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: My mother [Hattie Steele Owens] saw me graduate both times and she was so proud of that. She knew that I was an artist. She still didn't understand. She never came out to any show or anything. She read about me in the paper. And I took her work that, you know, she just said she liked the colors. But she didn't quite ever fully appreciate me being an artist. She, she just, she just couldn't get to her, you know, she just wanted me to be this good Christian woman. And I guess she wanted me to be married or something, I don't know, but it wasn't happening (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 635410 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I won't think of it until tonight after you've asked your last question. Speaker 1: Okay. Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Pretty much as I said before. As an artist first. And as a person who motivated, inspired, instructed, and helped somebody else, whether they were an artist or not. That's, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you. Story_ID: 635411 Speaker 1: This is my family reunion. Myself is on our far right, in the middle is my mother, and on the left is my son, Leslie Brooks. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is myself, I'm working on an (unclear) painting in my studio. Speaker 2: This is a mural that I was working on and there's no children present, but it, it's a children's mural. It was done in 2008 I believe. Speaker 1: Where is this? Speaker 2: This mural is now in the back--well I think it may be destroyed. It was in the back of an art gallery over on Bryden Road, the William H. Thomas Gallery [William H. Thomas Art Gallery, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: This is a piece of work that I did for a show in twenty--eight, 2008. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is me in my gallery. This is my--the gallery that I owned in my home, 1990 I believe. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Again this is work that I'm showing in my gallery Art Genesis [Columbus, Ohio] in around 1990. Speaker 2: This is a show I did--a work from a show I did for the--at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: 'Bout what year? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Is it recent? Speaker 2: No, it's not--it--I just look good. Speaker 1: This was in 2009. At a convention for a--it's Catholics for Action--Catholics Called to Action [sic. Call to Action] or something. Speaker 2: Okay. Who is in it? Speaker 1: That's Dr.--her name's on the back, I don't--I can't remember. Speaker 2: Jamie T. Phillips? Speaker 1: Dr. Jamie Phillips. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Phelps. Speaker 1: Phelps. Dr. Jamie Phelps [Jamie T. Phelps]. Speaker 2: Okay, this is me at the convention and that is the work that I did the background work for their convention which is fourteen by eighteen feet. Speaker 1: That's in 2010? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm so happy I'm through (laughter). Speaker 1: This is at Ohio Avenue Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio] on my return from Africa doing a residency there. Speaker 2: This one? Speaker 1: This me with the senior citizens at a senior citizen building class that I was doing. Speaker 2: This is me in Hawaii with my best friend Peggy [ph.] who perished in a fire soon after we returned. Speaker 1: This is a demonstration I was doing at Kojo's [HistoryMaker Kojo Kamau] gallery, ACE Gallery [Art for Community Expression Gallery, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Is that a wood burning demonstration? Speaker 1: Yes, it's a wood burning demonstration. Speaker 2: This is half of a piece. You're only seeing a detail of a piece that I was doing for Columbus opera [Opera Columbus, Columbus, Ohio] and that--this is at the Columbus Museum of Art [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Another piece I'm working on, a painting on wood. This is a picture or one similar to it is in Essence magazine. Speaker 2: This is me being interviewed at the Columbus Museum of Art for a project that I did for North [ph.] residency. Speaker 1: Okay. That's you on the left who's interviewing you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do not know the name of the anchor person that's interviewing me on Channel Six [WSYX-TV, Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: I'm putting up a sign for a little store that they're opening at the King Complex [The King Arts Complex] in Columbus, Ohio. It's a wood burning. Speaker 2: This me in '93 [1993] receiving my English award [Walter and Marian English Award]. Speaker 1: This is in 1990--yes 1990. That's myself, my mother, my son, and my son's wife. Speaker 2: Okay, could you give everybody's names? Speaker 1: Okay. Myself [HistoryMaker] Queen Brooks, my mother Hattie Owens [Hattie Steele Owens], my son Leslie Owens--I mean Leslie Brooks, I'm sorry Leslie Brooks, and his wife Tisha Brooks [ph.]. Speaker 2: Displaying some work at a event at the King center. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is me when I was six months old. Speaker 1: You're not frowning on this on either. Speaker 2: This is me when I started my first day at the J. Ashburn Youth Center [J. Ashburn Jr. Youth Center, Columbus, Ohio] as an artist. I'm trying to think 19--1980 I'll say, I'm not for certain. Speaker 1: This is my--to the left Mrs. Pierce, myself in the middle and Mr. Pierce, Mr. Elijah Pierce. I do not know his wife's name. Speaker 2: This is me, I think I had to be eight, I don't know. Speaker 1: This is my grandmother Ms. Huella Smith [ph.]. Speaker 2: This is me working in my, in my home studio on Franklin Avenue. Speaker 1: Another portrait of me I don't know when it was taken. Speaker 2: This at my gallery on Lockbourne [Road], Art Genesis. Speaker 1: Again Lockbourne, Art Genesis. Speaker 2: This is when I was in Africa. The gentle- the young man standing, I do not know his name, he was the bus--he was a student. The young man next to him is Ananias [ph.] who was my interpreter, and I'm standing in the back. On the far left--I do not--I can't remember her name. I cannot remember the ladies--the two ladies, to the left of the last lady on right is, oh what's her name? They're her sister-in-laws or something. Speaker 1: Now that's you in Cote d'Ivoire? Speaker 2: Yeah that's me in Cote d'Ivoire. Those are people from FACE [Friends of Art for Community Enrichment]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From FACE. Speaker 1: Myself and my dad [Pomp Brooks]. That says, "Babysitter and da- sitter--babysitter and daddy," (laughter). Speaker 2: That's cute. Speaker 1: That's what--my mother wrote that. Speaker 2: That's you on a pedestal. Speaker 1: With a pen in my--pencil in my hand. Speaker 2: That's 1961. Speaker 1: Okay, that's 1961. Just me posing in the alley. Being a girly girl. Speaker 2: My mother Hattie Brooks and myself Queen. Speaker 1: This is from that awful period of photography in the late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This was my--going to--my--when I first went back to Ohio State to study art. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This again Queen, myself. Speaker 2: I believe this is in '62 [1962] this little--this is a picture of me and my son at birth. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Finally, the smallest of all here. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And this is me when I was probably seven or eight...