 Story_ID: 411925 Speaker 1: I'm Cheryl Butler, I'll be conducting the interview today. Matthew Hickey is the videographer and I'm going to have you state your full name and spell it please. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Jeanne Brayboy, Jeanne Martin Brayboy, J-E-A-N-N-E, M-A-R-T-I-N, B-R-A-Y-B-O-Y. Speaker 1: And your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 23, 1930, Camden, South Carolina. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: June 20, (laughter) 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we conducting this interview? Speaker 2: At the Levine Museum of the New South in Charlotte, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And what is your profession? Speaker 2: I'm a retired elementary s- school teacher, music teacher. Story_ID: 411926 Speaker 1: --Ask you a few People magazine style questions to, to get things started. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Lobster, which I don't get to eat very often (laughter). Speaker 1: What about your favorite time of year or season? Speaker 2: Winter, I like cold weather. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Yellow (laughter). Speaker 1: Favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: Europe, which, where I don't get to go very often either (laughter). Speaker 1: Any particular country? Speaker 2: Italy. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or quote? Speaker 2: Well, this might not be the exact words but, "Unto whom much is given of, of whom much is required" Story_ID: 411927 Speaker 1: Let's find out a little bit about your family history. Tell me your mother's maiden name? Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name was Singleton, June Singleton. Speaker 1: Okay, and so her full name, and married name? Speaker 2: Martin. June Singleton Martin. Speaker 1: And when was she born and where? Speaker 2: She was born June 19th, 1911, in Whiteville, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Do you know your maternal grandparents' names? Speaker 2: Yes, I know more about my, no, no, not my maternal one, I'm thinking, my maternal grandparents, I know their names. Speaker 1: Yeah, what are their names? Speaker 2: John [John Singleton] and Millie Singleton, and they were in Whiteville, North Carolina, that's in eastern North Carolina. Story_ID: 411928 Speaker 1: So, tell me a little bit about your mom [June Singleton Martin] and where she grew up. Did she tell you stories about her childhood? Speaker 2: When I think back, not so much. She grew up in Whiteville, North Carolina and she went to what was a Presbyterian boarding school, high school, in Hendersonville, North--Henderson, not Hendersonville, North Carolina, it was called Albion Academy [Franklinton, North Carolina] and that's where she met my father [John Martin] and, of course, it's long gone. I don't know a whole lot really, I'm ashamed to say about my mother's early childhood days. Speaker 1: And so she, how did she meet your father? How did they-- Speaker 2: Well he used to tell this story about, she worked as, in the dining room as a waitress, in the school dining room. They were required to do things and somehow he was late coming to eat and he asked her if she would bring him a plate and he, and he was a great jokester. He would say, "Well, if you bring me a plate, I'll dance at your wedding and it so happened I played the fiddle." This is what he used to--he used to say that all the time. So that's how they met in, in high school at this, it was a Presbyterian school. Speaker 1: A colored school? Speaker 2: Yes, in Henderson. Speaker 1: And when did they get married? Speaker 2: I, well, I guess it was '30 [1930], the year I was born. Story_ID: 411929 Speaker 1: My father [John Martin] then came to Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina] and they were married sometime, he graduated in '31 [1931] so I'm not sure when he came and my mother [June Singleton Martin] went to live with my aunt [Jessie Dinkins Wright] in South Carolina who had reared my father because he wanted to drop out of school and go to work since he was married and going to have a family but she said no, and so she went to live with my aunt in Camden [South Carolina] and my father finished school. Speaker 2: At Johnson C. Smith (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Johnson C. Smith. Speaker 2: And what were their professions? Speaker 1: My father ended up, he taught, he was the history teacher and a coach [at Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] and my mother was a librarian, afterwards, she, eventually she went to, she didn't finish college but she took classes and she worked in the county library in Camden. Story_ID: 411930 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name, when was he born and where? Speaker 2: His name was John Wendell Martin [John Martin] and he was born in Columbia [South Carolina]. I have to think of the date, 1905, I think, or 1906, it's on the crypt. When he left, when he graduated from Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], he went to Camden [South Carolina] and he worked at a school, Mather Academy [Camden, South Carolina], started out coaching football. This was, of course, during the Depression [Great Depression] and then he became a member, he was the first male member of the faculty there. Mather Academy was a boarding school, private school, that was founded by women from the Methodist church, northern white women who came to Camden and this was, it was founded, started in '67 [1867], right after the Civil War. There were several schools started by northerners in the South after the Civil War for black children. And so this was one of the schools and this is where I went to school from kindergarten through twelfth grade and he was on the faculty there, he taught history and then he coached and he did a lot of things in South Carolina. He started the first black athletic conference in South Carolina. He later moved to Columbia and worked in the public schools there. Columbia was like twenty-five miles from Camden but, and then later he came back to Camden and, before, and worked in the public schools before he retired. Well, he died, he was still working when he died. He died early age. Speaker 1: When did he die? How old? Speaker 2: He was fifty-three, very young. Story_ID: 411931 Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your paternal grandparents? Speaker 2: I know more about my paternal grandparents. Speaker 1: What were their names? Speaker 2: My grandfather was Isaac McLaughlin Martin [Isaac Martin] and he was born in Fairfield County, South Carolina and he lived, he died in 1947 and I remember that I was a freshman in college [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] then. He was, what they call, a lay missionary in the Presbyterian church, which meant he traveled around to different churches, usually when it was supplying, when they didn't have a pastor and he was also a carpenter and I remember his, I remember him as a gruff old man but, anyway, I do remember him very well. My grandmother, I did not know, she died in 1912, Rebecca Gettys Martin. She had four children. In fact, I have some newspaper clippings about them and she died when the oldest one, my daddy [John Martin] had three brothers, she died when the oldest one was twelve and-- Speaker 1: How did she die? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know but the newspaper clipping says that she died of a slow lingering illness, so, I don't know, and it's interesting, the newspaper clipping says she died like, gives the day of the month, I think it was May, but it doesn't give the year but I figured it out because in the, I did, I started genealogy search but not really. In 1909, they are listed in the census in Fairfield County and she was twenty-six and he was twenty-nine. The newspaper article says that her oldest child was twelve when she died so I figured from that, it was 1912. Oh, the census also says that they got married in 1899 and I have a bowl, that a cousin who is now deceased, gave me that said it was one of their wedding presents and so, all the, I deducted that, that she died in 1912 but the newspaper article doesn't even say that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but then my grandfather married again but my father and one of his brothers, stayed with my aunt [Jessie Dinkins Wright], her sister, my grandmother's sister, in Camden [South Carolina], off and on until they were grown because that's where my father went back to live, that's why, how that happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my grandfather lived here in Charlotte [North Carolina] eve- and this is where he was when he died. Story_ID: 411932 Speaker 1: Well let's talk a little bit about your childhood. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Where did you spend your early childhood years? Speaker 2: Spent all my childhood years, until I graduated from high school, in Camden [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Well, my father [John Martin], as I said, worked at Johnson C.--not Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], he finished Johnson C., he worked at Mather Academy [Camden, South Carolina] and I can remember going there, I have a sister [Thomasina Martin Brayboy] who's two years younger, there's just the two of us, and we would go, he coached football, we would go to the games and we would go to functions on the campus and I have a picture, I should have brought it, of my father with the two of us. He has on a white suit and we have, and we're all dressed up and it was at one of their commencements. Story_ID: 411933 Speaker 1: Those are the things I remember most about my childhood and it was a pleasant childhood and, of course, we were hand-to-mouth, I'm sure. My aunt [Jessie Dinkins Wright], who we lived with, was a dressmaker, really custom dressmaker and did, Camden [South Carolina] was a kind of winter resort town for wealthy northerners who had summer homes there, or winter homes there, and they had horse races and these people would come to Camden and my aunt sold a lot to these people and made a good living from it. Speaker 2: And tell me again, you were born in-- Speaker 1: Camden. Speaker 2: In 1930? Speaker 1: In 1930. Speaker 2: So, describe, so you had these northerners, white northerners coming down for vacation. What was the racial climate like during your childhood? Speaker 1: Well, it was totally separated. I had, I, I, never had any relationship with any white students or young people until I went to college in Greensboro [North Carolina] and there I participated in an organization that, see it was several schools in Guilford College [Greensboro, North Carolina], several women colleges in Greensboro, and Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] and there we did have an interracial organization. That was my first real contact with any students my age, anybody my age. Speaker 2: So back in Camden, were the neighborhoods, obviously the schools were segregated, were the neighborhoods also segregated? Speaker 1: Yes and no. In, in-- Speaker 2: Describe your block. Speaker 1: My block was absolutely segregated but on the other end of town, they were mixed. Some people that I knew, some black people that I knew, lived on some of the same streets where some of the white people lived. Speaker 2: So what did your block look like? Was this is a middle class neighborhood? Speaker 1: Yeah, well (laughter) part of it was and part of it wasn't. Speaker 2: Who lived there? Who do you remember? Speaker 1: There weren't many, I don't--there weren't many children on the street, like in the next block there were some children who we were not allowed to play with. There were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who do you, who do you remember specifically? Speaker 1: The, my friends, oh, my friends all lived on the other side of town, not, which was not far, like six or seven blocks away. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Oh, one of my best friends was Earline Stover Cobb who died this, in Washington [D.C.], this past year, and I went to her funeral. I had, her father was a postman, who delivered mail and her mother was a teacher. Another very good friend was Cresenia Brevard [ph.]. Her father [Christopher Brevard] was a dentist and her mother [Gertrude Brevard] taught. And then I had a cousin who was my age, her mother taught and her father had a barbershop and had a good friend who lives here now, Bernice Rorie [ph.]. Her father was a carpenter and her mother worked as a cook. She worked in service and she's still my good friend, yeah. Story_ID: 411934 Speaker 1: Was there a class division within the African American community? Speaker 2: I, I would say so. When, when I was young, the peop- the, the girls that I mentioned, we called ourselves the gang, now why we would call ourselves the gang (laughter), my parents wondered why we wanted to call ourselves that and, of course, I don't remember now why we did. We thought it was cute. We, of course, gangs then were different from now. We were close-knit, I tell, I can tell you this. We went to Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina], which it had a boarding department but we were city students so we didn't board. Speaker 1: Mather Academy? Speaker 2: Right. There was a public school right across the street. It was very inadequate. It went only to eleventh grade, Mather went to twelfth grade. In that time, in South Carolina, there were only four, five black schools that went to the twelfth grade, if you can imagine, and students, of course, from Mather, at Mather, came from, you know, it was a big boarding, probably more boarding students than local students. So I, when I think back, we thought we were, you know, but we paid two dollars a month for, two dollars a month tuition and then if you took piano lessons, which I took, you know, maybe you paid an extra two dollars but we really thought we were, you know, different from those children who went to the public school. Speaker 1: And they were less fortunate, economically? Speaker 2: Right, and, and we, you know, we weren't really, I mean, we were--as I said, we were probably hand-to-mouth but still it was, it was different. Speaker 1: But some of your parents were educated? Speaker 2: That's the difference and, of course, some of the parents who, you know, at the public school were educated too, but anyway, it was different. That was the difference. Mather was a great school. As I said, it was staffed, at first, mostly by white northern women, then gradually some black women were added and men and that's, as I said, where my father [John Martin] worked for years but we had music and art and when I think back, we were really privileged, small classes and loved it, loved it. Speaker 1: Where did you excel? I know you studied music so what was your earliest experience with music? Speaker 2: Well we had a piano and my aunt [Jessie Dinkins Wright] played the piano and I think that's what got me interested in it and I started taking piano lessons early, when I, I think maybe fourth or fifth grade, at Mather. Speaker 1: Do you remember a particular lesson or recital or song? Speaker 2: I don't rem- no, but we did have recitals. In fact I have one, well I have two or three pieces of music that I played but I finished first in my class and so, you know, and I loved school, loved, loved school. Speaker 1: Which subjects? Speaker 2: English, history and, of course, music and we had a chorus and we would do operettas and that kind of, I loved that kind of thing, still do. Speaker 1: Is there a particular concert or recital that you remember that stands out? Speaker 2: Not really. There was one, there's a piece called the 'Minute Waltz,' a Chopin [Frederic Chopin] waltz and I remember, you know, it's real fast and I still have that piece of music, it's raggedy, and I don't remember just when I did it but I was maybe sixth or seventh grade. I don't remember, I remember doing the piece, I'm not sure when, but I remember I was fairly young and I thought, and I remember I got the prize. They would give prizes at the end of the year and my music teacher had given this, for doing good work, I got this piece of music as a prize and she wrote on it, "This is a big piece for a little girl." And so I still have that piece of music (laughter) and so I was like maybe sixth grade, I think, and I did learn it and play it later on. Story_ID: 411935 Speaker 1: What was life like inside your home? Your sister was two years younger? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: When was she born? Speaker 2: In '32 [1932]. Speaker 1: Were you close? Speaker 2: Yes, and no. I was always a child that tried to follow the rules and my sister was, yeah, you know, whatever. She, so-- Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Thomasina [Thomasina Martin Brayboy], and she lives now in Montclair, New Jersey, and we married brothers. I married Jack [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] first and then later on she married his brother, Tom [Thomas Brayboy]. Story_ID: 411936 Speaker 1: So tell me about holidays in your house. Do you remember Christmas in your house? Speaker 2: Oh, right, I don't remember a lot about presents but we always did have presents but we always, we always had a lot of friends and I had cousins who lived next door and there were t- two girls in that family and they were younger and we always had a lot of people dropping in and we always had, you know, food and, I remember one Christmas, I guess I was high school [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina], my father [John Martin] went out in the woods. A friend of his had property outside of Camden [South Carolina] and told him he could cut a Christmas tree out there and he brought this straggly Christmas tree in and we refused to put it up and decorate it and it came down to Christmas Eve and we--he said, when are you going to put the Christmas tree up? We weren't going to put that Christ- and he went uptown and, of course, they were clearing the Christmas tree lots then and bought a tree for fifty do- fifty cents and, beautiful tree and so we decorated, but we always decorated the house and, and had friends in and, especially during Christmas and had cookies and cakes and folks would drop in and we always had that. Speaker 1: Were other holidays big as well? Thanksgiving, Easter? Speaker 2: Pretty much. We always, we belonged to church and-- Speaker 1: What church? Speaker 2: Trinity Methodist Church [Camden, South Carolina], and so we always participated in the Christmas and the special services because I remember they used to have a Christmas morning service. My father was very outgoing and often after church he would, if there were two or three older women who were by themselves, and he would say, "Oh come on, go home with us and have dinner." He did that often and my mother [June Singleton Martin] would kind of roll her eyes at him but she expected that, you know. She kind of expected but I remember that very well that it was always, you know, very open. Speaker 1: Did your mom cook certain dishes that you remember? Speaker 2: Yes and no, but my aunt [Jessie Dinkins Wright] did a lot of the cooking. Story_ID: 411937 Speaker 1: Who's your aunt? Speaker 2: She's the one that reared my father [John Martin]. She was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Jessie Dinkins Wright and she was like my grandmother because she had reared--she was my grandmother's [Rebecca Gettys Martin] sister, the one who had taken my father in after his mother died and he had another brother, too, who ended up living here who she took in. Then there was an older brother who had, who, who stayed with his father [Isaac Martin] and then there was a younger brother, too, who went--my, my grandfather married again and they stayed with him mostly but--. Story_ID: 411938 Speaker 1: So, you were describing race relations in Camden [South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you remember any significant events? Were there tensions? Speaker 2: You know, I don't really remember any. Now that doesn't mean there weren't any but, as I said, we, we were kind of sheltered. I can remember my father [John Martin], my parents, you know, they always tried to keep us out of situations where we might, and, and, where we might have any problems and I don't, I don't really remember any but I'm sure there were but no big eruptions that I can recall. Speaker 1: Do you remember any rules of behavior? Like were you, were there certain stores you couldn't go into or movie theaters? I mean, did you, was segregation real? Speaker 2: The seg- the movie theater, we sat in the balcony and didn't go very--we didn't go very often but I remember that. But as far as the stores, I don't remember. You know, it's a small town and, and it was interesting, you know, people knew each other and as I, I can remember there was a white doctor and I can remember getting the flu or something and him coming to my house and then he and my father sitting down having a drink afterwards. So, you know, the, there were some friendly relations. Speaker 1: This was in the 1930s? Speaker 2: This was, well this was-- Speaker 1: Forties [1940s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '40s [1940s], been the '40s [1940s] 'cause I was high school age. Story_ID: 411939 Speaker 1: Do you remember who the leaders were, both in the white community and the black community in Camden [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: The prominent people? Speaker 2: I, I (laughter), I really don't remember too, too well. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: My aunt [Jessie Dinkins Wright] was very well-respected and she's, worked a lot in the church and because she did the sewing, most of the sewing she did was for white people and they came to our house. We had a, it was a big old house and, and she had a sewing room and I can remember sitting playing on the--I was the oldest grandchild, my sister's [Thomasina Martin Brayboy] younger and the other two cousins that were next door were younger so I was her favorite. (Laughter) I shouldn't say that but I was. Anyway, I can remember playing on the floor and she was, had the ladies trying on their dresses and so on. I can remember that very well. Story_ID: 411940 Speaker 1: Tell me more about Mather Academy [Camden, South Carolina]. It seems like a special place. Speaker 2: It was a special place. As I said, there was a boarding department and some of the students who were there, the parents worked like in the North or other places and that was a good place for them to be. It was staffed, as I said, it was begun by white northern women who were called deaconesses in the Methodist church at that time. I'm not sure of that now because now I belong to the Presbyterian church but-- Speaker 1: You were treated well? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that-- Speaker 1: Were you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: I was going to say, we had a band which was pitiful when I think of it now and we would have band practice at night. And, of course, this was after my father [John Martin] started working in Columbia [South Carolina] and my mother [June Singleton Martin] didn't have a car and so he would be in Columbia and, but I could, we'd go to band practice and before it got dark, but then I didn't have a way to get home and the music teacher and another teacher would bring me, would walk, they didn't have a car, they would walk me home. I think about that now. They would walk me home and come in and have a cup of tea, a cup of coffee and a piece of cake, maybe, or whatever, and I think about that now. Story_ID: 411941 Speaker 1: These women who, who worked at Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina], the Methodist church, the black Methodist church [Trinity Methodist Church, Camden, South Carolina], was right across, around the corner, very close, and they all joined our church and became active members like. The circle meetings, as they called them, that my mother [June Singleton Martin] belonged to, they would join those circles and, you know, come to our homes regularly. They also might go and visit in the, it's interesting, go visit in the white churches. They would go, but, and apparently they were welcomed in the white churches but they also participated in our church. Speaker 2: Do you remember any church programs or any specific moments at the church? Was it a quiet church? It was an all-black Methodist church? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah, it was a very traditional church, not like a lot of churches now, very traditional, and I think one influence was the school's influence and later on one of the women who was the pres- principal of the school, was our church organist but that was after I had left but I still kept in touch but it was a very traditional church, not like these churches today. Story_ID: 411942 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about Mather Academy [Camden, South Carolina]. Did the teachers there instill in you a strong sense of purpose? Speaker 2: Absolutely, it was a church school. We had chapel every week. We had, on Mondays and Wednesdays and, of course, it continually espoused Christian values which I never questioned because, as I said, we were members of a church [Trinity Methodist Church, Camden, South Carolina] and all and so it just seemed natural to me that we were required to go to chapel and, and we would often have speakers who were pastors and so forth. Speaker 1: Did anyone stand out to you, any of the speakers? Speaker 2: Can't really recall now. Speaker 1: Did you take any, any church trips or school trips? Speaker 2: Not really, we didn't, you know, we didn't have much money and we didn't really travel much when I was a child. Speaker 1: Did you go on any picnics as a church? Speaker 2: Oh, that kind of thing, yes, we did have church picnics. I remember one church picnic when, and I mashed my finger in a car door (laughter) and that just broke up the picnic because, at least for me it did, 'cause it was so painful and all I did was sit in the car and cry the rest of the time but, in school, we used to have picnics too. We weren't far from a lake, Lake Wateree and I'll walk, the whole school would walk to have a picnic in the spring, I remember that very well. Speaker 1: Do you remember, so, Mather Academy was K [kindergarten] through twelve. Do you remember your-- Speaker 2: At that time-- Speaker 1: --high school years? Speaker 2: --my high school years I remember very well. We had, oh, I loved school and we had a lot of activities. We didn't, they didn't allow dancing. And so we had receptions, we didn't have parties but my father [John Martin] started this movement with the PTA [Parent Teacher Association]. He thought we should have a dance, a prom, and we had a prom my senior year. Speaker 1: Who was your date? Speaker 2: I remember, excuse me, William Dowdy [ph.], who was from Eastover [South Carolina] and he didn't know how to dance at all and I can remember his hands were sweaty, he kept doing this and his hands were sweaty. Now the, the girls, you know, we used to get together at home and play records and dance, you know, but, and we had some parties at home where we danced but we didn't have 'em at school but that was the only time we had one but I have some pictures for, I don't have them here but I have some pictures of us. Speaker 1: What was it like having your father at school? Speaker 2: Well, he, he, he left and went to work at the public schools in Columbia [South Carolina] when I was maybe seventh grade, so it was, that was okay, you know. Speaker 1: Were you kind of singled out, were you kind of special because-- Speaker 2: When I was younger, it, it didn't really, you know, it didn't, I don't remember it mattered very much then. Speaker 1: And so you graduated at the top of your class? Speaker 2: Graduated at the top of my class. The class was small, maybe, oh gracious, I want to say fifty maybe that many, but three-fourths of us went on to college. So it was, which was kind of a rarity in that time, in '47 [1947] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who-- Story_ID: 411943 Speaker 1: Who told you college is the way to go? Speaker 2: Oh, my parents [June Singleton Martin and John Martin], you know, my grandfather was a graduate of Johnson C. Smith [Biddle University; Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] in 1898 when it was Biddle Institute [sic.]. Speaker 1: What's your grandfather's name? Which side? Speaker 2: Excuse me, Isaac McLaughlin Martin [Isaac Martin] and, of course, my father finished in '31 [1931] and he had an older brother, a year, two, who finished in '31 [1931] with him. Then he had another, his oldest brother, finished Smith in 1919 at see, and then Smith had a high school component then. Daddy didn't go, he went to Albion [Albion Academy, Franklinton, North Carolina] with my, his brother, Thomas [Thomas Marian Martin], they called him Jack Martin. He went to the high school component and so did my older brother who was, his older brother who was James [James Martin]. And then they had a younger brother who finished, and I've forgotten, he finished later on, maybe '36 [1936] but he, it was always, education was always someth- I always knew I was going to college. When I think back, I don't know how they did it on their meager income but I got a scholarship from the Methodist church. That's, that was a big help and so did my sister [Thomasina Martin Brayboy]. We both went to Bennett [Bennett College] in Greensboro [North Carolina]. Story_ID: 411944 Speaker 1: What were your dreams, even before you got to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina]? What were your dreams? What did you think you wanted to be? Speaker 2: You know at that time, there weren't many options, a variety of occupations and I always wanted to do something in music and, and being a teacher was the logical thing. And then, when I left, when I graduated Bennett, I got another scholarship from the Methodist church and I got my master's [degree] at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and that was a wonderful experience, being in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: So your music training, you took piano-- Speaker 2: In, in high school [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina], right. Speaker 1: And did you sing as well? Speaker 2: In the choir but not solo (unclear) but one of the things I, my sister [Thomasina Martin Brayboy], who's younger, had a beautiful soprano voice and one of the things I remember, we had chapel and we would sing spirituals and we sang hymns too 'cause we had the hymn books but students who were eleventh, twelfth grade, you know the older girls who had good voices, would lead the spirituals and we would sing and I remember that very well and I always enjoyed that and my sister got to lead some. I didn't have that kind of voice to lead. Speaker 1: Was that meaningful for you to connect-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --with the past? Speaker 2: Yes, it was and I think at the time I didn't think about, so much about the past but I remember enjoying that very much. Story_ID: 411945 Speaker 1: Now, the land your parents [June Singleton Martin and John Martin] owned, how did they acquire that land? Speaker 2: My parents, the, the house we grew up in was owned by my aunt, oh, and that's a, oh, gracious, long, long story. Her mother was a child of slaves. Speaker 1: Now who, provide the names. Speaker 2: All right, my aunt's, my aunt was Jessie Wright [Jessie Dinkins Wright], she reared my father, she was really my great aunt, she was my mother's [sic.] sister, really her half-sister, my grandmother's [Rebecca Gettys Martin] half-sister, and she was the daughter of a woman, Mina Dinkins [ph.], and a white man, William Aldridge [ph.], who, of course, at that time could not marry but, and, and he, but he had taken her mother as a concubine and he built this house, built this house for her and this is the house, it's still standing. I have a cousin who lives in that house now and he supported them. Now I never knew her. I never knew Mina, who would have been my great-grandmother. I never knew her but the house, the land, the house, was originally built by him for the family and that was where my great aunt, my Aunt Jessie, lived and took my parents in to live and that's where I grew up. Speaker 1: Was that situation, with the concubine situation, was that a common thing or was that kind of swept under the rug? Speaker 2: I'm sure it was a common thing. I didn't really know anything about it until I was grown and, and I think it wasn't kept, it was, it was quiet but I'm sure older people in the town knew it but it, I didn't know anything about it until I was really grown and I wish I knew more about it and I've tried, my little genealogist search to find out about it but I haven't, I haven't, and I haven't pursued it enough. I probably should do more. And then, my, as I, my aunt as I said, made a good living sewing and she acquired other property around town. Speaker 1: Did she rent out property? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: She lived in property? Speaker 2: No, she, it was land, she didn't have houses on. It was, one property was right next to our church [Trinity Methodist Church, Camden, South Carolina], which was up on one of the main streets in Camden [South Carolina] and eventually she sold it to the chamber of commerce and they built a little building there. Story_ID: 411946 Speaker 1: Now was it, you mentioned the wealthy northerners who would come down-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and I know equestrian sports were big in Camden [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Right, steeplechase races and they had polo every Sunday afternoon, when I, every, during the season, and one of my friends Cresenia Brevard [ph.], her father [Christopher Brevard], who was a dentist, liked to go to the polo races and he would take us, you know, four or five of, three or four of her friends, and we would go to the polo because we didn't, we just romped around. We weren't interested in the polo but I can remember that and I don't remember that there was any, any problem with us going, I don't. Speaker 1: No protest because you were girls of color? Speaker 2: I don't remember any and they didn't have any seats, you know, people were always standing if they, I don't remember that they had any kind of seating arrangement at all. And so he would go and park his car and as I said, we'd play, we'd watch a little bit and we played around. Story_ID: 411947 Speaker 1: How did you decide to go to Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: My father [John Martin] (laughter) decided. As I said, he finished Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and when he was at Smith, it was all male. It was, by the time I came along though, it was co-ed but he used to say, he wasn't, he didn't want me to go to Smith because he knew about those Smith men (laughter) and that was what he said all the time but he liked Bennett. I don't, I'm trying to think, I think we had visited once before we went and, of course, it was, at that time, quite the place to go. The Bennett girls were, you know, supposed to be well-trained. We had had some Bennett graduates who would come to teach at Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] and Bennett was Methodist-related, not really supportive, but Methodist-related and we had some Bennett students, Bennett graduates to come and teach at Mather. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember who the president was at Bennett College while you were there? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. David Jones [David Dallas Jones] was president when I was there. Speaker 1: And how was he? Was he respected? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very much so, and very much, at that time, was made about being a Bennett lady. When we went to town, we were supposed to wear little hats because they wanted us to stand out among the other people. And we were supposed to conduct ourselves in a certain way and so forth. And so-- Speaker 1: Did you have to wear gloves or, I knew at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] they wore gloves. Speaker 2: We might have, we might have had to wear gloves too but not so much the gloves as I don't remember, it's the hats, but, did you go to Spelman? Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). So it's the same mentality. Speaker 1: What do you remember? So your first year at Bennett you went from South Carolina to North Carolina. Were there any, any shifts? I mean, you were at an all-girls, you know, black women, college? Speaker 2: It wasn't much, much difference really. Here again, we were very sheltered and we weren't, you know, we had a lot of rules and regulations about what we were supposed to do, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were the rules? Speaker 2: Oh, well conduct, you know, general rules, always-- Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: --supposed to be ladies. And I can remember, we could only wear pants on Saturday. We could, if we were, you know, working or doing stuff around the campus, we could, but we couldn't, we always had to wear skirts during the week and well, of course, we had to be in, you know, it's not like the dormitories these days where you had a key, you go and come as you please. You had to be in at a certain time. Speaker 1: Curfew? Speaker 2: (Nods head) But anyway, I loved it, you know, I, I enjoyed it. Story_ID: 411948 Speaker 1: Did you belong to any clubs at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Not really. I belonged to the choir and I loved that because we got to tour sometimes. Speaker 1: Where did you go? Speaker 2: Oh, I can remember going, West Virginia, Ohio, up that way, and then a lot of little towns in North and South Carolina. Speaker 1: Do you remember how you were treated at those various locations? Speaker 2: Well, they were most--we were treated fine. Most of the times it was a black church, not always but most of the time and usually when we went we stayed with families and that was, that was okay, you know. I can remember some interesting experiences that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like what? Speaker 2: --well, I remember Charleston, West Virginia. There was, we sang at a church and my friend and I went with this lady to go home and she was taking us upstairs to go and she had, of course, fixed this room and her husband had gotten drunk and was in the bed, in the room where we were, and I felt so sorry for the poor lady because she was so embarrassed but she, you know, quickly shifted us to another place but, you know, that wasn't very nice. I remember another place in Greenville, South Carolina. A lady had a very nice big old house but she was older woman and I don't think she hardly ever went upstairs and it's a great, you know, big overstuffed furniture and I don't know if, maybe it had been dusted sometime but I remember my friend, Agnes [ph.], who was also originally from Camden [South Carolina], she was a year ahead of me but she was, you know, at Bennett too. She said, "Are you going to get in that bed?" And, (laughter) you know, it was a great big stuff--and I said, "Well I'm, I cannot sit up all night. And so I'm going to have to get in bed." But nothing bothered us, nothing bit us or anything but we had some fun experiences like that. I enjoyed that a lot. Story_ID: 411949 Speaker 1: Now they called Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina], the Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] of the South. Speaker 2: How about that. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Why, why is that? What was the academic situation experience like? Speaker 2: It was good then. It was, it was very good. I, I don't know who gave it that name but I guess it was just PR [public relations]. Speaker 1: What was your major? Speaker 2: Music, music education. Speaker 1: And tell me about some of your classes. Speaker 2: Well, there were music theory classes, music appreciation classes, most of them, and then I had as a freshman, had the basic writing, you know, freshman composition and that kind of thing. And then there were music and I studied piano and my senior year, I gave a recital with another friend who was a vocalist. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Doretha Henderson Black, she died years ago but we were, she was originally from Charlotte [North Carolina] but I did not know her until we got to Bennett but we were close friends and, and then she wasn't a music major but she took voice. She had a lovely voice and we gave a recital, May of our, maybe April of our senior year, and we stayed friends over the years. She went on to live in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]. She got her doctorate at the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and was the principal of the school and died suddenly, years ago. Story_ID: 411950 Speaker 1: What was the racial climate like in Greensboro [North Carolina] at the time? Speaker 2: It was very much separate. As I said, there was an interracial organization with students, not a great, many from Greensboro College [Greensboro, North Carolina] and Guilford College [Greensboro, North Carolina] and I belonged to that. I can't remember that we did very much except maybe just, you know, have sort of like social gatherings, all women. I don't remember that there were any men in it and I don't remember there was anybody from A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. I cannot remember. I couldn't be in but I don't remember that. Speaker 1: At Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina], was it, were there political discussions about injustices, racial injustices or segregation or did you talk about the history of slavery in your classes? Speaker 2: I don't recall any of that. As I said, most of my class, after my freshman year, you know, I just had basic composition, that kind of thing, and most of mine were music. Speaker 1: Well what about at convocation or the message from the administration? Did they give you a mission to go out into the world and-- Speaker 2: Well that kind of thing, go out in the world and serve and, you know, do worthwhile things, but I don't remember a whole lot of discussion about race relations. I really don't. Speaker 1: And what was your own mindset when it came to race? Speaker 2: You know, I think my mindset has been somewhat different from many people who grew up in the segregation days because of my experience at Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] because we had these white teachers. I had first, from first grade on, most of my teachers were white. And so-- Speaker 1: And that was pleasant? Speaker 2: Very pleasant. And when I think about it, I just had very, had one or two black teachers and I think that reason I was always more open, still am, and didn't have this distrust that some people had and I had never, you know, had any, in the larger society, it was, of course, plenty racism but in my world, my small world personally, I had not had a lot of problems. And at Bennett there were white teachers too. Of course, my piano teacher, Frederick Kirchberger, I loved him dearly (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what was his name? Speaker 2: Frederick Kirchberger, I'm sure he's dead now but he was white and he was originally from Germany. He was a German Jew, and there was a choir director, Carrie Kellogg [Carrie Kellogg Ray], who was black and I had most of my classes under them 'cause it, it was small classes and all. Story_ID: 411951 Speaker 1: How many students were at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] at the time? Speaker 2: About 600, 650, it's never been, you know, large and they are struggling now, of course, Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], has been there the past year, and she's leaving and I just hope we can survive. It's going to be rough. Speaker 1: What about sororities? Were there sororities at Bennett (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there weren't any sororities at Bennett when I was there and when I came to Charlotte [North Carolina], I was invited to join sororities but at that time, it wasn't important by then. Speaker 1: What about clubs? Speaker 2: There were some clubs but, but not, there was like the social science club or the science club, that's the kind of thing and so, I don't remember that clubs were a big thing, really. Speaker 1: What was big at Bennett? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't remem-- Speaker 1: Well, who did you date? Was there, was it-- Speaker 2: The fellows from A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and then fellows from Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], used to come up. Speaker 1: Do you remember any dates? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't want to--no significant ones. I ended up marrying a man [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] from Smith but I didn't know him when I was at Bennett. Story_ID: 411952 Speaker 1: What were your dreams before you graduated Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Well, I, when I left Bennett, I went to graduate school and I expected to come back and teach, come back to the South and teach. I never expected, I loved being in Boston [Massachusetts], that was a whole new world but I never expected to stay up there. Speaker 1: Who told you, while you were at Bennett, that you should go to graduate school? Speaker 2: I can't remember but I can, I was encouraged to apply for this scholarship from the Methodist church, which I did get, and, but I can tell you this, my father [John Martin] used to always say, finish college and he, he encouraged us to get our degrees and he would always say, "And please take a year off and have fun and don't just go get married right away." And I think that was because he got married when he's still in college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and he kind of felt like he never caught up but he used to always say that to us. Speaker 1: And you were at Bennett from what year to what year? Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947], graduated high school [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] in '47 [1947] and graduated Bennett in '51 [1951]. Speaker 1: And did you graduate at the top of your class? Speaker 2: Second. I had two close friends, the one that I mentioned, Doretha [Doretha Henderson Black], who I gave a recital with, she and this other good friend, Alberta Copeland, were tied for valedic- and we were like tenths of a point apart (laughter). Speaker 1: So did you study a lot? Speaker 2: Well I practiced a lot because, and I still did enough, you know, but as I said, we were music classes but then I played the piano and that took a lot of practice. I did take organ when I was there too and that was, you know, nice and-- Speaker 1: So how did you get to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I think I picked it because it was, it was Methodist-related and then I got the scholarship from the Methodist church and I'm not sure otherwise why I got, how I got there, but it was a good experience too. Speaker 1: So what year did you enter Boston University? Speaker 2: The fall of '51 [1951]. Speaker 1: So you went right out of undergrad? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was that experience, traveling from the South to the North? Speaker 2: It was really quite an experience. I had a wonderful time there because this is my first introduction to museums, the symphony. I had a very good friend with whom I'm going to go to Alaska on Saturday, Sybil Morial [Sybil Haydel Morial], whose husband [Ernest Morial] was mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] and whose son [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] was mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] and she was Sybil Haydel then and I met her when I first got to Boston. We stayed in the same dormitory [Charlesgate Hall]. She was a senior and, of course, I was in graduate school but we just hit it off right away and we used to go to, we'd stand in line at the symphony on Saturday afternoons, you could get a ticket for fifty cents and we would go to the museums together. In fact, she graduated that, that, my first year. I was there like a year and a half and her parents [Eudora Arnaud Haydel and C.C. Haydel] came up for her graduation and they, they took us around but, and we stayed friends over the years. She was in my wedding and so we decided, we'd travel together. We don't get to see each other very often and so we decided we would take a trip together so we're going to Alaska on this coming Saturday, going for a week's cruise. Story_ID: 411953 Speaker 1: What museums did you visit in Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: The one that stands out, the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] museums, I remember, they, those are the ones that stand out. I remember we visited the Gardner [Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston, Massachusetts], I think, named after a woman, but the Harvard museums the ones that stand out and we used to go a couple of times. We went to Harvard chapel to services. Howard Thurman was the chaplain there but well, I'll tell you my most interesting experience, that was when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was there and knew him well, dated him a few times (laughter). Speaker 1: Tell me about that. How did you meet Martin Luther King? Speaker 2: There was another friend, a woman, who was from Durham [North Carolina] at the time, Caroline Green [ph.], who lived in the dormitory [Charlesgate Hall]. She was in grad school and she met him. I can't remember how she met him but anyway, somewhere he saw me and he told her he wanted to meet me and so she introduced us, and he was a very interesting young man. I've got some pictures of us at, at that time. Speaker 1: What was the conversation like? Where was his head at that time? Speaker 2: He was always very interested, interesting. He was invited to speak at different churches around town, at a couple of times, like the youth groups and so forth. I've never heard him preach really but he, a couple of times I went with him to the y- youth groups and he was concerned. Even in Boston at that time, there was a lot of segregation and I can remember him talking but, and there were a group of us who used to get together sometimes and I can remember him talking about that then. Speaker 1: How many black students were in the graduate program? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember. See, Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] was a big school so I don't remember and I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about in your specific program? Speaker 2: I can't-- Speaker 1: Were there many or were there just a few? Speaker 2: There were, there were quite a few. I was in the School of Music [Boston University School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] and it was not located on the main campus and I could take the subway, it was like eight or ten blocks away and I, but I had one class on the main campus and, of course, he had a car. You know, not many black students had a car at that time. Speaker 1: Martin Luther King had a car (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and so when he found out that I was taking the subway, I would, I could see him like at the cafeteria when I took this class, the main, and so he would take me over to the class over at the music school. Speaker 1: He was a gentleman? Speaker 2: Oh yes, very much so. Story_ID: 411954 Speaker 1: So you knew Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was he a visionary while he was in school [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]? What do you remember? What did he talk about? Speaker 2: He was a visionary to an extent but, of course, none of us in the small group of friends that would talk, none of us had any idea about what his vision would develop into. He would talk about some, some of the conditions in Boston [Massachusetts] were not as open, was, were more segregated than one might expect at that time and I remember some conversations about that but-- Speaker 1: What did he say he wanted to be? Speaker 2: At that time, he used to say, being a college president which was a great achievement for a man and especially a black man at that time. Speaker 1: Any particular college? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and he had this way of saying, "Bennie Mays [Benjamin Mays] can't last always" and you know Bennie Mays, of course, at that time, was the president of Morehouse and a very wonderful president. Speaker 1: So did you believe that Martin Luther King, Jr. might be a president one day of Morehouse College? Speaker 2: I think, I think, I think we felt like he was going to do something special and maybe that would come about. He said he didn't want to be an ordinary preacher. He used to say that and we kind of felt like that might be true. Speaker 1: Was he a good speaker? Speaker 2: I only heard him speak at youth groups but he was al- he always had this, this presence and manner and I never heard him give a sermon but-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: He was all, always kind of formal in his, just everyday speech. Speaker 1: Formal, and he, did he always wear a suit? Speaker 2: Always wore a suit and always wore a bowtie, when I saw him, even at relaxed moments or casual get-togethers where now everybody would have on blue jeans, he always had on a suit. Well, all the other fellows did too. They always wore suits, the ones that I knew were in graduate school and they wore suits and ties to class. Speaker 1: How old was he at this time? Speaker 2: Well, he had, he had gotten his master's [degree] so he was in his twenties, I guess. Yeah, he must have been in his-- Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) twenty-five maybe. Story_ID: 411955 Speaker 1: Tell me about your sh- your social outings. Where did he take you? Speaker 2: Well, the movies and, as I said, I went with him a few times to churches where he spoke to youth groups. Not a, not a whole lot of time. I never, but in a few (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did-- Speaker 2: --few, where, where we had several get-togethers, you know, this kind of thing. Speaker 1: Why didn't you date him seriously? Say what you feel comfortable saying. Speaker 2: I wasn't really interested, and this is probably trivial, but I wasn't too interested in marrying a preacher or being, you know, getting close to a preacher. I mean, there was no, no, no conver- nothing approaching marriage. We, you know, it wasn't like that at all but I wasn't particularly interested. Speaker 1: Did you get the sense that he was pretty interested in you? Speaker 2: Well, I think it was a challenge, (laughter) you know, a challenge, but he was good company, he was good company. Speaker 1: Was he funny? Speaker 2: He could be, yeah, he could be funny. And, as I said, several times there were several of us who would get together at his apartment and it was always fun but it was, you know-- Speaker 1: Where was his apartment and what did you do at these gatherings? Speaker 2: Talk. Just laugh and talk, very, very informal and very unstructured. He had an apartment down Massachusetts Avenue and I can't remember, I really can't remember. It was over a, it was over a restaurant called a Western Lunch Box, I remember that much and it was not fancy at all and he shared it with another fellow, who I think, I think his name was Philip Lenud. Speaker 1: What was it, Philip-- Speaker 2: Philip Lenud, I think, Lenud, L-E-N-U-D, I think, and I've lost touch with him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so some of the conversations, were you often talking about politics or religion? Speaker 2: Not much religion, maybe a little politics. I hate to admit (laughter) that I don't remember a whole lot of it. Speaker 1: And then when did, did he leave first? Speaker 2: No, I left. I left in January of '53 [1953] and he was there at least a couple more years and then, of course, he, he got married. I remember I got a wedding, an invitation to the wedding. Speaker 1: Did you go? Speaker 2: No, I wished him luck (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you know him throughout your tenure at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]? Were you friends? Speaker 2: Met him, I guess, not too long after, after I got there. He was seeing another young lady who lived in the same dormitory [Charlesgate Hall] with me. You wouldn't know her and she was the roommate of my very good friend, Sybil Morial [Sybil Haydel Morial], and she was most unhappy when he found out, she found out that he had taken me somewhere and I wasn't interested enough to make her unhappy. So I decided, well, you know-- Speaker 1: Just to drop out. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Was he a ladies man, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Well I guess, but I mean, I don't know of any others in Boston [Massachusetts]. There could have been but I didn't know of any others. Speaker 1: Anything else we should know about him as a young man? Speaker 2: That's, that was, that's about all really. Speaker 1: Was he successful as a student? Was he achieving? Speaker 2: Oh, I feel sure he was. I feel sure he was. I don't really know much about that but I feel, but Coret [Coretta Scott King]- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But based upon the times you went out, did he study quite a bit? Speaker 2: I would imagine so because we didn't go out that much. I mean, it wasn't, you know, regular basis or anything. Story_ID: 411956 Speaker 1: I'm going to find out more about your experience at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] as a student. Was it strange being up north? Did the culture feel different? Speaker 2: It did, but I adjusted, you know, pretty well. It did, and in the School of Music [Boston University School of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], when I think about it, you asked me, there weren't many black students and I guess I didn't relate to, you know, I'm kind of reserved at first and I didn't relate to them. The ones that I got to be close to were the, the girls who were in the dormitory with me and-- Speaker 1: What dormitory was that? Speaker 2: It was called, Charlesgate [Charlesgate Hall] and it had been a old hotel, it was converted into a dormitory, and it was, it was, it was fine. Speaker 1: What about the clubs on campus at Boston University. Speaker 2: I'm sure there were a lot but, here again, undergrads, I didn't, I didn't join any clubs there. Speaker 1: Was there any kind of political conversation on campus at all? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) There might have been but I didn't participate in, I don't remember. I hate to say I don't remember a whole lot of things. Speaker 1: Now did white students and black students live in the same dorm? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And were you friends? Speaker 2: Yes. I, we lived, the floor we lived on was graduate, they were all graduate students and there were several, well there were black and white students and we got, I got to be friendly with several of them. Speaker 1: Was it a shift for you to go from historically a black women's college of Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina], to Boston University? Speaker 2: The shift was that the school was so big and, and the city was so different and all, that was the shift. As far as adjusting with the people, I didn't have that much problem. Here again, I guess, because at Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina], we had had so many white teachers and at Bennett, too, and even though I hadn't known many students, but I don't remember it being a problem. The only thing I remember was when I'd say something in class, I guess because of my, of my southern drawl, everybody would turn and look to see who was talking and so that made me a little intimidated, not intimi- inhibited to say something in class but beyond that, I remember getting questions of people interested why, how did I get that far. I mean, how did I happen to come to Boston [Massachusetts], that kind of thing and, but, but-- Speaker 1: Favorite experiences at Boston University? Speaker 2: Going to the symphony and the museums and so forth, that's that part. Speaker 1: Any big lectures on campus that you recall? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did you excel as a student? Speaker 2: Did well enough, (laughter) did, did well enough. Story_ID: 411957 Speaker 1: And when did you leave Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and where did you go? Speaker 2: January, '53 [1953], and what happened, I had relatives here, I had an aunt and uncle here and they knew of an opening in the school system here and, you know, sent me information about it and I had information about two or three other jobs but they sent me and, of course, my parents [June Singleton Martin and John Martin], you know, encouraged me to come here, sent me the application and I filled it out and I really had the job when I left and even, and I started in March. There was a lady who was teaching who was going out on maternity leave and so I was home in Camden [South Carolina] about a month and came here and had an interview but-- Speaker 1: So here is in Charlotte [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Charlotte, started in March of '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: As a teacher? Speaker 2: In elementary school, music--elementary music teacher. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Myers Street School [Charlotte, North Carolina], I had two schools, and Biddleville School [Charlotte, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Biddleville? Speaker 2: Biddleville, right, which is no longer in existence. Speaker 1: And what was the other school? Speaker 2: Myers Street. Speaker 1: M-A-Y-A? Speaker 2: M-Y-E-R-S. Speaker 1: Oh, Myers Street School. Speaker 2: And Myers Street School is no longer in existence. It's, what they call met- well it's torn down, it's a new school and all. Speaker 1: So you taught music. Tell me about your music classes. Who did you teach? What, how old were the students? Speaker 2: I taught elementary music, first, one through six. They called us, general music teachers. Went to each class once a week for a half an hour. Didn't have a separate class. And so, I had two schools and taught some of everything, music, rhythms, rhythm instruments, music appreciation. Speaker 1: So tell me about that. Rhythm instruments. What did you do? Speaker 2: You know, sticks, drums, cymbals, maracas, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: And did the kids-- Speaker 2: Most, most (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) enjoy it? Speaker 2: Yeah, most of the time, yeah. Speaker 1: Now these two schools, these were colored schools, black schools? Speaker 2: All, all black schools at the time. The first days of integration, well I taught those two schools, the first time, in '69 [1969], I think, and I was sent to, I was, well I, I wasn't, I didn't stay at those two schools the whole time, I was moved around to other schools and, oh, I can't even remember the names, but the first year of integration, I was sent, they moved, what they call special teachers, music, physical education, art, they sent us out into the--integrate, they integrate--they used us for integration first and I was sent to two all-white schools in '69 [1969] and I was the only black teacher in the schools, in those two schools, in for like a year-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at least a year. Story_ID: 411958 Speaker 1: So I'm going to take you back, again, to the '50s [1950s] when you were starting out in these black schools [in Charlotte, North Carolina]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you said you taught them rhythm and--tell me more about your classes. Speaker 2: Okay, usually we'd start with singing and then, depends upon the age group, we'd do some, you know, rhythms. It might be using instru- rhythm instruments to accompany a song or it might be using instruments to accompany a recording. There'd be games that would go along with it. Then we taught musical theory too. The scales, the keys, basic things like that. Music appreciation, they used to have, and still do, concerts by the symphony and we would introduce the kids to the music beforehand so they would be familiar with it before they'd go to the concert, various and sundry things and then sometimes we'd have a chorus and we would perform at PTAs [Parent Teacher Association]. Speaker 1: So what kind of music were these students learning? Speaker 2: Well, there's a prescribed state curriculum with music books. Speaker 1: And what was a part of that curriculum? Speaker 2: All, all kinds of, all kinds of things. Speaker 1: I mean, was this classical music? Was this popular music? Speaker 2: Classical but, but a lot of popular music has been included over the years. Speaker 1: But back in the 1950s-- Speaker 2: Yeah, even then, and when I think about it, the books, the music books in the '50s [1950s] weren't nearly as interesting as the ones that came along later on. Speaker 1: What were some of the songs? Were these traditional songs, kind of like, 'This Land Is Your Land,' that type of thing? Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. You know, patriotic songs some, but even in the, in the early, in the '50s [1950s], some of them were even deadlier (laughter). Not, I shouldn't say that, I remember one like (singing) "Thirty days--." What is it, September, still just, you know, songs, like was teaching the days of the week and the months of the year, (singing) "Thirty days, hath September, April, June, and November, all the rest have thirty-one, except February in kind." And something else, twenty-nine and then we'd teach like holidays, you know. I meet kids now who tell me that I remember we did 'The Ghost of Tom' and, you know, it's Halloween (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's that? Speaker 2: --Halloween, (singing) "Have you seen the ghost of Tom? Long white bones with the flesh all gone." And, you know kids like, and I, Christmas music always had a program. Sea- we did a lot of seasonal things and depending upon the grade level. Speaker 1: Did you guys do 'The Grand Old Duke of York'? Do you remember that one? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think I do remember that one. Speaker 1: And you did Christmas concerts? Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't call it concert, but anyway Christ- I loved doing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Presentation. Speaker 2: --we had, we did, loved--right. Loved doing Christmas programs, loved doing. Speaker 1: What were those like? Speaker 2: Always had a chorus and we, we, oh, later in, you know, Christmas carols, later we would do Christmas carols but pantomimes and then even musicals. Nowadays, you can buy programs, a musical play that's recorded, accompaniment that's recorded and the kids sing and dance and whatever and act out the story and the music, the background accompaniment is recorded so you, it's easier to do. Speaker 1: Was there any traditionally black music incorporated into the curriculum at all? Speaker 2: Yes, spirituals that had been in the songs, I mean in the books, even from the-- Speaker 1: What kind of spirituals? Do you remember any specific? Speaker 2: Oh, 'Swing Low, Sweet Chariot,' just, you know, depending upon the age group but there were always some, there were always some and they got, as I said, the books, the curriculum more interesting as time went on. Story_ID: 411959 Speaker 1: Now were these students, were they aware that they were in a segregated school? Speaker 2: I would think so, at first, yeah. Speaker 1: Did, was there any sense that this was not right or-- Speaker 2: I don't know whether the child- you see, I was in elementary school. I don't know whether they were so much aware that it wasn't right. I think as they got older, middle school, high school, because, you know, there were times when they got hand-me-down books and this kind of thing and you would have a book that said now, this wasn't so much with, with the elementary but I'm sure high school, you know, history book, an English book, that formerly belonged to Myers Park High School [Charlotte, North Carolina] which was, and is, the posh neighborhood here, that kind of thing, and I'm sure they, they were aware of that. Speaker 1: Did you spend any time building their sense of pride and their culture and their heritage, self-esteem? Speaker 2: We used to do, you know, black music spirituals but I can remember the same song, 'The Ghost of Tom,' it says, "Long white bones with the skin all gone," and the kids would say, "Ooh, but," and I would say, "Well you know, if we took away all of our skin, all of us would look the same. We're all just a bunch of skeletons," and they would kind of think about that and I would say that even after the schools were integrated, I would say that often. You know, we just, just think about it, we're all, if you, maybe you could say, well, Johnny's, that might be Johnny 'cause he's tall, that might be Suzy 'cause she's short but other than that you, you really wouldn't know. Speaker 1: So, what were some of the white schools, elementary schools in town? Speaker 2: Oh, I-- Speaker 1: Were students, were they, were they bused to these black schools versus white schools (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean, when, after integration? Speaker 1: Or even be--even before, did you just go to a community school, someplace near your home? Speaker 2: There were all--yeah, neighborhood schools, mainly, before integration. And then after, you know, Charlotte [North Carolina] at one time was one of the most integrated school systems because of our school suit [Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education, 1971] and first, most of what they did was bus black students into white schools but then they got so they bused the white schools, white students, into the black schools. The neighborhood where I live, the sch- they made the school fourth, where I, when they first opened my school neighborhood was one through sixth. Then when they developed the integration plan first, they made it a four, five, well first year was five, six and they bused white students in but then, then it was four, five, six and they blus- bused white students in. Story_ID: 411960 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the fifth, so even before we get to, 'cause I'm going to bring you to integration, so were there any other big moments in the '50s [1950s] before integration happened in the '60s [1960s]? Were there other, were any other sort of pivotal moments that you recall during your time teaching? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not really. Speaker 1: How about race relations in Charlotte [North Carolina] at that time, '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: I'm sure, you know, there were, there were tense moments. The last, I stayed pretty much on my side of town. Speaker 1: Well, what was your side of town? Describe your neighborhood. Speaker 2: My neighborhood is a nice middle class neighborhood and now you go into Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], it's not far from Johnson C. Smith and my neighborhood is called McCrorey Heights [Charlotte, North Carolina] and it was started by a man [Henry Lawrence McCrorey] who was president of McCrorey Heights, not, I mean president of Johnson C. Smith, not when I came to Charlotte but he had been president of Johnson C. Smith for forty years, can you imagine, and he bought all this property which was outside the city limits at that time and then gradually sold off lots in the property and a lot of people who bought lots in that neighborhood worked at Johnson C. Smith. There's still several people who, most of them have moved on, it's an old neighborhood. We have very few children there now. Speaker 1: Was it a mixed or racially mixed neighborhood? Speaker 2: No, no. Well it is now. My next door neighbor is, recently moved in-- Speaker 1: But back then-- Speaker 2: Back then it was not. Speaker 1: --in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], it was a black middle class neighborhood? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Were there many in Charlotte, black middle class neighborhoods? Speaker 2: Oh, well, several, yeah, quite a few. They have moved farther out. The inner-city neighborhoods were, you know, mostly black. Story_ID: 411961 Speaker 1: Do you remember who the leaders were in Charlotte [North Carolina] at that time, black or white? Speaker 2: Yeah, Kelly Alexander was a big NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] man and oh, ask Joe [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr.] and B.B. [HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine] to bring you in on this, I keep forgetting-- Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: The DeLaines, ask them to help you that I, we had a mayor the first days of integration whose name was Stan Brookshire and he did a whole lot to make a smooth transition, say, during the sit-in days, which would have been in early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Now, do you remember your old friend, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at that time, seeing him on the news? Speaker 2: Right, I remember seeing him on the news and saw him once, the year before he died, when he came to speak at Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]. Once he came through here, I was not at home but he called my house and my--I wasn't home, my husband was there but he said he recognized as soon as he answered the phone, he recognized his voice and he told him who he was and, of course, you know, they chatted a while and Jack [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] invited him to come, come by but he was between planes at the airport. Speaker 1: So your husband knew Martin Luther King also? Speaker 2: No, he didn't know him but I had told him and I don't think when I first told Jack that I had known him fairly well, I don't think he really believed me but then he believed me and occasionally somebody would go to Atlanta [Georgia] and see him and he would say, "How are the Brayboys?" and come back and tell Jack and Jack would say, uh-huh, your friend asked (laughter)-- Speaker 1: A little jealous, huh? Speaker 2: --your friend--and he wasn't really jealous but asked about but it was funny because he never met, Jack never met him but he would often, there were two or three people here who knew him and-- Speaker 1: What was the first time you actually realized that your friend, Martin Luther King, was leading up this movement? Speaker 2: Hear- hearing it on television. Speaker 1: Where did you see him on TV? Where was he? Speaker 2: He was in Montgomery [Alabama] then. And I wrote him a note congratulating him. I guess, maybe, it was at the end of the boycott and app- and he kept it and I got a call a few years ago from this man, Carson [HistoryMaker Clayborne Carson], who's written this biography and it was in his files and they wanted permission to use it and so I, I told him fine, you know, and there was nothing in the letter that said, nothing, you know, that-- Speaker 1: What was in the letter? What did you write? Speaker 2: It was just that we, we had been following his progress on television and congratulated him on his work and keep, good luck, keep up the work. And I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were-- Speaker 2: And I just said that if you ever come through Charlotte, stop to see us and you can always get in touch with us through Johnson C. Smith. So I guess that's why the research, how the researcher found, found me because I still have a relation- see my husband worked at Smith for years so I still have a relationship with people there. They know how to find me. Speaker 1: And any other contact with-- Speaker 2: He came to speak at Smith about a year before he was killed and it was for the Presbyterian board of missions or something. They had a big thing and he spoke in the gym and I spoke to him. I have a picture, I didn't think to bring that picture, but I have a picture of him and I didn't know they were taking the picture. The photographer was taking, the school photographer, and he was taking pictures of, for the school, and my husband brought them home and I was kind of teasing him, "You all look funny on this, that and the other." So then he hand--he gave, the photographer gave it to my husband and he said, so Jack gave it to me and said, "Well maybe you like this picture," and it was of me speaking to Martin Luther King. Speaker 1: What did he speak about that, that day? Speaker 2: It was about race relations and so forth then, that's as, (laughter) that's as much as I remember. Speaker 1: How was he received in Charlotte, Martin Luther King, Jr.? Speaker 2: Oh, he was received very well and see this was on the campus and it was in the gym and it was packed and they had all the policemen and all and it was a makeshift stage in the gym and they stood with their arms around, you know, holding hands so you couldn't get up on the stage to speak to him afterwards. And I said to, whoever the policeman was right there, I said, "I'd like to speak to him. I used to go to school with him." He didn't even answer me, he just looked away, you know, and nobody was to go up there. So I said, "Martin," and he turned around and said, "Come over here and talk to me," and so I did and, and once, I saw, he, he spoke at a high school convocation. The black high schools used to get together and have a big commencement convocation. There were five or six at the time and he spoke there and we went to speak to him and I was pregnant (laughter) at that time and I, there was a pol-- Story_ID: 411962 Speaker 1: You were telling me about Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and his travels through Charlotte [North Carolina] and you mentioned a convocation at an area high school. Tell me about that, what happened? Speaker 2: The black high schools, I think there were only two, maybe three, had a combined graduation convocation and he spoke and that would have been '63 [1963], maybe, and I did get to speak to him, not to really talk to him, but just speak afterwards. Speaker 1: What were some of the high schools involved? Speaker 2: I know it was West Charlotte [West Charlotte High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] and Second Ward [Second Ward High School, Charlotte, North Carolina], maybe J.H. Gunn [J.H. Gunn High School; J.H. Gunn Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina], I really can't remember the others (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was he speaking about specifically? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Not really but I'm sure it was, you know, uplifting, encouraging speech for the graduates, for the students, but I can't rem-- Speaker 1: Did he see you? Did you talk to him? Speaker 2: I spoke to him afterwards but just, you know, a lot of people were speaking to him and I spoke to him afterwards. Speaker 1: Tell me how you got his attention. Speaker 2: Well, he, you know, he recognized me and all and there was a man who was a police officer but he was plainclothesman then and he told me later, he was a person that I knew, and he told me later that Martin had noticed that I was preg- asked him if he knew me and my husband [Jack Brayboy, Jr.], who was with me, and he said, oh, yes, he knew us and he said, he noticed that I was pregnant and, of course, the police officer who I saw often, said he had not noticed (laughter) that I was pregnant. I wasn't real pregnant but I was pregnant enough. Anybody paying attention, you know, would really notice, but we didn't get to really talk to him, just to say, hello, and-- Speaker 1: You yelled at him on, on stage? Speaker 2: That wasn't the time I yelled at him on stage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Another--that time, he, he spoke at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and this was in the gym and they wouldn't let anybody get close to speak to him then and I yelled, "Martin," and he, "Oh, come over and, come over and speak to me," and so forth and we had a little conversation. "If you're ever in Atlanta [Georgia], come by," and so forth and so on. Story_ID: 411963 Speaker 1: How did the Civil Rights Movement manifest in Charlotte [North Carolina]? So you had Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you saw the Freedom Rides and the marches on TV, you saw Martin Luther King when he came to Charlotte, how did that movement-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, the sit-ins started in Greensboro [North Carolina] and just a week or two later, they came to Charlotte and they had--the students from Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and other students started to protest and started the sit-ins in Charlotte. So that part, I didn't really participate in but that was very close, you know, that part was very close to us and we did a boycott of the stores here, department stores, Belk's, which is a huge department store here. I can remember that was from February to May or June, when everything changed when, you know, the, the store policies and so forth changed because this was boycotting the foods, you know, the lunch counters. I didn't come downtown to shop at all and-- Speaker 1: So what was the situation before those lunch counters in those stores and what was the situation after? Speaker 2: Yeah, and, of course, and see I met, I guess, you know, we didn't try to, to sit at the lunch counters, I know I didn't, and that was just something we just didn't do and, of course, the restaurants and all were segregated then but then our mayor who was then Stan Brookshire, and they very much wanted to keep Charlotte a peaceful place. We didn't have any real riots, real violence, but the students from Johnson C. Smith led the protest and when you talk to Dr. Yancy [HistoryMaker Dorothy Cowser Yancy], she was a student then during that time, and so they got together with some of the black leaders and they peacefully integrated, like the mayor and, and some others, got together with some of the black leaders and went to the restaurants and so forth and had a peaceful integration. Speaker 1: Do you remember more of the names of the restaurants or stores? Speaker 2: Well I remember the department store was Belk's, and I don't remember specifically the restaurants. Speaker 1: Was there some tension then? Were the people speaking back to you as you protested? Speaker 2: Well I didn't, I wasn't involved in any of the-- Speaker 1: Well, to the students? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure there was, yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Was this covered on the news, local news (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, right. There's a lot about it in the news and the newspapers, right. Speaker 1: What was your feeling at the time about all this? Speaker 2: I guess just wondering what was going to happen. Speaker 1: Was there any fear or-- Speaker 2: I guess, I don't remember there was so much fear. I guess I just stayed away from it. I wasn't involved in any of the protests then. Speaker 1: Were most of the professional black people at the time kind of on the fringes, a little bit away from the movement or were they part (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of them probably were, not all of them. Story_ID: 411964 Speaker 1: So tell me about the schools, integration. Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I was, I was first sent to two white schools, all white schools, and I was the only black teacher for the first year and, of course, because they sent the special teachers, art and music, physical ed [physical education], and it was interesting. Some of the teachers went out of their way to be nice to me. Some just ignored me. One or two, I mean, ignored me, I mean, they couldn't ignore me but so much but I remember the principal was very nice to me and the secretary and some of them, you know, just acted matter of fact, which was fine. Most of the children didn't, you know, they didn't react at all. I remember once, one little girl asking me, was I Indian and I said, "No, I'm not Indian, I'm--," I don't know whether I said African American or black probably then and she said, "Well I just asked because the lady across the street from me is Indian and she looks kind of like you." Okay. Speaker 1: So no problem from the students? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, the ones who maybe had a problem, they didn't say it, they might have, I'm sure there were some whose parents had a problem, and all, but it wasn't overt and I remember, my same aunt, my [paternal] great aunt [Jessie Dinkins Wright] then was coming visiting and she was very concerned about me going, going into the white schools teaching but I, (laughter) I guess I was naive, I went on and did what I've been doing. Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of those white schools? Speaker 2: The first two schools where I worked, Park Road [Park Road Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina] and Sedgefield [Sedgefield Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina] and I stayed there awhile and then I was switched to some other schools and some white and some, well by that, it was, they were in--after that, they were all integrated, one way or the other (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, well did, how did that go over the actual integration of all these schools, the busing of white kids and black kids? Speaker 2: Oh, there was some big protest about, about it, the high schools mainly and there was some parents. You could always tell the children whose parents were negative but, you see, most of them couldn't afford to send their child--and, of course, there were some more private schools that popped up but some children, you know, most parents couldn't afford to send the children to private schools. So, I can remember Oaklawn [Oaklawn Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina], which is near my house where I worked for years, I remember having a chorus and we had, of course, the black and white kids and I have a lot of pictures of those and I can remember a parent sitting and crying and I remember the teachers, one of the children asked me about that later and I said, "Well you know sometimes you all just sounded so good that the people were moved to tears." And we were asked to sing at different little occasions around town. So, you know, and I made, I still have, run into kids now, black and white, who I taught years ago, who all grown like that young lady. Story_ID: 411965 Speaker 1: How is it--so in the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] observing from a teacher's perspective, were the kids mixing at the schools in terms of friendships or were they segregated (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In elementary school, in elementary school, mostly. I, and see I never worked in middle or high school but the kids did. My daughter [Joyce Brayboy] went through integration and in first grade, she was at school in our neighborhood. Second grade, she was sent to a white school across town. Third grade the plan was changed and she was sent to another white school across town in third and fourth grade. She, she, (laughter) I laugh, she really is a child of integration. Fifth grade, they opened what they call a, opened a magnet school. You could apply to go and it was an open process, more than a traditional school. So we applied. It wasn't far from our house. We applied to send her there. So she went there in fifth grade and in sixth grade. And then, well no, it was fifth grade, I guess. Sixth grade she went to Piedmont Open [Piedmont Open Middle School, Charlotte, North Carolina] which was the open middle school. Speaker 1: Did she have positive experiences? Speaker 2: Oh, right, but she's the kind of person from a child, wherever she is, she's happy and plus she's, she's very much take charge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very, very much and so she, she adjusted well. She still has, and then she went to West Charlotte [West Charlotte High School, Charlotte, North Carolina], which is a black school which is under, which is beleaguered now because now it's practically all black, every, a lot of stuff has changed and, but at that time, West Charlotte, some of the upper class white students were assigned to West Charlotte and it was very integrated and she still is friendly with students who were her classmates then. Story_ID: 411966 Speaker 1: You had mentioned your family. Tell me how you met your husband and when you got married? Speaker 2: I came here [Charlotte, North Carolina] in '53 [1953], Spring of '53 [1953] and I met him through mutual friends, a man who taught at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], who worked at Smith, was engaged to a woman who I had known, she had relatives in Camden [South Carolina] and somewhere Jack [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] saw me and said he wanted, he knew that my friend, her name, we called her Bootsie [ph.], she, he knew that she knew me and she told, he told her he wanted to meet me and so we did and met him that spring and-- Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953], spring of '53 [1953], maybe started seeing him that fall. Speaker 1: And your husband's name? Speaker 2: Jack Brayboy, Jack Simeon Brayboy. Speaker 1: And he was an educated man? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. He, he had his doctorate from Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he finished Johnson C. Smith, he came, he was nine years older. He came to Smith on a football scholarship and then he worked here, then he went in the [U.S.] Army, I think he went in the [U.S.] Air Force, all of which he hated and-- Speaker 1: He was drafted? Speaker 2: Yeah, and came back to work at Smith and got his degree, his master's [degree] and his doctorate at Penn, and-- Speaker 1: Were you with him when he got his Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Yes, we had married. He had his master's but we had married then. We married in the, in December of '54 [1954] and-- Speaker 1: And was it a tough transition going from, again, the South again, back to the North? Speaker 2: Oh, no, I didn't go. He went, he went summers and then he got his degree in, finally, I guess it was '60 [1960], yeah, 'cause it was the same year, '60 [1960], '61 [1961], my father [John Martin] died. He went summers and I would go in the summers with him. His mother, at that time, lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I would go just for the summers. Speaker 1: How did Philadelphia feel? The climate, social climate, race? Speaker 2: It was, it was segregated as much, at that point, as, (laughter) as Charlotte [North Carolina]. I didn't, I didn't do much, well, I took classes at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he, he worked, he went to school in the mornings and in the afternoons and evenings he worked as a lifeguard at a swimming pool and then, that was about it. He had, his sister lived there and she was very f- very nice to me but I didn't really get to, you know, go much (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 411967 Speaker 1: So tell me about your children. When were they born? Names. Speaker 2: My son, Jack III [Jack Brayboy III], he was born in '58 [1958], September, '58 [1958] and he went through the schools. Went to the same elementary school where I worked, Oaklawn [Oaklawn Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina], and then he was seventh grade when the integration and he went to one school, I guess, one year and then they changed the plan. He went to another school, then he went to Garinger High School [Charlotte, North Carolina] and he did very well. He's a nice, he's a good kid. He's full grown, he's an old man now (laughter). Speaker 1: Where did he go to college? Speaker 2: He went to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill [Chapel Hill, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: And what's his profession? Speaker 2: He majored in broadcast communications, not, what do they call it now? Not broadcast, anyway-- Speaker 1: Yeah, broadcast journalism (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Broadcast journalism, right, and he came here [Charlotte, North Carolina] and worked two years and worked at WSOC [WSOC-TV] for two years. Then he went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and worked at WPVI [WPVI-TV] for twenty-three years. Speaker 1: As-- Speaker 2: Sports producer, reporter. Speaker 1: And when was your daughter born? Speaker 2: In '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: And where did she go to college? Speaker 2: She went to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina]. She went through the public school, I said she went to more schools, Jack went one elementary school, went to Oaklawn, Joyce [Joyce Brayboy] went to three, four different ones. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Joyce, Joyce Martin Brayboy. Speaker 1: And she went to Duke? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what's her degree in? Speaker 2: Public policy. I thought she'd never get a job. I thought, oh God, what in the world is public policy? But anyway, she came here and she worked in various things for a couple of years. She worked as a clerk at the department store. She was a hostess in a restaurant. She did, you know, several things and then she worked for Mel Watt as his, in his campaign as his fundraiser and she did real well with that for about a year before he-- Speaker 1: Okay, for the Congressman? Speaker 2: --yes, before he was elected and then in '63 [1963], she went, not '63 [1963], '93 [1993], she went to Washington [D.C.] when he was elected and worked first as a legislative assistant and then as his chief of staff. Story_ID: 411968 Speaker 1: I'm going to take you back one more time, back to the South, back to civil rights, real quick, Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination. Do you remember when you heard about it? Speaker 2: Yes. I don't remember when I heard about it exactly but, I can remember, you know, he was in Memphis [Tennessee] and speaking the night before and I can remember we, we watched that on television and then, I'm sure we watched, you know, the news about the assassination, and I remember they had a memorial service here [Charlotte, North Carolina], a citywide one at the city auditorium and we went to that. Speaker 1: Was that a shock to you? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a real shock. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was a real shock. Story_ID: 411969 Speaker 1: So you spent a number of years, how many years total did you spend in the Charlotte [North Carolina] school system as a teacher? Speaker 2: Spent thirty-three, almost thirty-four. Could have spent more but at one point for five years I worked part-time after, when my children [Jack Brayboy III and Joyce Brayboy] were little, I worked part-time. Speaker 1: Do you remember the Black Arts Movement? You were an artist, a music teacher and a musician, do you remember the Black Arts Movement, the black aesthetic and appreciating black culture? Speaker 2: Yes, sort of (laughter). I wasn't really involved in, in that, yeah. Speaker 1: So tell me what year did you start with the Charlotte schools and what year did you finish? Speaker 2: I started in '53 [1953], spring of '53 [1953] and I took, I stopped in '93 [1993]. It was a momentous year for me. I retired in '93 [1993], both my children got married in '93 [1993], but in between I took, I worked part-time and I was trying to think, I know I went back in '71 [1971], I went back, so '56 [1956], from '71 [1971] I worked part-time and I remember '71 [1971] because that's the year my mother [June Singleton Martin] died and I just, she had been sick a year or two before then and so it kind of worked out well that I was working part-time. Story_ID: 411970 Speaker 1: And your husband passed away young? Speaker 2: Very, yeah. He died thirty years ago, '76 [1976]. And he was a really special man. Now he would be more interesting to write about (laughter) or to interview but anyway-- Speaker 1: What was his profession? Speaker 2: Well, when he, he, his degree was in, I think his doctorate was in teacher education 'cause that was so important to Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] then. He was working at Smith but he started out as a football coach. He was a star football player at Smith, made All-American four years, all CIAA [Colored Intercollegiate Athletic Association; Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] and I've got leaflets and newspaper reports and so forth. It was quite interesting. I go back, my father [John Martin] was a high school coach and he finished Johnson C. Smith so he was always sending students to Johnson C. Smith so he knew my husband, Jack [Jack Brayboy, Jr.], you know. As I said, he was older and he would come to all the football games and all at Smith and so he knew Jack. He was close to the coach at that time, way before I ever met him, I was a little girl then. And, and so anyway, my husband, I mean my father kept a scrapbook of, that was about athletes that he had sent to Smith but because Jack was a star athlete and all then, he has, I have all this stuff about Jack and, of course, this, you know, neither, he didn't know and of course I surely didn't know that I was going to marry him later on but I have this nice scrapbook about his achievements, but anyway, then he, he left coaching. He was academic dean and then he was vice president of academic affairs. He was a vice president for administrative affairs. Speaker 1: At Johnson C. Smith? Speaker 2: Right. He spent his whole tenure there. He was often offered jobs other places, but he never wanted to go anywhere else and I said-- Speaker 1: Yeah, was that a turning point for you, his passing? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, right, it was, he, he had cancer and he had been sick like a year and a half but he worked almost up to a couple of months before he died and, and my children, Joyce [Joyce Brayboy], was just short of her thirteenth birthday and Jack [Jack Brayboy III] had been in college [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] two weeks. So, that was, yeah. Story_ID: 411971 Speaker 1: So tell me, when you left the Charlotte [North Carolina] school system-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what did you do next? Speaker 2: Well, I've gotten more and more community involvement. I always, I've heard people say that you'll know when it's time to retire and I could have worked, you know, two or three more years and the schools where I was, I really enjoyed, and then they switched the plan and I was still at one school that, the one near my home which I loved but they changed the, the, they made it a math and science school and they sent the former faculty other places and they sent me to another school which I thought was, anyway, I did not enjoy and I hadn't been there but a week or two when I knew what, I, I had enough time. You can retire thirty years or twenty-five years and a certain age. Well I, I had thirty-three years and I knew, I, this is it and so I decided to retire and the first year, I was a little at loose ends, wasn't quite sure what I wanted to do. I did some tutoring which was okay and expor- explored some other things but then gradually, you know-- Story_ID: 411972 Speaker 1: I don't know, if you don't have my list of, I've been on-- Speaker 2: The foundation. Tell me about the Foundation for the Carolinas [Charlotte, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Wonderful organization. Speaker 2: When did you start with them and what was your role? Speaker 1: I was a board member and I started with them, I can't remember but, I was on the board for six years and then I was off two years, then I was on for six more years and I served on a lot of different com- it's a c- committees, it's a community foundation that has mixed grants to different non-profit organizations, institutions, colleges and so forth. It, it also is proactive in that they will identify a cause in the community and put money into it, organize it, et cetera and I was on the distribution committee, the committee that made the grants which was fun, rather than having tried to raise money. So, and I'm still on some scholarship committees. I'm on one scholarship committee, the Panthers [Carolina Panthers], which is our professional football team, has a scholarship committee that they give to students who are going into graduate work and I've been on that scholar--on that committee since it started six years ago. Speaker 2: So is that a big deal as an African American woman in Charlotte [North Carolina] to be on the board (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The foundation? Speaker 2: --the foundation like this? Speaker 1: And it's a big deal and see, when I first went on it, it was, it was smaller, now they have assets over $600 million. Just this year, they got assets of like $300 million. I mean, it's phenomenal. It's not just a big deal for me, they have like a head of the corporations, I mean big people, but they have to have people of color. I recognize that, you know, that's it's not my great wisdom and it sure is not my money. A lot of the people who are on the boards have big trust funds there and all, of course, which I don't but I think-- Speaker 2: Do you remember any specific events with the foundation that stand out? Speaker 1: I was, well, several years ago, we started, we got a big, big fund set up, bequest, woman left $45 million and it was really broad, just the educational, social policy--projects and so they developed a program called, Strengthening Families [Strengthening Families Initiative] which had lots of, lots of ramifications and that was really good. We could, we did like educational opportunities, health of services, all that, you know-- Speaker 2: So tell me about some of your interactions. Is there a story you recall? Speaker 1: Well we used to visit, when, say an organization would make an application and we would do what we call a, site visit to see if, what they would do with the money, et cetera. Then we got smart 'cause that got to be kind of difficult and we'd have the, the director or whoever, board member, come to us and explain. Speaker 2: Did you do any of these visits? Speaker 1: I did some of the site visits for (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who do you remember? Who do you remember meeting? Speaker 1: Oh, for example, Thompson orphanage [Thompson Children's Home, Charlotte, North Carolina], this kind of thing, you know. A lot of them were really--I got to know really a side of life in the community that I was not really familiar with, you know, all of these different agencies that need help and that do really good work and-- Speaker 2: Did you, did you meet any of the recipients? Speaker 1: Sometimes we would meet recipients, right, sometimes we would and there were just all kinds. For example, there was a kitchen project that was started that was mainly geared at developing culinary skills for people who had been unemployable later on and early on that, you know, they had had different bad habits, they had been incarcerated and so forth and we gave them the seed money to begin. Now it's really well-established. That was maybe ten years ago, well-established and the, the folks who've gone through the projects, working in restaurants and doing meaningful, as one woman said who told about her experiences, she said, this is the first time I've had a legal job and a lot of very gratifying experiences and I've met a whole lot of people in various, various areas across town, ordinary people, corporate heads, this kind of thing. Story_ID: 411973 Speaker 1: Now where did you get the motivation to do kind of social service, philanthropy, that type of thing, any role models that you can think of? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my parents [June Singleton Martin and John Martin] were very involved in the community when it was a much smaller scale but they were always doing things at church and I remember my father had a Little League baseball team and that kind of thing and so it's as if Camden [South Carolina] is a little town, six thousand people so it was much smaller scale but-- Speaker 1: Was your family kind of, were you leaders? Speaker 2: Sort of, yeah. Speaker 1: So tell me more about, give me one more example of your parents, the little league, what was that about? Speaker 2: Well that was after I had left home so I'm not sure but I remember my father busy raising money 'cause they didn't have any uniforms and he was trying to help out this Little League team. And so when he died, we asked that anybody who wanted to make a contribution to a memorial, give it to, give it to this team so they could, you know, that was his memorial to buy, buy uniforms for the boys. Story_ID: 411974 Speaker 1: We were talking about role models throughout your life when it comes to philanthropy and giving back to the community. You were telling me about your parents [June Singleton Martin and John Martin]. What else can you say about their contributions to the community, helping out? Speaker 2: Well, as I said, they were active at church and my father was always busy with things like the little league, so forth. In my, in my mother's later years, I remember she was on a Salvation Army board which surprised me but that kind of thing, in a small town [Camden, South Carolina], of course, it was on a smaller scale. Speaker 1: Who else did you look up to? Any other mentors or even people you did not know personally but whose lives you copied in some way? Speaker 2: You know, beyond my family, I, I don't know if that sounds selfish but I can't think of any, you know, I, other people who in the community that I admired but I can't really name anybody special. Speaker 1: Any leaders like Mary McLeod Bethune or anyone like that who-- Speaker 2: Well I was familiar with all these people, you know, and I've read about them and heard about them but I guess I didn't really especially identify with any of them. Story_ID: 411975 Speaker 1: Tell me about your home life. You mentioned a daughter, a son and your husband. What was life like? Where did you guys live and what was daily life like? Speaker 2: Daily life was very busy because, you know, they were in school and then I was working and Jack [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] was working. We did a lot of things. At Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], we went to the football games and they always had concerts and things and I would take the kids to and I was always one, as the kids say, dragging them to concerts or whatever. I've been a season subscriber to the symphony [Charlotte Symphony Orchestra] since '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] and at first I had a good friend who would go with me, then she moved away, so sometimes my husband would go, he did not want to go but he'd go to sleep most of the time but he would go. He was a good man and he would go. Sometimes I'd take one of the children. I can remember taking Joyce [Joyce Brayboy] when she was eight or nine. She always wanted to go, never could, she couldn't stay awake, though, but that's what I love. I go to the symphony, I go to the opera, I go to the dance theatre and I have some friends who go with me but when we were growing up, that was what--and then the children's activities. My daughter took piano and she took ballet and my son played sports and so it was picking them up and dropping them off and that kind of thing, and then we were active at church, too, so. It was busy. Like I said, ordinary life but it was pleasant. Speaker 1: What were holidays like in your house in Charlotte [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Loved holidays. That's the time I'd do any baking, cookies and so forth. I remember a nice thing I thought. When Jack [Jack Brayboy III] was a senior at college [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], he came home and he said, "Oh, I couldn't wait to get home, Mama. I could just smell the cookies baking." I just knew what it was going to be like 'cause we always decorated the house and the tree and so forth then. So, that's all, and I've got lots of pictures of those. He always enjoyed, we always enjoyed that. Speaker 1: At Christmastime, did you sing carols around the piano? Speaker 2: Sometimes but most of the time it's just the church but we, we have relatives here and we have an extended family and what we do is, at Christmas, we go to different houses each year. Last year it was my turn and I had like twenty-five people. The, the, somehow it's gotten a little smaller but then I have a cousin here, her father and my father [John Martin] were brothers. So sometimes we'd go to her house. Speaker 1: Now who, can you name names? Speaker 2: Her name is Carolyn Wilson, Carolyn Martin Wilson, and her father was Thomas Marian Martin, his nickname was Jack Martin, he was coach at the high school here for years and years and when I first came to Charlotte to work, I stayed with them, with, with Jack Martin, and his wife was Ethel, Aunt Ethel [Ethel Martin]. They were very nice to me. And after my husband died, they were very nice to me. I think Aunt Ethel came to see me every day to make sure I was okay. She, she was a lovely lady and she was my aunt by marriage. Story_ID: 411976 Speaker 1: You were a young woman when your husband [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] died? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Yeah. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Forty-six. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Never, never had a really, well one maybe serious relationship (laughter) since then. Almost married somebody but didn't and probably the best thing. Speaker 1: How did you keep the kids on track and keep everything on track? Speaker 2: Well, I guess, we kind of operated on the way my parents [June Singleton Martin and John Martin] did with me. You know, you all expected to do such and such a thing, don't tell me what anybody else is doing. I, you are blessed because you never had to worry about whether you were going to eat or sleep and I can remember very well, when Jack [Jack Brayboy III] was going to college [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], that summer they had orientation and I went to Chapel Hill [North Carolina] with him and his father wasn't well enough to go and I said to him then, I guess we knew, we didn't really say it, but we knew he wasn't going to make it and Jack, son Jack, we'd (laughter) always call him, he said, "Oh, Mama, he's going to make it. He's going to make it," but I said to him, "Now he, we don't know what's going to happen but if something does, you know, you are going to college and you are just expected to do your part. You're supposed to get your lessons and do what you're supposed to do, don't worry about whether or not you can stay in school." And as it turned out, he, he did and he would, you know, work in the summers and all but we managed to, but that was always, you know, we always even when I was a child, you're going to college, you're going to do what you're supposed to do. And so that's, they said I was a mean old mama and I guess I was but anyway. Speaker 1: But you got through it. Speaker 2: We got through it and my daughter's [Joyce Brayboy] the one that tried my patience and I guess girls are like that but she turned out very well too. (Laughter) I threatened to do away with her several times going shopping but, you know how that is, so. Story_ID: 411977 Speaker 1: So it seems that Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] was an important part of your lives? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the connections to the university, some of the friendships. Speaker 2: Well a lot of the people who worked there over the years were also our good friends. Speaker 1: Like who? Speaker 2: A lot of them have passed on. Just last week, a woman, Aurelia Law Liston [sic. Aurelia Liston Law], who had finished Smith but her husband had worked at Smith and he died some time ago, James Roland Law. He and my husband [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] were very close friends and he had died a while ago and she just died last week. Her, her service was at Smith. My husband's service, funeral service, was at Smith. My daughter [Joyce Brayboy Dalton] was christened there and her wedding was at Smith and, as I said, even when they were little, you know, we always went to a lot of activities on the campus and right now, I work part-time for Dorothy Yancy [HistoryMaker Dorothy Cowser Yancy]. We developed this friendship when, I've, I knew her vaguely when she was a student but not really well and then when she came back to work here, we became good friends. And so, she asked me to do things for her. She's a single woman and so, like organizing. If she has to have a reception or a dinner or a meeting or something, then I do that kind of stuff. She calls it the office of protocol but I don't say that very often but I do the fun things and that's, it's been a real pleasure. I talk to, they have a caterer on the campus and, you know, I talk to the caterer and order the flowers and, you know, help plan that kind of thing. Speaker 1: So you've watched that university change and grow over the years? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the changes you've seen over the years. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think, and this is not the most important thing, but I guess it's the woman's touch. The campus was always a very nice place but she has, you know, worked with the grounds people so it's perfectly beautiful. They do a wonderful job of maintaining it. That wasn't always the case. Speaker 1: So what was the campus like from what you know, like in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: As I said, it was always a, you know, it's a nice place and, of course, I guess it was, I knew a lot of people when Jack was working there. I knew a lot of the faculty people and I don't know as many of them now, even though I know some of them but it's grown, besides maintaining it and the buildings and, of course, she'll tell you all about her pet thing is the technology center that they've built and the programs that she's developed around there. It's grown so much since then. She's done a wonderful job and we'll miss her. Speaker 1: So currently you work there part-time? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Are you there-- Speaker 2: Whenever they call. When her secretary calls me and says, we, we have to have, we've got these people coming and we need to have a lunch set up in the president's dining room and will you talk to Debra [ph.], who's the caterer and I do that. I do that kind of s- s- thing. Story_ID: 411978 Speaker 1: And what else have you been working on since your retirement from the school system? Speaker 2: Oh, as I said, I've been on a myriad of boards. Right now I'm on the board here at the Levine Museum [Levine Museum of the New South, Charlotte, North Carolina]. I'm on the Charlotte Symphony [Charlotte Symphony Orchestra] board. I was on The Mint Museum [Charlotte, North Carolina] board and, as I said, I was on the Foundation for the Carolinas [Charlotte, North Carolina] board for years. I'm not on the board anymore but I serve on two scholarship committees there. And I've been active in my church. I go to Memorial Presbyterian Church [Charlotte, North Carolina] and I'm an elder, which is the governing body in the church. I'm not active now, I'm off the session. My time rotated off but I do stuff at church. Speaker 1: So how does Charlotte [North Carolina] feel? I mean, you're serving on all these boards, in terms of race relations on the boards and beyond? Speaker 2: Well you know sometimes I'm amazed, really. I think, you're a little old girl, little old colored girl from Camden, South Carolina and here you are sitting on a board with the, you know, like the man who's head of the Foundation for the Carolinas is on the Charlotte Symphony board. Speaker 1: Who's that? Speaker 2: Michael Marsicano, who's a wonderful man and I knew him from the Foundation for the Carolinas and I was on the Afro-American Cultural Center [Harvey B. Gantt Center for African American Arts and Culture, Charlotte, North Carolina] which is the black cultural center here. I was on that board and we needed some money and I couldn't--I went to Michael and talked to him. I was off the foundation board then but they have some discretionary funds and we were trying to pick a director and we needed some money for a search firm and I went to Michael and talked to him. I made, you know, I feel privileged to be able, African American or not, ordinary person, school teacher, I, because I've been on these boards, I've developed a relationship with a lot of these people and I went to Michael and told him we would like to get some money so he said, he would go to his board and see and we got the money. So, you know, I even, I'm on speaking terms with the man, Hugh McColl, who was head of Bank of America. He's retired now, because I used to be on the board at the North Carolina School of the Arts [University of North Carolina School of the Arts] in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] and his wife [Jane Spratt] was on the board and we used to ride up there together and here he is a multimillionaire and she's very down-to-earth person. She's from South Carolina too, didn't know her but anyway. Speaker 1: Has it been a positive transition or a difficult transition from-- Speaker 2: It's not, it's been very positive and I, I sometimes I think, I think that some African Americans who feel uncomfortable even, even though they have powerful positions, which I don't have, but I've gotten to the place now where, I forget who I am, not who I am really, and I know that it's not, as I said, because of my great talent for finance or whatever, maybe, hopefully I have good judgment. I know sometimes I'm put on these boards because they think, you know, they have to have a person of color and I'm a woman and I'm a person of color, too, and fairly good sense. I know, I understand that perfectly but I've also been able to develop some good relationships. Speaker 1: Okay, but it's been a positive transition? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 411979 Speaker 1: So, I'm just going to ask you to walk me through, though, your work with the school system beyond--we talked about desegregation-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what was life like in Charlotte [North Carolina]? I mean, Charlotte has drawn a lot of attention in recent years because of segregation, busing issues, so tell me what the experience was like in the '80s [1980s], for example, in Charlotte schools? Speaker 2: I thought it was great and that was when we were quite integrated and so many, you know, of course, there are some people who still, you know, don't approve or wouldn't approve, but there were so many good relationships developed and to me what's most important is for the children and this is still happening in a lot of places but then there's some schools that are almost totally black now, but the earlier, the sooner the children learn to live together, the better. That's, that's my whole philosophy. The very, the sooner we, we get together then the children grow up learning to get along because in the real world you're going to have to get along. Speaker 1: Where were you teaching in the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: I taught at Oaklawn [Oaklawn Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina], which is, as I said, three blocks from my house, for twenty-six years. So I taught there. Then I taught across town at two or three different schools. Speaker 1: So take me through the timeline through Charlotte schools? Speaker 2: When I first came, they were totally segregated, then they integrated, first the staff-- Speaker 1: Well, where were you and what year, which school, what year? Speaker 2: When I first, first came, '53 [1953], I was in two black schools, Myers Street [Myers Street School, Charlotte, North Carolina] and Biddleville [Biddleville School, Charlotte, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: And then when the, I was then at Biddleville and Lincoln Heights [Lincoln Heights Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina], which was a all-black school 'cause they closed Myers Street, then integration and I was sent to the two white schools, Sedgefield [Sedgefield Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina] and Park Road [Park Road Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina]. Well before then, I was sent to another school, Albemarle [Albemarle Road Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina], Alexander Street [Alexander Street Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina], but I can't, I can't really remember exactly the years but then integration it was Park Road and Sedgefield. Then, you know, it was integrated, I was back at, I went to Oaklawn, which was near me but it was the, the first year, it wasn't integrated but then it was integrated and I was sent to Billingsville [Billingsville Elementary School, Charlotte, North Carolina] which is over across town and it was, they were both integrated. They both had black principals. Then I was sent to another school, gosh, can't even think of the name of it, which I detested, but anyway, I was sent to several, it would, I was always in two schools and one year I was in three small schools which was terrible. Speaker 1: At some point, did the curriculum change to recognize the integration at all? Speaker 2: Not real- not really. Speaker 1: You were still teaching-- Speaker 2: Music, basic-- Speaker 1: Music? Speaker 2: --and it was the state mandated music curriculum. Speaker 1: And it consisted of patriotic songs, classical music? Speaker 2: Oh, all kinds of songs, folk songs, all kinds of songs, you know, not just-- Speaker 1: Did you believe in the curriculum? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. The curriculum was good and, and we would have state music conventions and I would go and they would have workshops and, you know, new methods and this kind of thing. Story_ID: 411980 Speaker 1: Tell me about the tensions in the '90s [1990s] in the school system in Charlotte [North Carolina], '90s [1990s] and early 2000, 2001, weren't there some-- Speaker 2: The tensions had been because they changed the school plan and they, which has resulted in some of the, some all-black schools, some re-segregation in some cases. You see, I retired in '93 [1993] so I haven't been a part of it really and I hate seeing the re-segregation. I think it's a step backward. Speaker 1: How did that happen? Speaker 2: Parents who lived other places, a lot of people we said, moved into Charlotte. Okay, so you live in a little suburban town and, you know, your child doesn't have to be bused and the school is all white or whatever. So they came and they brought suit against Charlotte-Mecklenburg [Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools] because some of the students were being bused to different places and it, it's just really interesting because the natives, so to speak, of people who've been through integration and know all the problems we went through and came through and survived and made a better school system, you know, we, we were content, so to speak, and these people were outsiders who came from other places and they brought suit and they got a judge, Judge Potter [Robert D. Potter, Sr.] who is now dead, who was sympathetic and he upset the whole plan and went back to, it's not totally neighborhood schools but it's close to it. What they have done, for example, the school that's in my neighborhood [McCrorey Heights, Charlotte, North Carolina], they made it, what they call a language emersion school. They renovated the school, they built practically a whole new school, in my neighborhood there're not ten, ten children 'cause we're all old and the children have grown or go, so now they emphasized Spanish and French and they started out K [kindergarten] through one, and then I guess this year they have third grade, all up to third grade. The school's half empty, or more than half empty. In the suburbs, there are a lot of people who moved, the schools are very crowded and they have all these trailers. And so there's this dialog now about whether they should renovate inner-city schools, which are almost all black, but a lot of them need work because they're getting older and whether building new schools and there's this constant-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --talk about it. Story_ID: 411981 Speaker 1: I know Charlotte [North Carolina] has undergone a great deal of change-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --over the years. What have you noticed in this change? What, is it good, is it a positive change? Speaker 2: A lot of it is. Speaker 1: What have you seen? What's different? Speaker 2: Well, there's so much building and there's so many people moving, more people moving here. As I said before, I, I, it wouldn't have to be getting any bigger for me but I know that's false. I just, they're just building condos and office buildings all over town and I just wonder, who's going to fill these spaces but I'm sure they've studied the demographics and, and the builders and developers know, in, in many ways, it's good but it, we are getting to have more of the problems of larger cities which I guess is inevitable but you can't stop progress. I think there's a big, Charlotte is a really can-do town and we find ways to do good things and, for example, we had a referendum a few years ago about building an arena uptown and it was voted down. Well anyway, they built it anyway. We, and that's the, we do things like that, city council and whoever got together and built, we do things like that, but it's a big arts support town and now we're building this big arts center, cultural center down on South Tryon [Street], the Afro-American Cultural Center [Harvey B. Gantt Center for African American Arts and Culture, Charlotte, North Carolina] is getting money. It's amazing, we, we have a lot of wealthy people here and when, when the (air quotes) powers that be decide that we're going to do something, they do it. Story_ID: 411982 Speaker 1: Back to your personal life. So that's what's going on in the public sphere, back to the private life. Do you have any grandchildren? Speaker 2: I have a grandson, he's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. My hus- my husband, my son [Jack Brayboy III] was married but he's divorced and I don't get to see him very often. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: His name is Virgil, Virgil Banks Brayboy and he's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was he born? Speaker 2: He's thirteen, yeah, he's thirteen, and the relationship is not the best, which is, I, I'm very sorry about that. My daughter [Joyce Brayboy] was married but she's divorced and she doesn't have any children. She, she wishes she did. So, anyway, maybe I'll have some more. I hope, I look forward to that and I often wonder how it happened that both my children were divorced because my husband [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] and I had a wonderful relationship and, anyway. Speaker 1: Well what do you think about this, the younger generation? Did they inherit the values that your parents passed down to you and that you passed down to them? Is it, are we a different generation? Speaker 2: Well you are a different generation but I think my, my kids, they, they surprise me sometimes that they have inherited our values. My daughter is very generous, outgoing person and very, I guess, assertive, aggressive, sometimes I think she was more than my husband, my son and me all mixed up together. He's more reserved but they're both, you know, good, good kids and I've been really blessed that way. I've never had any major problems with them, just the usual teenage foolishness but, you know, no- nothing and they both went on to school and they are both productive citizens (laughter) so, on that front, I've been very lucky, I've been very lucky and I have a lot of good friends that I, as I said, I have some cousins here and, and they're cousins on the other side, they are the ones when we all get together at Christmastime, you know. We go from family to family, we even go to Columbia [South Carolina] to one cousin's, so, I've been, I have, I have a lot of support. I've been blessed that way. Story_ID: 411983 Speaker 1: When you look back on the highlights of your life-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --on the personal level, what are three of the big highlights? Speaker 2: Well, my children [Jack Brayboy III and Joyce Brayboy] and, you know, that's, that's been a blessing and, of course, you know, my marriage was a blessing for a while and the only real regret I have is that my husband [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] died so early and, but I've had lots of wonderful experiences. As I said, sometimes I'm surprised that the people I've gotten to know in Charlotte [North Carolina] and the places I've been and the experiences I've had, which came out of board relationships and that kind of thing, that has been, you know, my life has been good. Story_ID: 411984 Speaker 1: This is the Museum of the New South [Levine Museum of the New South, Charlotte, North Carolina]-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Levine Museum of the New South. What is the New South? Speaker 2: New South is the South of, since the Civil War, and that's what we emphasize here, the good and the bad. Speaker 1: What is your role at this museum? Speaker 2: I'm a board member and I have been for several years and we've had, we have had several thought-provoking exhibits and-- Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Well, the one that's brought the most attention, that's touring the country now, is the one called 'COURAGE' ['COURAGE: The Vision to End Segregation, the Guts to Fight for It'], which chronicled the Board of Education suit [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], that's the one you're going to hear about from the De Laines [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr. and HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine]. Story_ID: 411985 Speaker 1: The first suit, Clarendon County [South Carolina], to integrate the school, started in Clarendon County, South Carolina and then it was combined with four other suits into the, the bro- the broader Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and when we had the exhibit here ['COURAGE: The Vision to End Segregation, the Guts to Fight for It' at the Levine Museum of the New South, Charlotte, North Carolina], the things that people went through who brought the suit, their homes were burned, the churches were burned, they couldn't buy food, they lost their jobs, it was just a tremendously moving exhibit and it's, it's on, I've forgotten where it is right now but it's touring and then they're going to do a permanent installation, not here, 'cause we don't have the space but somewhere here in Charlotte [North Carolina] and it's brought lots and lots of recognition. Speaker 2: Do you remember that time? Speaker 1: I remember it vaguely. I was, I guess I was in college and, you know, remem- reading about it and I do remember that there was a church around the corner from us, not our church, that was burned. You know, we didn't have television then and so it's word of mouth and, and-- Speaker 2: What, what church was burned, where? Speaker 1: It was a Baptist church around the corner from us in Camden [South Carolina]. It's, so much has changed for the better, still there's lots to be done but-- Speaker 2: But I want to know about the, the church situation. Who, what was the talk? Speaker 1: I can't remember exactly why the church in Camden was burned but in Clarendon County the church of the man who had started the suit [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952], that's, this De Laines' father's [Joseph Armstrong De Laine], you'll hear about that tomorrow, his church was burned and he literally had to leave town and, and move to New York [New York] to his later years when he came to live in Charlotte [North Carolina] because the white people in Clarendon County, you know, just did everything they could to destroy the people who had brought suit to integrate the schools in Clarendon County, which were woefully inadequate. Speaker 2: And do you remember hearing about that? You were here at the time? Speaker 1: Not here, no. I was in, I think I was in college. I've forgotten the exact year. Speaker 2: At Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: I think I was in college. Speaker 2: You remember hearing those stories? Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: And were there several stories of burnings and conflict? Speaker 1: Oh, there was, there was a lot of it, right, and as I said, when you talk to the De Laines [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr. and HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine], they can tell--they lived it. Speaker 2: But you remember hearing about it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Speaker 2: Were your parents [June Singleton Martin and John Martin] concerned? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sure they were, I'm sure they were. Story_ID: 411264 Speaker 1: We were talking about the ways in which you learned about different racial conflicts while you were at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina]. You learned about some things going on in Camden [South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Yes, and you know, I hate to admit it, but (laughter) I don't remember a whole lot of it. This is at, that was before the days of television. I remember going away to grad school [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and coming back, my parents [June Singleton Martin and John Martin] had a television set and we had a television set in the lounge at the dormitory at Char- in Boston [Massachusetts]. We didn't have one at Bennett and so, you know, I'm afraid I did not read the newspapers at that time as much as I should. I can remember when I was in high school [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] my father used to make me read the newspaper, The Charlotte Observer, which we always got in Camden, too, but I wasn't as conscientious about that and so-- Speaker 1: Do you remem- but which stories do you remember? The church burning. Speaker 2: I remember the church burning so much. Speaker 1: Any lynchings? Speaker 2: I don't remember any lynchings, not in, not near us, not in South Carolina. Speaker 1: What about the KKK [Ku Klux Klan]? I know they did march. Speaker 2: Yeah, they did march and they, and I'm sure they marched in Camden at some point and they're probably the ones that burned the church in Camden and they, probably in, in Clarendon County [South Carolina], too. Speaker 1: In North Carolina do you remember the Klan? Speaker 2: I don't remember specific incidents but we have had, you know, incidents that we, I'm sure there were some but I just-- Speaker 1: What about in Charlotte [North Carolina]? Any protest, marches? Speaker 2: I'm sure there'd been some but I just cannot remember the Klan. I'm sure there'd been some. I think that they're doing, there's some Klan stuff still somewhere in North Carolina but I don't remember specifically any. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaking of kind of organized protest, do you also remember the existence of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and organizations like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember, yes, reading about that and hearing about it and, of course, that was later on when we had television so, you know, I could keep up with all of that. Story_ID: 411265 Speaker 1: And social upheaval, what about the wars, right? Korea [Korean War], Vietnam [Vietnam War]? Speaker 2: I remember, yes, you know, reading all about that. Speaker 1: When your husband [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] was drafted, was he, did he go to war? Speaker 2: That was, that was, no, he didn't go to war. He was always stateside. He never got, never really went to war. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I don't remember how long, that was before I knew him. I don't know how long he was, I can't remember now how long he was in the, he was in the [U.S.] Air Force and he was a medic but he never really went out of the States. I remember he hated it, every bit of it but he was fortunate he never really went to fight. Story_ID: 411266 Speaker 1: I'm going to have you describe your neighborhood and your home here in Charlotte [North Carolina] with your children [Jack Brayboy III and Joyce Brayboy] and your husband. What was your home like? Speaker 2: The home where I still live, we built forty-four, forty-five years ago, built it in '62 [1962]. We bought the lot shortly after we were married. It's in a neighborhood called, McCrorey Heights [Charlotte, North Carolina]. McCrorey [Henry Lawrence McCrorey] had been president of Johnson C. Smith [Biddle University; Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] for years and he had all this property. He wasn't president when, when I got married but we bought the lot shortly after we were married. Somebody told Jack [Jack Brayboy, Jr.] that there was this lot for sale. In fact the street wasn't even cut through on that block and we bought the lot. We lived in a little house on the campus at the time. Speaker 1: Of Johnson C. Smith? Speaker 2: Right. It was torn down recently. A little, very meager house but, anyway, cheap rent, and we bought the house in '56 [1956], I think it was, and saved our money and built the house in '62 [1962] because in between there, Jack was trying to finish his doctorate and I remember one year he had a sabbatical and so, and he was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I was here working and then we were in and out of, I mean he would come home every month or whatever and we lived on his salary and saved mine so we could build the house and we, I'm in that same house now. Speaker 1: What is the house like? Speaker 2: It's a, it sort of looks like a split level but it's not but it's a two-story house and it's brick and it was well-built and I've tried to maintain it so, and as I said, it's a, it's a nice quiet neighborhood but right now 77 [Interstate 77 (I-77)] runs right by it. Seventy--when we moved there, you could hear nothing but the crickets but they developed 77 since then, in fact, since Jack died. And so I can hear the noise from 77 but I've just gotten used to it now. Speaker 1: And the neighborhood transitioned from a black neighborhood to a mixed neighborhood? Speaker 2: It's, well it's not very mixed, there's just a couple of white families. The person who lived next door to me, the family, has passed on and the children moved to other places and a young white man bought the lot, bought the house, just six months ago. A very nice young man, single and he's not ver- there very much, and a couple others in the neighborhood but it's close to Uptown [Charlotte Center City, Charlotte, North Carolina], it's five minutes from Uptown and people always coming by offering to buy the house because it's gotten so now if you live in the suburbs, the commute is difficult and so on and so I get things in the mail all the time and people just coming by, "Are you interested in selling your house?" No, not yet (laughter). And when my, my son came back to Charlotte, he lived with me the first year and then a little house became available, which had belonged to a man who was dean at Smith and he and his wife died and so he was able to get that house. So he's right around the corner and that's nice. Story_ID: 411267 Speaker 1: So you've taken me through several years here. Speaker 2: A long, (laughter) I've, long time, right. Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well, when I was teaching, I, I was regarded as a pretty good music teacher and, and I've tried to be a good citizen, good neighbor, productive member of the community and so I would like folks to remember me as that I tried to, to make a contribution, both through my children [Jack Brayboy III and Joyce Brayboy] and the way they turned out and the other things that I've been able to do. That's what I would, I would hope folks would think well. You know, I did, did make some contribution. Story_ID: 411268 Speaker 1: When it comes to music and music education, what do you want your contribution to be? Speaker 2: That most of the children are taught at least, grew up learning to, to really love music and appreciate it. For example, at my, my church [Memorial Presbyterian Church, Charlotte, North Carolina], some of the children I taught sing in the choir and so that makes me feel good. They didn't, and that occasionally I'll meet a child who'll say, I remember you taught us, thus and so and thus and so, so, I, I appreciate that. Speaker 1: When it comes to race relations and the progress there, what would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I hadn't thought about a legacy for that. I, that's, that's, how should I put that? Well, I have been able to work with all kinds of people and work very well and I think one thing that has helped me to do that, I don't just see that, you know, you're white and I'm black and we are different and, and automatically trust, maybe I'm naive but I'm, I'm more trusting and comfortable in, in my relationships and I always expect the best instead of always expect the worst. Speaker 1: And you helped desegregate the schools here, really? Speaker 2: I, I really did and I don't think much about that but I guess I did because a couple--you know, more than once I was in a place where I was the only black person and I'm--occasionally I'm in a board meeting sometimes when I'm the only black one and I wish more black folks would, would participate in with--but, but I participate in things that I like, the museums, the orchestra and, of course, I'm sure that's because of my high school [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina], you know, training in music and because we had an integrated faculty and then my time in Boston [Massachusetts] and I, I think I'm more accepting than some people, and I think my children [Jack Brayboy III and Joyce Brayboy] are like that too because I think children kind of soak up whatever-- Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: --attitude your parents have. Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be when it comes to philanthropy? Speaker 2: I've never had much money to give away but I've done what I could with that but because I've worked, for example, on the board of the Foundation of the Carolinas [sic. Foundation for the Carolinas, Charlotte, North Carolina] and these various committees that give away money that I've encouraged, or tried to encourage people to use whatever resources they have because you can do a lot even if you don't, don't have a lot of money, in service certainly if you don't have, you know, money too. We have, as a part of the Foundation for the Carolinas, one of the umbrella organizations is called the African American Community Foundation and I'm on that board and I was one of the founders on that board and, you know, there are lots of young professional black folks who have a lot of money here in Charlotte [North Carolina] and everywhere and trying to show them in many ways that they can use their success to help others. There's still so many needs. Story_ID: 411269 Speaker 1: And your words of wisdom to the generations that come who face these challenges of race and gender, class? Speaker 2: Well I think so much education first of all. It's important for everybody to get the best education they can and then to develop a sense of responsibility not only for yourself and your own family but for the community that none of us got where we were or where we are by ourselves. We all are where we are, whatever situation because of the shoulders of others no matter, no matter what you do or what you accomplish. You don't do it alone and I think it's our responsibility to help others along the way. Story_ID: 411270 Speaker 1: This picture is of my father and his, and two brothers. He had one other brother who wasn't born. The one in the middle is my father, John Wendell Martin [John Martin], he was a year old, notice his fancy dress. The one on the left is his brother, Thomas Marian Martin, his nickname was Jack in later years and the one on the right was his brother, James Martin. Nineteen o'six [1906], I think, my father was born in 1905 or 1906 or 1907. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: This is my father, John Wendell Martin, I think on the steps of Mather Academy in Camden, South Carolina where he taught and where I went to school and this, think in the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Speaker 1: My mother, June Singleton Martin, and I think this was in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: This is in the, on the campus of Mather Academy and it would have been 1945 or 1946, I graduated in '47 [1947]. I'm in the middle and on the left is Thelma Kirkland [Thelma Kirkland Poston], can't remember her married name, and on the right is Earline Stover Cobb who's in, who died recently. She lived in Washington [D.C.]. Thelma lives in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We'd love to have more. Okay. Speaker 1: This is the choir at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] and this would have been 1950 probably. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, where are you? Speaker 1: I'm right here, and that's on the steps of the library at Bennett. Speaker 2: Point to it again. Point to yourself again. Speaker 1: Oh, right here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: Okay. My s- senior year at Bennett, graduate year. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, I'm ready. Speaker 2: In the spring of 1951, I gave a piano recital along with another schoolmate and this is after the recital and my friend, Arden Shelton [Arden Buckner Shelton], was presenting me with some flowers. She was an usher at the, at the recital. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wedding reception. I was married on December the 22nd, 1954 in Camden, South Carolina and the reception was at my parents' home when here we are cutting the cake. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 2: This is my son, on the right, Jack Simeon Brayboy III [Jack Brayboy III] who was a sportscaster in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at WPVI [WPVI-TV] and I guess that was about ten, ten years ago. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay ready. Speaker 2: This is a baby picture. Of course, I think I was about six months old in Camden, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Was it my second grade, well-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: --my second grade class and we, you see, we have the rhythm instruments and this one is me playing something. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and let's go with the younger of the two photos up front. Speaker 1: Right. I think I was five or six, seven somewhere, in elementary school. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And this is my high school graduation in 1947. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay I'm ready. Speaker 1: I was a sophomore at Bennett College in Greensboro [North Carolina] and I was a member of the May court. My yellow, my dress was yellow organdy which my aunt, Jessie Dinkins Wright, made for me and sent to me. She was a seamstress in Camden. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in my senior robe at Bennett on the steps of Annie Merner Pfeiffer Chapel [Greensboro, North Carolina]. The little one, you can just, you know, you don't-- Speaker 1: Well that's a senior picture. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: This is a, these pictures are of an informal gathering at the apartment of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], at Boston, in Boston, Massachusetts. We were all students at Boston University. Can't recall the name of the fellow, that's Martin Luther King and me in, and I can't remember his name. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, bottom right. Speaker 1: A picture of Martin Luther King with me and Eloise Jones [Eloise Jones Bridges] who was my roommate. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and the last one. Speaker 1: And this, there's several pictures here. Martin Luther King is here at the bottom, I'm here at the back and this is my friend Sybil Morial [Sybil Haydel Morial] whose husband, Dutch [Ernest Morial] was mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana] and whose son, Marc [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], was also mayor of New Orleans. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we'll start with the big one. Speaker 1: I was an elementary music teacher in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools and here I am with a kindergarten class demonstrating rhythm instruments. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And that's '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nineteen seventy-six [1976]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: About 1990 I was teaching at Oaklawn Elementary School [Charlotte, North Carolina] and that was my chorus and we were performing uptown in the atrium of the bank. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Son first. Speaker 1: This is at, I retired in 1993 and the day after my daughter's wedding, they had a surprise retirement party for me. This is my son, Jack Brayboy. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and your daughter. Speaker 1: And my daughter, Joyce Brayboy, Joyce Martin Brayboy. Speaker 2: For many years, I was on the board of the Foundation for the Carolinas [Charlotte, North Carolina], which is a very prominent community foundation here in Charlotte [North Carolina] that's a big influence on our community. They give away a lot of money and they administer a lot of trust funds. I served diligently on the board for several years. When they moved into a new building an anonymous donor wanted to recognize a person who had given service, long years of service to the foundation, not money, but service, and I was chosen by the foundation to receive this honor. They named a conference room after me and commissioned a portrait. So there I am. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: I don't like that picture. Yeah, I don't like that. That's a more recent one. I don't like this picture. I've got eyes half-closed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And is that your son in that picture with the portrait? Speaker 1: Right, with the-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is my daughter, Joyce Martin Brayboy and I'm in the background. We were at a friend's golden wedding anniversary in 2005. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: That's my husband, Dr. Jack S. Brayboy [Jack Brayboy, Jr.], and that was made in '60 [1960] somewhere...