 Story_ID: 3679 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. The videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Alvin J. Boutte. A-L-V-I-N, B-O-U-T-T-E, Boutte. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 10/10/29. Place of birth is Lake Charles, Louisiana. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? March 6 or 7th. Speaker 1: Sixth, yeah. Speaker 2: Sixth, 19--2003. Speaker 1: Yes, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my home in Chicago [Illinois], at Lake Point Tower, conducting this interview. Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm retired. In my career, I had two occupations. I was a pharmacist, businessman and a banker. Story_ID: 3680 Speaker 1: Now before we get into depth, there are five 'People' magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they just require short answers. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is (pause) I guess shrimp. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Dark blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like two favorite--two times of the year, fall and the spring. The fall because of the colors, spring because everything is new--new life. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Not any more. I used to. Jamaica, Italy--been to Italy many, many times, but not--I can't travel any more. Speaker 1: And sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Story_ID: 3681 Speaker 1: Well let's--let me ask you some questions about your family history. How far can you trace your family back and do you know what your family was doing in the Nineteenth century or--? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. My daughter, one of my daughters has a great interest in that and has done a lot of things. So we can trace our family back to when the people came here from France. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me. Give me some details. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. I don't--cause I didn't, I didn't have a great interest in it. But we're--we are Creoles. And it's a mixture between French and African. But I don't know a lot of the details of it. But my daughter does though. Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories that your family has passed down through the years about what life was like in the Nineteenth century, during slavery or, or the Civil War, after any of that? Speaker 2: Not a lot. They didn't talk about it a lot. My father [Arthur Boutte] was born in, you got it there, I think 1880-something, so just twenty-some years after slavery. But they never talked a lot about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother. She lived to be a hundred. She couldn't speak English. She spoke Creole. I did not know my grandfather. I knew my grandmother on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Did they tell you any stories from their early life or any stories that you remember? Speaker 2: Not a lot. They didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you get the impression from them or from your father that life was easier for them or hard or-- Speaker 2: No, I think life was tough. But they didn't think it was tough. I mean they--you know, everybody was about the same in those days. My recollection is that I don't think they thought it was that--they had a tough time, you know, trying to make a living and whatever, but--. I don't--they didn't pout about it. Story_ID: 3682 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. Can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, Boutte, B-O-U-T-T-E. Speaker 1: And when was he born, you said 1890s? Speaker 2: I think, I got it (unclear)- it's 1880 something. Speaker 1: 1880s. Speaker 2: He was a--he was born in Reserve, Louisiana. And he came to Lake Charles [Louisiana] because Lake Charles was being built in those days, and he thought he could get himself a job. That's what I recollect that they told me. Speaker 1: And so St. Charles was a relatively new--. Speaker 2: Lake Charles. Speaker 1: Lake Charles. Speaker 2: Relatively new, yeah. Speaker 1: So, it was built after 1880 to be sure because that's when he was born. Speaker 2: Probably, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what, what kind of person was your father? What did he, what did he do for a living and what was he like? Speaker 2: He was a gardener and he loved flowers. I remember that about him. He died in the '50s [1950s]. He was a gardener. I don't remember him having any--any great interests. I don't remember that, but maybe he did. But I was--when I was born, he was--he was forty-eight when I was born. He was just an average, hardworking man. Speaker 1: How, how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I had nine. Speaker 1: And are you the--where do you fall in there? Speaker 2: I'm the youngest. Speaker 1: Youngest. All right. So, yeah, that would make sense if he was forty-eight. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Well, were you and your father close? Speaker 2: I don't know what close means. Not really. We were--he was my father. There wasn't a lot of place for us to go. He was so much older than me. That's about it on that, as far as that's concerned. Speaker 1: Okay. So did--did your family live in the town of Lake Charles? Speaker 2: Yes, we did. Story_ID: 3683 Speaker 1: Now, tell me something about your mother. What's her name and can you spell her name for us? Speaker 2: Her name is Adoria. My mother comes from a very different kind of family. She was a Darensburg. Her father and her family were in much better financial shape than my mother--than my, than my father's family was. And she married him, and he took her to Lake Charles [Louisiana] to live. But she was a Darensburg. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: D-A-R-E-N-S-B-U-R-G. And they were tradesmen, all of them, bricklayers, plasterers. In those days, those kind of jobs were done exclusively by blacks, not whites. Whites didn't do any of that. So they built up every--they built everything. They were primarily tradesmen. That's my mother's family. Speaker 1: I've heard that about that area of, you know, the Gulf [of Mexico] Coast, a lot of black involved in building trades and that--. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: Iron work and--. Speaker 2: Yeah. whites didn't do things like that. The bricklayers were all black. Speaker 1: Was that a hold-over from slavery? Speaker 2: I don't know. And, of course, it had changed by the time I came around. Speaker 1: Whites started taking those jobs? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay,. Well, tell us something about your mother. You know, did, did she go to school--as a matter of fact, did your father [Arthur Boutte] go to school too? You know. Speaker 2: Neither one of them went to school. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: My mother was a seamstress. And she helped out in the family by making things and selling, and, you know, selling them. She was a seamstress. Speaker 1: Okay, and did she have a regular place of business or did she work out of the home? Speaker 2: No, she worked out of the home. Speaker 1: Now, now, what was she like? What was your mother like? Speaker 2: Hardworking, down-to-earth, always emphasizing, you know, try to do something, be somebody. Quite a woman. Hard life, had many children. Speaker 1: Did you all live in a--. Speaker 2: We lived in a small house. Speaker 1: Did your mother and father ever tell you about how they met? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother was on a buggy ride with her father. And she saw my dad. And that's how they started secretly seeing each other. My mother's family did not approve of my father. But she married him anyway. Story_ID: 3684 Speaker 1: So can you reflect back--I'd like for you to reflect back and give us some idea of the neighborhood you lived in and some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Lake Charles [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: It was tough, mainly because there was no opportunity. The educational system was horrible. But we went to--we were Catholics. Everybody, this was the history of our--so we went to the Catholic schools [Sacred Heart Catholic School, Lake Charles, Louisiana], which was fifty cents a month, but just much better, the quality of education, just much better. I took Latin in high school, took three languages. I didn't realize how much--what a good education I had until I was grown and started going to school with whites and realizing that I had a wonderful education. But I didn't know it. I was--the educational system was terrible, but the public--private schools were terrific. We went to church, we went to school. We studied. There was very few social events, very few at my recollection. I don't remember going to, you know, hardly any, but... Speaker 1: Was this an integrated school? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: It was an all-black Catholic school? Speaker 2: All black. All black. This was--. Speaker 1: Did you have black teachers too? Speaker 2: No, we had white teachers, white nuns. This school was founded--she's a saint now in the last two years, by [Saint] Katherine Drexel--the famous Drexel family in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Well, she's the--took all of her inheritance--they were a very wealthy family. She took all of her inheritance to found these schools and to educate--advocate black--there's where Norman--Norman Francis [educator] came out of one of these schools too. That's where we came from. Speaker 1: Norman Francis, the President of Xavier University [of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana] right now. Speaker 2: Right. But we--Mother Drexel founded these schools and really gave you a terrific education. I mean I had--we had no idea. We thought, you know--of course, we had no self-confidence because we had been kicked around so much by white people. But we didn't realize, you know, really what we had until we got--we left and got grown and started being around other people. Story_ID: 3685 Speaker 1: So, what--what kind of a little boy were you when you were growing up? What did you like to do? Speaker 2: Read. History--read, read, read, read, read and I still, and I still do. I'm reading the history of Britain right now. Speaker 1: Right, and when we came in, you were--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I read incessantly. Day and night, all kinds of books, mainly about other people and other places and what people could be. Speaker 1: What, what--where did you get your supply of books? Or was there a library or--? Speaker 2: They had a library in which we had to go in the back and ask for what we wanted. We couldn't browse around and, you know, find something. We--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well, black people had actually had to go to the back of the library--, Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And they'd ask and then a, an attendant would go find whatever you wanted? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: If you didn't know what was already there, you couldn't even ask for it. You had to ask for it by name or could you-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, you had to, you had to have some idea. Speaker 1: Okay, that's different. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: So, so you liked to read. What else did you like to do when you were coming up. Speaker 2: Sports, I liked sports. We didn't have football. We had basketball. That's the only sport we had, but it wasn't--it was on a low scale. It wasn't a--it wasn't a big, big deal. Story_ID: 3686 Speaker 1: Did you go to grade school and high school in the same school? Speaker 2: (Nods for yes) Um-hum, went to grade school and high school. And in those days, you only had to go to school eleven years I think, which is what I did. And then the smartest ones went to college, if you could, if you could find a way to go. Speaker 1: And what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Sacred Heart Catholic School. Speaker 1: Was it in Lake Charles [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Yeah, right in Lake Charles. We had white nuns. I don't know if we had any black teachers at all. I don't remember any. Oh, we did at grade--in the grade school, we did. Speaker 1: Now, do any--when you look at your life in school, do any of the teachers stand out as mentors to you or people who were very concerned about you? Speaker 2: In college [at Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], my economics teacher, Mr. McKenna. In high school, Sister Cyprian. I had a great affinity for most of my teachers. Speaker 1: And what was your favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: In high school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I would say math[ematics]. We didn't have economics in high school. We had that in college. We had Latin in high school. We had physics in high school. I liked that too. We had French, Spanish. Speaker 1: And did you know how to speak Creole when you were--. Speaker 2: When I was younger. But I've forgotten. Speaker 1: You can't say any--. Speaker 2: Well, I--'parlez vous Francais?' Do you speak French? 'Je ne ge pas' [sic], in Creole, you say, 'mo pas gen.' That means "I don't have." Both of them means "I don't have." But I've forgotten. It's been too many years. Story_ID: 3687 Speaker 1: Okay. So well, when you were in high school, were you involved in social activities in high school [Sacred Heart Catholic School, Lake Charles, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: We didn't have a lot. My recollection is--it was--almost all of it around the--around the church. We had a dance. I don't know, know how often. It wasn't often, but I'd go occasionally and stand around. I was never... Speaker 1: So you weren't a lady's man? Speaker 2: Oh, no. I was scared to death of the women. I met my wife [Barbara Boutte]. She went to high school the same time I did. She went to a different school. And--but no, I didn't, I didn't go to, to a lot of those dances. I don't know how--I think they have had them once a month in the summertime. But we didn't have a lot of social life. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of music going on when you grew up, in the neighborhood or--. Speaker 2: If there were, I didn't take advantage of it 'cause I don't remember us having a record player. And I remember the music in those days, which I liked, but I don't remember us--I remember when we first got our first radio. And it was a big deal, I mean--. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. I guess I was going into high school. We didn't have a lot of worldy things--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) This would have been in the early '40s [1940s], right, I guess--. Speaker 2: Perhaps. Speaker 1: Yeah, you were born in '29 [1929], I guess it'd be in the early '40s [1940s] that you were in high school, '41 [1941], '42 [1942]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I finished in '47 [1947]. Speaker 1: Okay, so maybe mid-'40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: And that was, you know, when I was--the radio had been out for about twenty-five years then. You all just got one at that point. Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, we didn't, we didn't have a lot of anything really. Speaker 1: Did you all listen to the Joe Louis [boxer] fights and--(unclear)? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, sure. We all lived together, meaning our family. My father [Arthur Boutte] and two of his sisters lived in the same block in this neighborhood. So we'd go to each other's houses. That was our social life really. That was our social life. And one of the men was much more successful than the other two. He was much more successful than my father. So they had a lot of things, like they had a car. They had a radio, you know, things like that. Speaker 1: Now, you came from such a large family, was there--you know, was the family real close and, you know (unclear)--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very close. And most of them had left when I started growing up. They had gotten up, going married, gotten married or whatever. But, yeah, they all liked each other. Story_ID: 3688 Speaker 1: In high school [Sacred Heart Catholic School, Lake Charles, Louisiana], did, did you play sports in high school? Speaker 2: I played basketball which was the only sport we had. I was on the debating team. We had a debating team which we couldn't find any other schools to debate with us. The black schools didn't have any, and the white ones wouldn't. So we debated among ourselves. I was on that. Speaker 1: Okay, what else did you do? Did, did you run for class office or anything like that? Speaker 2: I just--yes, I was the class treasurer. And I didn't realize that until just a few months ago. My wife had a party and one of the men that came brought our class book from high school. And I was the treasurer. I don't remember us having any money. Speaker 1: But it was fitting that you were the Treasurer, you know--. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: The way things have turned out, you know, since. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So you were the treasurer. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was the treasurer. Speaker 1: Okay. So did anything memorable happen in high school that you, that you will never forget or? Speaker 2: I wanted to go somewhere. I wanted to go places where the books that I had read. I used to dream all the time. That's what--in high school, I was waiting to go somewhere. Speaker 1: There's nothing wrong with that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me, when you were a senior and you were approaching graduation, what were your thoughts in terms of a career? What did you think that you would do? Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to be a businessman, but that--there weren't any such thing as successful black business. The only successful business people that blacks, were either a doctor--I didn't want to be a doctor--a pharmacist, not even a lawyer in those days. The closest thing I could come to business was a pharmacy. That's what I wanted to do, not that I had a great interest in pharmacy, but it was the closest thing. I didn't know any--or you could be a mortician which I definitely didn't want to be. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was gonna ask about that cause I know--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) You could be a mortician, right. Speaker 1: In a lot of towns, the most wealthy black person in town is the mortician--. Speaker 2: Yes, you could be--but I had no interest in that whatsoever. Speaker 1: So pharmacist, that's unique in that I don't guess there were a lot of black pharmacists in those days? Speaker 2: No, not a lot. Story_ID: 3689 Speaker 1: So did they have a pharmacy program at Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] when you? Speaker 2: Yes, they had a pharmacy program which is where--what I studied. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about Xavier University in New Orleans. What was it like and how did you like it? Speaker 2: I liked--like my high school, same thing. This woman, the Drex--Mother Katherine Drexel, she founded Xavier. This was the only black Catholic university in the United States. You got one in, in Ohio, but that's white, Xavier [University, Cincinnati, Ohio] of Ohio? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, she founded this--gave this school an enormous amount of money to start them off, to--and the principles were the same. It was--it was education mainly. You know, you didn't--there wasn't a lot of college things there. It was that you were there to be educated. Speaker 1: Okay, so not a lot of extracurricular activities. Speaker 2: Not a lot. They had a basketball team which I was on. Speaker 1: Now, were you a member of that basketball team that won all those games [from 1935 to 1938, Xavier of Louisiana's basketball team won sixty-seven games and lost only two] or--. Speaker 2: No, no. We had, we didn't--. Speaker 1: Did, did you know any of those young men who were on that team? In those days, they had--I don't know when you came along. I guess they were--yeah, they were older than you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The group that won sixty-three straight games-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I had heard about them, but--. Speaker 1: Most of them were from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. But I can--. Speaker 1: Charlie Gant [basketball player], William McQuitter [basketball player]. Speaker 2: Right, but I--not our team. We were--we were not that good. Story_ID: 3690 Speaker 1: So--well, what are some of the highlights of your tenure at Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Now, you were in the pharmacy department. It doesn't sound real exciting, but what happened? Speaker 2: I learned a lot. But a lot of the things I learned, I didn't have a great interest in. I learned the science--a lot of scientific things. I had a very little business education. I had an economics class which I was, was the one that I was really inspired by. Speaker 1: Now, who's your teacher then in economics? Speaker 2: Can't remember his name, right now. Speaker 1: I think you may have told us--. Speaker 2: I told you, yeah [Professor McKenna]. It slips me. Speaker 1: But he was a profound influence on you? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the course mainly, you know. I really liked the things they were talking about and--because I knew that we really needed that. There was no question in my mind about that. But I was very impressed with that. The pharmacy courses were mainly scientific. Interesting, but not... Speaker 1: It was skill I guess, but not--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Didn't really do anything for your ambitions or--. Speaker 2: (Shakes head for no). And I finished, took the, took [pharmacy] board [examination] and passed right--immediately. And then I was drafted immediately into the [U.S.] Army, just a--I mean a matter of days. Speaker 1: So this was 1947? Speaker 2: No, 1951. Speaker 1: '51 [1951], okay. Speaker 2: I went into college in 1947. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. All right. Story_ID: 3691 Speaker 1: Now, the [U.S.] Army had just been desegregated--or it was in the process. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Just been desegregated--it had just been desegregated. Speaker 1: Had you followed the, the [U.S. President Harry S.] Truman and the whole drama around the desegregation of the Army? Speaker 2: I had. And one of the first things you do when you go--in those days--I don't know if they do it now, but they give you a test to see who you are, where you stand. And they gave me a test, and I did extremely well on that test. That was the first time I'd ever been to school with whites, I was telling you about. That's when I realized, you know, I knew a lot more than they did, and I didn't--. Speaker 1: But you didn't know it before, huh? Speaker 2: I had--I had no idea. But they gave me this test, and after the test they told me that they wanted me to, they were--take Basic Training, but they wanted to give me another test. And they gave me another test. And I took the basic trainings for eight weeks and then they sent me to Officer Candidate [Training] School. That's how I became an officer. Speaker 1: Okay, now, was Officer Candidate School run fairly, and did you, did you--? Speaker 2: It was 290 cadets and there were two blacks in the class as my recollection. Speaker 1: Two, you and another person. Speaker 2: Another one who--I think he became a colonel, but I'm not sure. But he's passed now. Speaker 1: All right. And where did you go to Officer Candidate School? Speaker 2: Fort--Fort Riley, Kansas. Um-hum. Speaker 1: All right. Now, when you graduated from Officer Candidate School, you were like a first--second lieutenant? Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: And where did they send you? Speaker 2: They sent me to Texas and Louisiana. And--forget--where else--and then they sent me to Europe, to Germany. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were your experiences relatively smooth in--as an officer? Speaker 2: Very smooth. I just--I became a company commander. And the thing that I remember most about the Army is there was such a reluctance on the company because the company was almost all white. And when I left to go home [after being discharged], when I got up to go home at six o'clock in the morning and walked out of the building, my company was standing there to say good-bye to me. That's--it was one of the most moving things that happened to me in the Army. Though it was tough at the beginning. It was--it was just--desegregation had just happened. And there was a lot of people that were not necessarily for it. I mean, and, and the Army is a place where there's a lot of rough people, a lot of rough people. So it was not easy, but I had a colonel--he was just a wonderful man. His name was Colonel Salant. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: S-A-L-A-N-T. And when I got to his--then he told me, he says, "you know, we--this integration has just happened, you may have some problems. Whatever problems you have, you come and see me. But this is not going to be easy for you." But it--it worked out fine. Speaker 1: Now, why do you think the, the men under your command liked you so much? I mean what, what do you think it was? Speaker 2: 'Cause we used to win everything. I mean we did. Whatever competition they had, we would win. That's--we used to win. Speaker 1: And so they--you think, they saw you as like some, someone who provided the proper leadership actions? Speaker 2: Oh, no question. My--my first sergeant was a white guy, a big, rough white guy from Oklahoma. I can see him right now. And he was right in the front of them when I was leaving. But we--we did fine. That was the beginning of the Army, which was the first integrated institution in America. It was something I had never thought I'd live to see. Speaker 1: It seemed that remote when you were, when you were in school? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. There was no integration. And there was a lot of hatred and mean people, a lot of ignorant people, especially about race. But my first taste of it was the Army. Speaker 1: Okay, so that--so you got a chance to see some things change, I guess--. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, a short span of time. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 3692 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about, what were things like in Germany, you know, being stationed in Germany? How did the Germans treat you? Speaker 2: Well, you didn't run into a lot of Germans in those days, but they treat--the Germans were on the run. I mean they were, they were the bottom of the barrel in those days. You know, it was--we had everything. We had all the money, all the resources. We were in total command, so--but you didn't see a lot of--the only Germans you saw is the people that worked--they worked like black--black people were, used to work here. And they, they're the ones that worked in the mess halls and the whatever. Speaker 1: Service jobs for the military. Speaker 2: Service jobs, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, you were there during the height of the Cold War and all that. Do you have any stories about your three years, in the Service [U.S. Army]? Speaker 2: I never was in combat, naturally, but we went on maneuvers. The Army that I was in was an Army that was trying--always trying to be better. I mean they pitted us against each other. I didn't think that anybody could ever beat our Army in those days. I just thought, you know, I couldn't imagine anybody beating us. Speaker 1: And so the United States Army pretty much was the--at it's all-time high, I guess you'd call it. Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was something. If I--and I almost did. My wife [Barbara Boutte] and I was talking about this yesterday for some reason. But I almost stayed in the Army. I'm sure I would have been a general, at least a brigadier general. But I almost stayed in the Army. I like the discipline of the Army. I like the--the theory of--I like--I like what they, what they believe in. I like discipline. I like order. I don't like disorder. And I--my wife--and she said, "well, I think you made the right choice." But I don't--I, I almost stayed in. Story_ID: 3693 Speaker 1: Now, now, were you married when you were in the, in the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you get married right after high school or did you--. Speaker 2: No, I married in college. She [Barbara Boutte] and I went to high school together, but to different high schools. She went to a Catholic high school in Opelousas, Louisiana, and I was from Lake Charles [Louisiana]. But we used to go--same school, kind of school, Catholic by the Sisters, by [Saint] Katherine Drexel. But we went there to play basketball, and I saw her. And when I saw her, that was it. And we married a few--couple years after that when we went to college--we both went to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: That sounds like how it ought to happen. (Laughs). Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah. Story_ID: 3694 Speaker 1: So now--now, when did you come out of the [U.S.] Army? You came out in--. Speaker 2: I came out in '53 [1953], I think, '53 [1953]--came here [Chicago, Illinois] and bought my first drug store. Speaker 1: Now, that's a big leap. You, you're in the Army now, presumably--. Speaker 2: I had saved a lot of money. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh, did you? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I'd saved all my money really. Speaker 1: So you had enough saved from the Army to come back and buy a drugstore? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I bought my first drugstore. I had never worked in a drugstore before, so the guy that I was gonna buy it from, I told him I want to work in here for six months, just to--you know, 'cause I had never worked in a drug store. And so I worked--and that's the last job I ever had in my life. But yeah, I bought my first drug store. Speaker 1: Now, let's go back to that for a second. That's a, that's a tremendous amount of money to save I would guess to be able to go into business--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, in those days, I think I paid $85,000 for that store, which was quite a bit of money, but I think I put up $20,000 and Sealtest Ice Cream, I made a deal with them that I would put their ice cream in. And they put up the rest of the money. But that was the first one. Speaker 1: Where was your store located? Speaker 2: 47th [Street] and Lake Park [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. That neighborhood was changing. It was still, I'd say 80 percent white, but it was changing to black. And the first year, my accountants paid all my bills and paid my taxes. They told me I could write myself a check for $28,000. And I couldn't wait to get a home to my wife [Barbara Boutte]--I'd made $28,000 which would thrill us. Terrific. But that was my first business. Speaker 1: That's the first year you made $28,000. Speaker 2: $28,000, um-hum. Speaker 1: That's great. Story_ID: 3695 Speaker 1: Did you have a--any mentors in terms of business in Chicago [Illinois] that showed you the ropes or--? Speaker 2: I knew two Jewish pharmacists and both of them were in business and they were really smart. They knew the business. So I learned a lot of that from them. But I didn't--I learned a lot of it from myself. Pharmacy is mainly--now, the people that's filling the prescription is the pharmacist, but pharmacy is a business. The principles--it's the same as running the gum factories, the principles are the same. Speaker 1: Okay, and what are those principles? Speaker 2: Placing your--spending your money in your business where you get the most benefit out of it, whether it's--it's a building, fixtures, inventory, you have to decide which is the best thing to do. And following in those, and being very careful with what you do, knowing--set up controls everywhere, so you know exactly what--I knew how many packs of cigarettes I sold every week. And how many. And you can do that. All you have to do is to require your people--you don't just hire a person and say, "stand behind this cash register, you, you're the"--you have to give them something to do and make the--make them feel that their job has value. "I want to know exactly how many packs of cigarettes you sell, exactly. I don't want to know approximately. I wanna know this." So you have to give people a goal. It could be a little goal. It could be a modest goal, but you must give them a goal. And you must always let them know that you're--this is the most important thing to you, their goal. And you have a much better chance of succeeding if you do that. Speaker 1: Okay, now, have you developed like a--or did you have at that time, like a overall business philosophy? Speaker 2: I had a business plan which I had originally thought I was gonna build me a whole string of drugstores, nationwide. And I did. Iafter two years, two or three years, I bought my second store. Then my third, then my fourth, then my fifth. The thing that made me decide out of the business--and this is the reason why you don't see any, any independent drugstores, is when a third-party payment came in--you know, in the early days, you, you had a prescription. You went to the drugstore and you had it filled. And you paid the pharmacist. Then a third-party payment came in where an insurance company would pay the pharmacist, where the--or the state would pay the pharmacist, which is what it is today. Well, that's why you don't have any independent drugstores because they can't wait for their money. You know, they have to have their money when they fill the prescription. Sometimes these people wait ninety days to give you your money, and I could see that. So I sold all my stores and went into the banking business. Story_ID: 3696 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about how you--step-by-step how you got involved in the banking business? Speaker 2: The president--the chairman of Continental [Bank, Chicago, Illinois]--I was on the board of the [National] Urban League in those days. And the chairman of Continental had been to Washington [D.C.] and in some meeting, they decided--they had to include us in the economy of the country. So they decided they were gonna give blacks banking franchises. I don't know if this was the result of [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] or whatever it was. But anyway, this guy came back to Chicago [Illinois], 'cause we knew him even though he was white. We were all, you know, on different little boards together. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: You know, I can't remember his name now. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: I can't, but anyway, he's the one that talked to us and at that time, we were all one group, Independence [Bank] and Seaway [Bank]. And he said, "if you all"--that's why I told you it was our money--"if you all come up with the money"--'cause we, we were not poor. We had, we were all businessmen. We had--and some of them had big businesses like George Johnson [entrepreneur]. I mean he had a huge business. But anyway, he said, "if you all come up with the money, I--you can get a bank franchise." And we did. That's how we, that's how we went into the banking business. And our bank--and after five or six years, it was on the ropes. And I had sold my company and retired really from the drugstore business. And we talked and we said, well--and I told him, I said I didn't know any--I'd never run a bank. But I knew a guy, Ted [Theodore] Roberts [banking executive], who was the executive vice president of Harris Bank [Chicago, Illinois] here. And we were very good friends. And they--I said, "Ted, how long will it take you to teach me how to, how to run a bank?" He said, "six months." And he taught me and I took over the bank. We began to prosper. I bought my second bank--I bought five banks in my career. Independence, Guaranty [Bank], which was owned by the [Black] Muslims, Gateway [Bank], Southside [Bank] and Drexel [National Bank]. My last one I bought was Drexel in 1989. Story_ID: 3697 Speaker 1: Now, there hadn't been a black bank in Chicago [Illinois] when you all came up with this idea, since the--since 1929 or 1930? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Since the--yeah, something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: And you had two black banks early in the century Speaker 2: [Anthony] Overton [banker, started Douglass National Bank] and Binga Bank [started by Jesse Binga]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Binga Bank, B-I-N-G-A. Speaker 2: And that happened before I came here. Speaker 1: So, now, what you were doing is historic I guess. Speaker 2: I didn't consider it, and I still don't. You know, I don't consider it at all. I mean a bank is like a grocery store. It's the same--the principles of business is the same no matter how big it is. It--there is no--it's the same thing. I never considered it that, and I still don't really. Speaker 1: Okay. So you never considered the historical significance of it, and-- Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: Which, which came first? Was it Seaway [Bank] or Independence [Bank]? Speaker 2: We came together. I think we were within months of each other really. But we both prospered. Both did very well. Speaker 1: Now, the Seaway Group now is the--is that the Collins brothers--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That was the Collins brothers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Great black entrepreneurs. Grocery stores--same principle, it's the same. Speaker 1: They had the Food Basket chain. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And Collins Barbeque, laundromats and--, Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah. Speaker 1: One of them just died this week [2003]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he died about a month or so ago. We both--he was a founder of [Operation] P.U.S.H. [People United To Save Humanity, African American advocacy organization], too. We both got an award, maybe two months ago at P.U.S.H. the founding members. And he lasted a month. He died. Speaker 1: Was it Cesar Collins or--the one that just--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, Cesar Collins. Story_ID: 3698 Speaker 1: So--well did the--so you figure, after a year, they installed you as the, as executive officer of the bank [Independence Bank], and then-- Speaker 2: After--the bank was opened about five or six years. Speaker 1: Okay, before you became the head. Speaker 2: I had retired. I was on the board of the bank. I was one of the founders of the bank, but they were really going under. That's when I came into the bank. Speaker 1: What--what kinds of moves did you make to get the bank back on its feet? Speaker 2: First of all, hired the right people. First step. Secondly, build a sense of purpose with everybody from the highest to the lowest of what we would--wanted to, was trying to do, and where it had value. Those were the first things. Speaker 1: Now, in terms of--you said, what were--you wanted people to understand what, what you were trying to do. And well, what was that and I guess the thing that I'm--other than--I know you all were trying to make money, but was there more to it than that or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, we wanted to build a base for black--but we were, we were interested in black capitalism in its true sense. We were very encouraged by the fast food industry because the fast food industry was a way for a person to really--a person who didn't have a lot of training either, to get into business. And because of the standards required by the parent company--demanded by the parent company, like cleanliness and auditing and so forth, they had a real chance to succeed. So we--we had great interest in that. And I really pushed that. I was in the early years of McDonald[s fast food restaurant chain] financing and blacks and those different financing. I--because I knew they had a chance to succeed. It wasn't a helter skelter thing here. And if they didn't make it, McDonalds would have a lot to say about it. I could see the benefit of--in those days, the idea was to try to--for blacks to become politically powerful--more powerful, which they weren't much until then. But the most important thing, I thought, we had to have this political--we had to get more progress in politics. We had to have people, we had to crate more--create more wealth in the black community. Our biggest problem is we didn't have any money--and--most of us. So we had to find some way to change that trend. And I think that's what these institutions did in the beginning. They began to change--like Bob [Robert] Johnson [business executive] who is a billionaire now. I mean--I was chairman of Fulcrum Venture Capital [investment firm]. We worked with him when he first got involved. The creation of wealth was really what--now, we needed these other things too though. We needed the politics and--to protect ourselves, to protect our rights. But we really, really needed to created wealth and that wasn't-- Well, finish your sentence, sir. Speaker 1: That wasn't enough going on so we had to, we had to really concentrate on that. Story_ID: 3699 Speaker 1: We didn't lend--lend money to buy cars. We wanted you to take our money and make it multiple and to create--to create something. If you could show, show me that you could do that, you got me. Speaker 2: Now--we, we're rolling? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay, good, good (unclear). I was hoping we'd get this. Speaker 1: I got it. Speaker 2: Yeah, all right. All right, so you're trying to seed businesses really and you're trying to multiply the effect-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: To employ more people and to create wealth in the black community. Speaker 1: And I think for the most part, from what I'm seeing and reading now, I think we succeeded. We were the first generation to start all of this, after the opportunity. Now, I know they had black businesses in the--black banks in the '20s [1920s], but they really had no real shot. We carried it beyond the black community. As a matter of fact, 'Business Week' [magazine] did a story on me in 1974 or '75 [1975] saying, "A neighborhood bank goes to Wall Street." Every--everybody was our--was our customer. I mean we didn't limit ourselves to the areas where our banks were located. And because we started getting business from white--large white companies, other blacks started doing the same thing. Blacks in the advertising business started getting--but we started it. That's what this article in 'Business Week.' We were the ones that started it, that made it--"hey, we, we will do business with these guys." I see it now, I mean it's--I'm amazed at where it is now. But that's--that was our game. Speaker 2: I know part of the attraction of the black bank was the fact that it was black in the black community and people took pride in having an account at Independence Bank [Chicago, Illinois, Boutte started this bank in 1964]. Speaker 1: Yes, that was, that was true. There were many reasons to get business and you had to have a different theory for the business you were going--the big companies that I went after, and got, I had to convince them first that I could do what they needed to have done, and that it was safe. Let me give you an example, which started a trend in black banking. I went to General Mills [food products corporation] in Minnesota. They--the way they used to pay their withholding taxes, they used to have their bank, the local bank, just take the money out of their account. And I had done an analysis of this, how you pay your tax--how people pay their taxes and how they could benefit. And I convinced them that if they wrote a check, and I--we're not talking about five or six dollars, we're talking about millions and millions--and mailed it to me, the postmark--protects you. You would have the use of your sixteen million dollars, which you're sending to the government for taxes, for nine extra days. And here's what you can do with that sixteen million in those nine days. Here's what you could earn on that sixteen in those nine. And they had, they had never, they had never--cash management had not started. This was something new even to them. They didn't think about that. They didn't--so it was a lot of things. But you had to be creative. You had to find a reason that the person would benefit from dealing, having the relationship with you. That's what we tried to do. Speaker 2: Well, it sounds like an effective--it seems like it was effective? Speaker 1: Very effective. Very effective. Speaker 2: It may even, you think it like changed the way other people did business? Speaker 1: Oh, everybody do that now. I mean everybody do it now. Story_ID: 3700 Speaker 1: So you all were like pioneers and you were setting--. Speaker 2: In many ways. We're the ones that started the theory of ATM [automated teller machines] machines being used--we had the first ATM, we had the first ATMs in the--in Chicago [Illinois] and one with, from--a bank from Ohio, Fifth Third Bank from [Cincinnati] Ohio. They were the brightest bankers I had, had met in my career. You heard of Fifth Third? Speaker 1: Yes. They, they took over Old Kent [Bank] this year. I mean last year [2002]. Speaker 2: Yeah, but this was long before that. I mean they were Cincinnati [Ohio]. They weren't in Chicago then. But they--they wanted to concentrate banking on technology which was right up my alley. I thought that--I thought that technology would really allow you to make a lot more money in the business. So I teamed up with them. Today, they're using ATMs for all kinds of things. We--I wanted the state to pay its welfare recipients using the ATM. In other words, instead of sending the welfare recipient a check, which they had to go to a currency exchange and give them twenty-seven dollars to cash, under my system, all they had to do, they had to go to any ATM machine and get the money from the state there. So it's like a ordinary idea today. But it wasn't--when it had, when it started, that was--. Speaker 1: You're right, it wasn't--I mean there was a time when there were no ATMs--, Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right, that's right. Speaker 1: --and people weren't thinking about that at all. Speaker 2: All right. And now they--the social security, I mean not social security but the welfare, you know, the Illinois Department of Welfare issues a card that swipes and--. Speaker 1: That's what, that's what--how this started. But anyway, we bought Independence [Bank], then we bought Drexel [National Bank] or, or Gateway [Bank], Guaranty [Bank] and Southside [Bank] and then Drexel in 1989. And I got real sick, started getting sick in the early '90s [1990s]. And I sold all, everything. We sold everything to South Shore [Bank, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: And what was the name of the corporation that--? Speaker 1: IndeCorp [Boutte's banking corporation]. Speaker 2: IndeCorp, like Independence, but IndeCorp. Speaker 1: Independence [Bank] was one of the banks in IndeCorp. Speaker 2: Now, what were some of the--any particular stories of seeding small businesses that, that stick out in your mind that you'd like to tell us? Speaker 1: Proud. You--when a guy succeeded--I used to watch my people very closely cause I--they needed that. You can't just--especially new entrepreneurs, especially black entrepreneurs were just starting out in this. You have to watch them what it--what they do. You have to--you can't just stay on the sidelines. And when I saw that they were going to succeed, the pride, knowing that here's one of these block--'cause that's what I knew--I always knew that was what it was going to take. This thing wasn't going to happen in one minute. It's going to happen over a long period of time with a lot of successes, small successes. And that's really what's happened or has begun to happen much, much more. Story_ID: 3701 Speaker 1: What were some of the other activities you were involved in? I know you were involved in a number of civic activities and I know one of them was Operation Breadbasket [African American economic empowerment organization]. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right. Speaker 1: You want to tell us how you got involved in that? Speaker 2: I was involved in a lot of things. After the riots [in 1968] we formed Chicago United [corporate advocacy organization], which is the biggest black businesses in the city and the business--biggest white businesses. We used to meet for breakfast once a month at First National Bank building [Chicago, Illinois]. I served as chairman of that for two, two years. I was president of the [Chicago] Urban League [African American social empowerment organization] many, many years ago. Civic--board member of the [Chicago] Rehabilitation Institute [medical center], started it. I didn't realize I was going to become a patient of it, but I did. Junior Achievement, business, again, business. I was on the National Board of Junior Achievement [youth economics organization]. I thought that was very valuable, and I thought we needed it more than anybody. Speaker 1: That's right. I know my, my brother had Junior Achievement in high school, made items in high school and sold them, you know. Speaker 2: I was in the normal things that businessmen do. And my business directors--I was on the board of an insurance company, of an airline and of a bank. Those were the businesses I... Speaker 1: Well, we were--I had asked about Operation Breadbasket, I think. You were in on the ground floor of that, right? Speaker 2: Right, we had a great interest in Operation Breadbasket because we needed to expand our businesses, and there was a great deal of reticence in the white community to allow that to happen. Black businesses couldn't get shelf space in the stores. And it was all--you know. If we were going to, to push ahead, which is what has happened, this had to be corrected. And we couldn't--we were businessmen. We were not flame throwers. But we knew some flame throwers. And that's how, that's how this was formed. And we funded it. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, as a businessman, funded some flame throwers? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 3702 Speaker 1: By what you mean by a flamethrower, you mean a militant, agitator (unclear)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The [Rev.] Jesse Jacksons [civil rights activist, politician] of the world and blah, blah, blah, absolutely. Speaker 1: Somebody to kind of shake the--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Shake the tree. Speaker 1: --white establishment up. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, otherwise, it, it would have taken so much longer. If you have to go through a, a court to get relief, to get your products on, on a shelf, shit, you'd be there for years. That's why direct action was so critical in that case. These guys did a hell of a job. I mean they turned this country around--Jesse still turns, doing it. They turned this country around, and I can't tell you the benefits that's come out of it. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a dynamic that, that you don't read much about--. Speaker 2: No, you can't read about it. You don't--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah. It's not written about. Speaker 2: You know, they're the flamethrowers. Speaker 1: Okay, that's an alliance. It's a different kind of alliance--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Very different. Speaker 1: Than what you--. Speaker 2: We had an obligation to make sure they were all right and we, they--taken care of too. But they did an enormous amount of good. They broke the bar. Speaker 1: And that answers, I guess, another question too that people have, I guess, when they look at a Jesse Jackson and they wonder, how does he earn a living? You know. Speaker 2: He's so talented. I'm not surprised--I mean Jesse--this is so--this is one of the brightest men I've met in my career. Now, there's some other things I may not agree with him, but this is an extremely bright man who understands the quote "big picture." He knows what it will take, what it's gonna take to get there. He understands that. I had a great admiration--still do. I have a great admiration for him. The people that I worked with, the Jesses, the Vernon Jordans [attorney, political advisor]. Vernon Jordan, I knew was a sensational man thirty-five years ago, you know, when I was in the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois], he was in the--in the National Urban League [African American social empowerment organization]. I mean this--he's a really bright man. They did a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and in turn, the business community took care of them, like its own? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: That's why we, we never hear about that--. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Interesting concept 'cause I know some say and sensationalize it where Jesse was out here by himself and the business community has somehow separated--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, no. No. Speaker 1: So that's a, that's a absolutely false notion? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So, what other activities in the community would you--were you involved in? Speaker 2: I was mainly interested in economics and business. But, you know, I've done--I've gone the gamut. I was on the Chicago [Illinois] Board of Education for years. I was a mentor in high schools here for years. I've done it all really. Story_ID: 3703 Speaker 1: You had an accident, an auto accident, I guess it was, in--. Speaker 2: I fell and broke my neck, which really impeded my career to some degree, but it didn't stop it. Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum. Now, when, when was this? Speaker 2: It happened in 1979. And I've had trouble with it ever since. That's the biggest reason why we sold our company [IndeCorp, Boutte's banking company] too. I mean I had reached a point where I just couldn't work anymore. But it started in '79 [1979]. I had an operation in '79 [1979] and '85 [1985] had another one. So I've had trouble, and the older I've gotten, the worse it's become. Story_ID: 3704 Speaker 1: At this point, what--what are some of your hopes and concerns for the, the black community now? Speaker 2: I think they're on the right track. I don't think it's any question about that. I don't like--the group that's having the most trouble is the lower class. They're not getting the education. They're not--they don't seem to be teaching--they don't understand the valuableness of education. They don't realize how valuable it is. And I think that they're the ones that's not getting the benefit of the great American dream, not nearly as much as they, as they should. But other than that, I think the black middle class is expanding rapidly. I don't care what these people say. I'm telling you. And it's gonna expand even more in all areas, not just--in all areas. They're--they've got a taste of it now, and it's too late to turn back. Now, what we need to do is to concentrate on engraving in our children the desire to succeed, the desire to excel. I have some reticence about that in the lower classes, not the middle class and upper middle. The upper-middle class and the middle-class blacks, I think, are going to do a remarkable job in the thirty--twenty-five or thirty years. They're going to keep going to a point where they're going to mesh right into the--into the country through marriage and through a lot of things. But you still are going to have that underclass and I don't know exactly how to handle that. I don't know--I know there's a problem, but I don't know exactly how to handle it. Speaker 1: Well, some say there's an ever-increasing gap between black middle class and lower class. Do you agree with that? Speaker 2: Yeah, in the white middle class and the lower white class too. Yes, because-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) It's not just a black problem? Speaker 2: No, no. It's because of--you know what, education. Even in the Middle Ages, if you were from a certain family, you sent--you sent your children to school. They're the ones that get all the benefits. It's, it's no different today. That's why affirmative action [federal and state diversity initiative]--one of the most dangerous things in my--that's why I like [U.S. President George W.] Bush for, for not getting on this, jumping on this bandwagon, even though he said he was going to fight this affirmative action in [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. We have benefited enormously from affirmative action. I can't tell you. I mean we got a chance to do things we don't deserve to do. And I can't tell you the benefits. This hasten--we were going to win anyway. We were gonna win anyway, but this hastened the process--this is hastening the process. And as long as they can--our politicians can keep it going, the better off we're going to be. Story_ID: 3705 Speaker 1: At this point, what do you see as your legacy? You're retired now and--. Speaker 2: I don't--I've never been a quote "colorful person." I don't dream of a legacy really. I mean I enjoy myself and my family. I enjoy what I like to do, like read and I don't think about a legacy. I'm not trying to build a legacy. I didn't do any of this for a legacy or even for the money. You need enough money. I don't--I get satisfaction out of achievement, regardless of the achievement. I don't--I don't have a legacy. I don't know what my legacy is gonna be, frankly. Even this--I can't imagine why would you [The HistoryMakers] want to talk to me. What, for what purpose? I mean I'm an ordinary person. I'm not--and it's because I choose to be an ordinary person. Speaker 1: Well, I think it's, it's--some of the, the dynamics that you revealed to us today are important to pass on to future generations--. Speaker 2: Well, that's true. And, you know, when I realized what you were doing, and that's why I said when Al [Albert] Johnson [car dealership owner] told--'cause I, I don't usually do--this college is in Virginia. I got it down. They came all the way here to interview me. And they wanted to do similar, not, not to the extent that you're doing, James Mason college? Speaker 1: George Mason [University, Fairfax, Virginia]. Speaker 2: George Mason. I would not have--I don't, I don't pursue things like this. I never have. And my legacy, I hope will be that he was a good man, an honest man--honor, which is the most important word to me. It's not--he was an honorable man. And that says a lot. That takes in a lot, that you can--when I tell you something mister, that's it. Honor. But that's the only legacy I can--and I'm not sure a lot of people will remember that, but some will. Story_ID: 3706 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? It's a little bit different from legacy, and I think you may have answered some of it already, but--. Speaker 2: As an honorable man, who for whatever reason--I think it was because of the readings that I did when I was young. I read a book when I was nine years old by a black businessman from North Carolina, [North Carolina] Mutual [Insurance Company], which is the largest black insurance company. It's called 'The Great Divide,' and I went to my library and asked for that book and they didn't have it. But the lady was so impressed with me, she said, "I'll get it." And she did. 'The Great Divide'--this was this black executive in this insurance company. And he's saying that, you know, here's a road. And white people hate us so much. We're on this side of the road. We can't cross this street right now. We've got to stay here and build our business because they hate us so much we'll never succeed. And I made a speech to the P.U.S.H. [People United to Save Humanity, advocacy organization] convention, really, maybe seven or eight years ago, and said, "It's time to cross that street. We can't stay in the black community anymore. You've got to, you got be the Oprahs [Winfrey, media personality, executive]. You got to go out. You can't--I mean they don't hate you as much." I mean and I know there's problems, but you--now, you've got to cross that street. You've got to go and be somebody over there. And that--I read that book when I was a little kid. And I knew the day would come when we would have to do this. This guy's name was--I can't remember it. Speaker 1: I think in what you just said, there's some advice for young people who are trying to, trying to get involved in business today. Speaker 2: There's nothing they can't do now. And don't they believe they can't. There's nothing--and go for it. This man's name was M. L. Stewart. Speaker 1: The author of 'The Great Divide?' Speaker 2: He was an insurance executive in the North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company. And where he got those thoughts from, I don't know. But through reading gave me--I could see what tomorrow had to be. I could see, man, we, this is, this has to be done here. Or here's how you do this through reading. So. I think, I hope people read, but I don't--I hope we read even more than most people 'cause we need it. Story_ID: 3707 Speaker 1: This is my first drug store [in Chicago, Illinois]. This is my wife [Barbara Boutte] and I in the store. This is at 47th [Street] and Lake Park [Avenue]. Speaker 2: About what time was that, I mean, what, what year approximately? Speaker 1: '53 [1953], I think, '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Boutte and his wife in his first drugstore, Chicago, Illinois, 1953-1954. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3708 Speaker 1: This is when I was in the [U.S.] Army. This is the Officer Candidate [Training] School at Fort Riley, Kansas. And I was about ready to graduate when this picture was taken. Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Boutte with his friends at Officer Candidate Training School at Fort Riley, Kansas, 1950s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3709 Speaker 1: Same thing. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: [Photo - Alvin Boutte with his friends at Officer Candidate Training School at Fort Riley, Kansas, 1950s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3710 Speaker 1: This was my sixtieth birthday. Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Boutte at his sixtieth birthday party, 1989. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3711 Speaker 1: This was our first home. And I'm at home in our first living room. Speaker 2: Where did you live there? Speaker 1: In Chatham [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: In Chatham. Speaker 2: Chatham, okay. Speaker 1: [Photo - Alvin Boutte in his first home in Chatham, Illinois, 1960s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3712 Speaker 1: This is the speech I'm making when I had just built a new building for Independence Bank [Chicago, Illinois]. And we were dedicating the building. Speaker 2: Okay, what year was this, the best you can recall or approximate? Speaker 1: '83 [1983]? Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Boutte making a speech at dedication of new Independence Bank building, Chicago, Illinois, 1983. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3713 Speaker 1: This is--I was in Italy on vacation. I didn't know whether you wanted that, but that's--I went there a lot. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: What part did you go to? Speaker 2: Florence is my favorite city 'cause I love the books and the artwork there. Speaker 1: [Photo - Alvin Boutte vacationing in Italy, 1990. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3714 Speaker 1: I'm on vacation. This is in the Caribbean. My business partner had a home in Jamaica and we used to go there four or five times a year. Speaker 2: About what time period would this one be? Oh, this was--I was in my forties or fifties then. Speaker 1: [Photo - Alvin Boutte vacationing in Jamaica, 1980s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3715 Speaker 1: This was when we moved into this building [in Chicago, Illinois], 1973 or '74 [1974]. Into Lake Point Tower. Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Boutte at home in Lake Point Tower, Chicago, Illinois, 1973-1974. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3716 Speaker 1: This was a group of people at the bank [Independence Bank, Chicago, Illinois]. We were trying to settle a dispute between [Mayor Eugene] Sawyer and Tim [Judge Timothy] Evans as to who was gonna run for mayor in the city [of Chicago]. And most of the business meetings or things like that occurred at my bank. And we were trying to get them--we were trying to negotiate for them to behave themselves and work with each other. Speaker 2: Now, this is 1987, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And this is [Illinois Attorney General] Roland Burris. Speaker 1: That's Roland. Eugene, that's Sawyer. [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson, civil rights activist], Tim Evans, myself and Cirillo. Speaker 2: Cirillo McSween [entrepreneur, activist]. Speaker 1: [Photo - Alvin Boutte in prayer with Rev. Jesse Jackson and others concerning the mayoral race after the death of Mayor Harold Washington, Chicago, Illinois, 1987. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3717 Speaker 1: This is when I was in college, Xavier University [of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And, I was young and that's it. Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Boutte at Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana, ca, 1947-1951. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3718 Speaker 1: This is when I received a doctorate degree from [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and I had just broken my neck--I had just broken my neck, not too long before that. And I was still in the brace. Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Boutte receiving an honorary doctorate degree, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1979. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte] Story_ID: 3719 Speaker 1: This was on my retirement as chairman and CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of Independence Bank [Chicago, Illinois]. It was the last official--. Speaker 2: [Photo - Portrait of Alvin Boutte taken upon his retirement from Independence Bank, Chicago, Illinois, 1989. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo. From the collection of Alvin Boutte]..