 Story_ID: 34885 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Alvin, A-L-V-I-N, Vincent, V-I-N-C-E-N-T, Blount, B-L-O-U-N-T, Jr. Speaker 1: Alright. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is February 24, 1922. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: In Raleigh, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am a physician. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you specialize in any particular-- Speaker 2: I retired from the field of general surgery in 1994. And now, I'm pleased to be doing some family practice on my own free time. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: Today's date is May 5, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in-- Speaker 1: You don't have to give your address, just-- Speaker 2: We're at my home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 1224 East Side Pike [unclear], Greensboro, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 34886 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Food? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. My favorite food is chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Color? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Most of the time I could agree with some light shades of green. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like warm weather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Spring and summer. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like to be on vacation usually after Labor Day when everybody else is gone. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Recently, I have adopted one, at the end of my life. "If you think you're right, have the courage to do it." Story_ID: 34887 Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm going to ask about your family history now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, so we don't get them mixed up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Annie Lee Kornegy Blount. Let's put down Annie-- Speaker 1: A-N-N-I-E? Speaker 2: Yes. Kornegy is K-O-R-N-E-G-Y. That's the way she spelled it. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: That's the way she spelled it, so-- Speaker 1: K-O-R-N-E-- Speaker 2: Kornegy. Speaker 1: G-Y? Speaker 2: N-E-G-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. It's like "Kor-ne-gy," [phonetically] but it's-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But it's, she says it's "Kearney." Speaker 2: It's spelled rather funny. It's her maiden name. Speaker 1: Alright. And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I never knew. But I do know that it was the year 1898. And I believe it was in the month of November, as far as I can tell. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Franklin County, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is that the same county that Raleigh [North Carolina] is in? Speaker 2: No. Franklin County is--she was born in the county, you know, the county. Actually, the town was Franklin, but she was born outside of the city limits. So, she said she was born in Franklin County. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: It's real difficult for me to trace the sides of my family, because during the early part of my life, we came up during the [Great] Depression. But I gather from my mother, she had fourteen sisters and brothers. And as far as I know, none of them are living. Speaker 1: Okay. So, fourteen sisters and brothers. Were they raised on a farm? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, did your grandparents own their land? Speaker 2: I gather they were sharecroppers during the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know they had lived there for several years, but I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34888 Speaker 1: Is there, is there any story in the family about your mother's [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount] family being from anywhere else other than Franklin County [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: No. I don't have any history on that, except for Franklin County. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her mother was a Pierce. And that side of the family, they had an uncle who was one of the earliest graduates from Shaw University Divinity School [Raleigh, North Carolina], and pastored a church in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: That's about all I knew about the greatness of the family. (laughter) Speaker 1: Did you know his name? Speaker 2: His name was Jimmie [or Jimmy?]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They called him Uncle Jimmie. Speaker 1: Jimmie Pierce, or-- Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, he pastored a church in Boston? Speaker 2: In Boston. I don't know what church it was. Speaker 1: Okay, Shaw. Are there any stories on your mother's side that go back to the Emancipation? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: Okay. So, are there any, you know, stories about anything else on your mother's side about, you know-- Speaker 2: No, except that I know they were farmers. And from an educational standpoint, several of the offspring did eventually finish high school and college. Most of them were into the teaching profession, and I guess the ministry, because there were about four ministers in the family. Story_ID: 34889 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount] have any memorable things to say about growing up? Speaker 2: No. When my mother related to--with the large family they had, and that's just about all. And unfortunately, a good bit of the time during the [Great] Depression, they--we were living in Raleigh [North Carolina]. They left Raleigh and went to New York. My father [Alvin Blount, Sr.] and mother took a job there. He was a chauffeur, and I think she was a maid to all of (unclear). We were left with one of our aunts in Franklinton, North Carolina where I went to school, in part of my elementary education. I had no other recollections, because we--after my elementary school, my parents came back to Raleigh. We lived there, and I finished high school and came to [North Carolina] A and T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. So, much of my life during the Great Depression was trying to make things meet, really. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I just wanted to finish up your mother's side of the family first. Speaker 2: My mother's side, yeah. Speaker 1: Then we're going to get to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --growing up. But, did your mother have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: Yes, she finished high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she finished high school. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Do you know the name of her school? Speaker 2: I think it was Albion Academy in Franklin. Speaker 1: Albion? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A-L-B-I-O-N? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, these are all, these are all black schools? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In North Carolina. Speaker 2: There was no integration then--(laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the South. Speaker 1: So, did your mother ever share with you her aspirations when she was going to school? Did she want to do something special? Did she have any special talents? Speaker 2: Yes. She said she wanted to be a teacher, but she never got to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we were adults and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34890 Speaker 1: Now, well, I'm going to ask about your father's side, and then we'll put them together. We'll have them meet. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His full name was-- Speaker 1: Same as-- Speaker 2: Alvin Blount. Speaker 1: Alvin Vincent Blount, Sr., right? Speaker 2: I accumulated, I became a Catholic early in life, and Vincent was my religious name. My father told me to keep it like that. So, that's why the variation. He said, no, I've retired that name, so you keep it that way. So, I kept it that way from elementary school on. Speaker 1: Okay. So, senior had no middle name. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was in November of 1900. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I figure that because they got married--he made, he wanted to be older than my mother [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount]. And he actually had, was four years older. (laughter) He had picked up two years and then picked up two more years. But we know he was born in 1900. So-- Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Wake County [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: That's W-- Speaker 2: Wake County, W-A-K-E. Speaker 1: Oh, Wake, okay. Speaker 2: Wake County. Speaker 1: Wake County. Speaker 2: In a town called, a little community called Lincolnville--Lincolnton, they called it. That's above Raleigh [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Now, is Lincolnton named for [President] Abraham Lincoln? Speaker 2: There is a Lincolnton, North Carolina. And this was a community they called in the county--actually, he was born near Raleigh, but outside the city limits. And this was located some ten miles up in the rural area. They owned that property up there. His father owned the property on which they were born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His grandfather. Speaker 1: His grandfather, or his father? Speaker 2: His grandfather owned the land. Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be your great-great, your great-grandfather, right? Owned the land. Okay. Story_ID: 34891 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how [Blount's great-grandfather] they got the land [near Raleigh, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Search me. Actually, it seems that the, he owned some land. And the fairground, the State bought it and sort of relocated him somewhere else. And they, seemed like every time they came to the fairground lands, it would pop on them. So finally, they swapped it out to a little place called--community called Lincolnton outside of Raleigh community. And so, that's how it all occurred. Now, how he got it, I don't know. During the, I do know a lot of my, his brothers got land. His uncle got land with squatter's rights. Years ago, I understand that in the State, it wasn't clear who owned what. So, they would go down and put some stakes on the land, and steal stakes and cement. And this is the--whoever's name, the family's name was, this was their land. And then they started paying taxes on it. We call that in North Carolina, the squatter's rights. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this--now, if his grandfather had this land, now this had to be like at the end of the [American] Civil War, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so. Speaker 1: Around that period of time. Speaker 2: Uh huh. And I understand a lot of it occurred at the end of the Civil War when blacks were freed. And they just went out, and wherever they were staying, they just took the land, until the white folks took it back from them. Speaker 1: Okay. But I imagine some got a chance to keep it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this is-- Speaker 2: I know of a family in Greensboro [North Carolina] owned a whole lot of land. Mr. Wallington told me he owned a beaucoup of land, and got it from squatter's rights. And at first, at first you used to put down little sticks there. Then some of the Caucasians come along and dig a hole and put cement--. They would put another steel stake in there, so it would be a little difficult to dig up. So, they got on to the trick, and they started doing the same thing. (laughter) And so, you see, I was taken out by Mr. Wallington and a patient of mine, and he showed me how it was done. And sometimes he would move his land over, if he didn't see any stakes, you know. Speaker 1: And make it more. (laughter) Speaker 2: He'd take up his and move over ten more yards, acres. And when the sheriff came around to see who's who, he said, "Here's the stake." (laughter) "So, these are the owners." That's the way-- Speaker 1: That just did not, you know-- (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34892 Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your dad's [Alvin Blount, Sr.] side? When you go back to your great-great-grandfather-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --on your father's side, can you go back any farther than that? Speaker 2: I do know my great-great-grandfather had four sons, one of which was named Josiah. And that was my father's daddy. And he had, well, four children that were living. I don't know how many were lost at birth, as they say. Had two sisters and one brother. And he was the third in the bunch. There was a brother, a sister, my dad, and another aunt. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34893 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Alvin Blount, Sr.] have any stories about growing up? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or going to school, or trying to learn how to do something, or-- Speaker 2: My father, I'm sure he probably didn't finish high school. I know that. All I know is he took a job working for White's. The name of the company was White's Ice Cream Company, in Raleigh [North Carolina], I think. And he worked there for years. And I think in 1928 [Great Depression] after building a home, things were so tough, he migrated to New Rochelle [New York]--his mother, mother and I. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34894 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount and Alvin Blount, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: My father and mother meeting is--. My sister has all those stories, but I don't. (laughter) I really don't know, I admit. Because he was from Raleigh [North Carolina] and she was from Franklinton [North Carolina], so to speak. I don't really know how they met, because it wasn't by--on a job or anything, because there was a difference there. So, I don't know. Speaker 1: Did they attend the same church? Well, they were pretty far--how far away is Franklinton from Raleigh? Speaker 2: Oh, about twenty-six miles. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, they did meet, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So they--and this is, they met, they got married I guess during the [Great] Depression? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, no, before the Depression. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, it was way before that, yeah. So, they got married in--. Now, you're the second child? Speaker 2: I'm the first child. Speaker 1: First child. Speaker 2: I was born in '22 [1922]. Speaker 1: So, they were married--were they married like a couple-- Speaker 2: 1920. Speaker 1: 1920, okay. Can you name your other brothers and sisters for us? Speaker 2: I have one sister, Louise Blount Green; Gladys Blount Brown; and Mildred Blount Spencer. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is your family, growing up? Speaker 2: (Nods head, yes.) Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34895 Speaker 1: And, now, when you think about your parents' [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount and Alvin Blount, Sr.] personalities--you know, tell us something about, like their personalities, as you answer this question. And this is a question I always ask. When you consider their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, how they look, what their points of view were, their talents--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, we always said my parents always looked like they were in love, all four of us. They were just, sometimes what we call too much buddy-buddy for husband and wife. But Alvin was crazy about Annie, and Annie was crazy about him. And we used to kid them. We said, "And we almost believe you're both jealous of each other." (laughter) They were very loving. My father was determined that we did have what we called an education. And he always wanted to bet on some of us to finish college, to finish high school and normal school, for the things that people did when they came along. Many of my mother's friends would finish high school and go to what was called an "ecole normale," a two-year normal school. And then they'd get a B certificate for teaching. And then they'd go to summer school until they got their A certificates, and all that. So, they were very proud parents and they--as much as they knew how--they would sort of ask us when we were studying--they'd learn some things, too. They would often say, "Say that again, son, that sounds interesting." So, they almost got a self education from being around their kids. Rather unusual, because most of the time, it's the other way, the kids get it from the parents. But my father and my mother, too, were always interested in the fact that we had to do our homework. And if we didn't do it, it was a little penalty. And it was corporal penalty (laughter) if we didn't do it. So, that's the type of parents they really were. And the saddest thing in their lives was when they had to be away from us [working in New Rochelle, New York, during the Great Depression], trying to provide for us, because there was no work in Raleigh [North Carolina] that was comparable to what they could make in the northern area, to support us. So, we stayed with, from time to time, with various of our people--our aunts or our uncles, while they sent money home for us to survive on. Story_ID: 34896 Speaker 1: Now tell us about--I know your parents [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount and Alvin Blount, Sr.] worked for the Rickenbackers, right, in New Rochelle, New York? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, this is significant. The Rickenbackers were fairly rich people. Tell us who they were. Speaker 2: That was in Prattsville, New York back then. My father worked as a chauffeur for Eddie Rickenbacker. Eddie Rickenbacker was a chauffeur for General [John J.] Pershing during World War I, and subsequently became a flyer. But he was a German by birth. Mrs. Rickenbacker had been married to the DuPont--and the DuPont family, the DuPont is the car that was the forerunner to General Motors. And she divorced him, and they said that she got a large sum of money. And she and Eddie Rickenbacker married, and he became owner of the--and manager of the old Eastern Air Lines. Speaker 1: Now, Rickenbacker, now he was a World War I ace, too-- Speaker 2: Yes, to General Pershing. Speaker 1: Well, he was a chauffeur to General Pershing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But wasn't he a flying ace? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a flyer, too. Speaker 1: And didn't he win a medal or something, for-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --shooting down German planes, or-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Not the Congressional Medal of Honor. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was something like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that, but-- Speaker 1: He was a very famous World War I-- Speaker 2: He was very tall. They had no children. They adopted two, Eddie and David. Speaker 1: Now, just backing up---now, General Pershing, I know General Pershing was called "Black Jack" Pershing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because he commanded black troops during the-- Speaker 2: World War I. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So, he's one of the famous generals. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's, but the name Black Jack came-- Speaker 2: (laughter). I remember that. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, there's an interesting connection here. So-- Speaker 2: My father worked for him for years until they moved to, retired and moved to Arizona. And they weren't about to go to Arizona, so--. Speaker 1: Now, just another thing about Rickenbacker. Is there a story about how he met Eddie Rickenbacker and was hired to be his chauffeur? Speaker 2: I don't know. I know my dad was a hustler about getting good jobs. I really don't know how he got them. Story_ID: 34897 Speaker 1: He [Blount's father, Alvin Blount, Sr.] got some--after he left [Eddie] Rickenbacker, he began to work for another rich guy, who was Reed Chambers, who was president of an insurance company. He insured large planes that were at that time going overseas. And he lived in Huntington, Long Island. And when I was in college, I used to go back and forth in the summer. And Reed had a yacht that he drove. He taught me how to drive it. And we used to leave Montauk Point [New York] and go up in Connecticut every Saturday afternoon. And he played a major role in my medical education and so forth. In fact, he came to my commencement with Mom [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount] and Dad and said, "Which do we take, the M or the D on the certificate?" (laughter). He wanted his share. And he said, I own part of this." (laughter). And he was very nice. I mean, he got me started, really. And got my daddy [unclear] pretty well off. Speaker 2: So, this is Reed chambers? Speaker 1: Uh huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 34898 Speaker 1: Okay. So, we were talking about Reed Chambers. And you said--so, he helped pay for your education. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you remained in touch with him throughout your college-- Speaker 2: Throughout my medical and college education. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let me go--is there a, was there a third family that your father [Alvin Blount, Sr.] worked for, too? Speaker 2: Those were the only two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know after he left Reed, he retired entirely. He came to Raleigh [North Carolina] and shortly after that, my mother [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount] died. And about four years later, he married again. And in 1982, he passed away. Story_ID: 34899 Speaker 1: We always ask about growing up. So, I want to take you back to your earliest memory. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. And it's sort of--I sort of put the cart before the horse. Because my better days were not my childhood days, because of the [Great] Depression through which I grew, such that when my later life was certainly more happy, with the family and so forth. It sort of gave me an idea of at least I know what I want. I don't want what I had to take, but as you know, being poor has no discrimination. You either have it, or you don't. (laughter). So, my most pleasant memories, I guess, were just being in school, and I'll tell you why. My father [Alvin Blount, Jr.], despite the fact that he had to be away from me a lot, and since I was the only son, his letters and his chats were being with me. He put it this way: "Son, if you don't set your eye on being something or somebody, you might as well stop and do what I had to do." So, I never forgot that. So, not by chance of what I came through school all my life as an honor student. And I didn't forget that. I sort of built on that, enjoyed that. At an early age, I read everything--library. At an early age, I became interested in the sciences, and so forth. And not from the standpoint of being brilliant, I just wanted to know. Because that was something to keep me busy, because I didn't have any so-called pleasures that those people who had more means than I had. So, I was able to get through that before getting depressed, because maybe I was pulled--and my buddies, and so forth. So, after I made it through that elementary stage and got to high school, I was--picked up and running, because my life became more on an adult side. And I began to enjoy the things that others--because I started working when I was thirteen years of age, helping to do things--helping my father with his jobs, and so forth. And we didn't have cars at that time. I remember my father's first car was a Studebaker. And otherwise, we walked and used public transportation. So, it wasn't an easy road, but it set a pattern for me to raise and rear my family, and one of which I became serious about at probably an earlier age than I wanted to. One of the things that I did fight with my parents about was trying to determine what my life was going to be like. For instance, when I was a kid in high school, they used to talk about, "Where are you going to college?" So, they wanted me to go to a school of arts and, you know, they wanted me to be either a teacher or a preacher. Because those were people who--you didn't dare reach out to the entrepreneurs that we have today for our people. People weren't going around in your profession then. And blacks, there were few and far between. But you could read an historical review of teachers and preachers and someone who lived off others. But not anyone who was writing, not anyone who's a scientist and so forth. So, I wanted some of that, and I wanted to go to [North Carolina] A and T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to get you to A and T yet. Speaker 2: But no, no-- Speaker 1: But I- Speaker 2: But I'm saying--I know you didn't--but in my childhood, these were the things that--I was looking at college catalogs in Mrs. Kelly's room when I was in eighth grade, college catalogs, just looking through. Seeing all--A and T, they had all the black schools there. So, I became a little bit more of an adult an early age and missed a childhood, because times were tough, and I had to make it. Story_ID: 34900 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Were there any role models for science when you were growing up, in your community? Speaker 2: Yes. We enjoyed the people in the teaching profession, these coaches, and some of the ministers, because that's all we had. We didn't, there was nobody else. There were no basketball players. There were no--you know, as a black--as a black you were, I had a feeling. In fact, I used to write about it in school, the feeling of being a black, and someone determined that I should stay black. And I took that as an issue in debating and so forth, early in the seventh or eighth grade. I said, why--you know, I could see life then--that you got me over here--. And where I picked it up at, I used to ask why don't I have a new book? But the books were passed down to me when the whites used them in their schools the year before. We got them the next year, and the whites got new books, in North Carolina. So, some people think that little folk don't feel those things. There are some little folk that do feel those things. Fortunately, I felt them early. And my daddy [Alvin Blount, Sr.] used to worry about it. He said, "Son, you're thinking too early. Let me worry about that." And my answer was to him--and he looked at me strangely once. And it was, "Don't I have the right to think, no matter how old I am?" And he said, "No, you don't, you're a child." And I had to deal with that. But I dealt with it another way. When I got old enough, I was able to come back and examine that, and so forth. So, it made me a model. If I had to rear one, I would do differently. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: So, my childhood was fixed. Responsibility was placed on me to think to survive. Story_ID: 34901 Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. (laughter). It's a funny thing. One of the most phenomenal things I had was that my mother [Annie Lee Kornegy Blount], through tradition, had said that "You children can do anything you want to, but you must be baptized in the First Baptist Church of Franklinton [North Carolina], and I don't care what religion." So, I was taken down during revival by my several aunts, and placed on the mourner's bench on that afternoon. And I went to the mourner's bench until Friday. And they would shout and say, "Son, you got to get religion so you can get baptized." (laughter). So, I stood up and professed, this is, I know God. And I guess I was--and I was baptized. But I didn't--my feeling was that, I think you still have to live it. It's not something you can pick up on Sunday and get rid of it on Monday and Tuesday and Wednesday. And that was my, it's still my feeling about it. And usually--at that time, I came up as a child as a Baptist. I went to college, and I became a Catholic. And I remained a Catholic until my second marriage, and then I became Episcopalian. And-- Speaker 1: Now, does it make that much difference to you? Speaker 2: No, because I'm able to feel that, after all, my destiny is mine, and not the Pope, even though I have one of the highest honors from the Pope. I have the distinguished pontifical blessing from Pope Pius VIII, given to me on a visit here by Cardinal Stritch years ago. And, but whatever I was, I practiced and did the best I could with it. And people say Catholics don't--we had to--when I was Catholic, we had those discussions, just like you and I. There's this freedom of discussion. Someone may try to straighten your mind out about it, (laughter), but the whole concept of my life has been that when you cease thinking and you only do it--as [Francis] Bacon has put it, "Reading makes a full man, and writing, a ready man." Speaker 1: Okay. Is that something you learned in school? Speaker 2: I learned it when I was in eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34902 Speaker 1: Let me ask you. Now, what was the name of your first school? What was the name of your, where you started school? Speaker 2: School? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I started school in Lincoln Elementary School, in New Rochelle, New York in 1928. Speaker 1: Okay, Lincoln Elementary. So, this is an integrated school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Speaker 1: How many other black students were in the class with you? Do you know? Speaker 2: There were a few, but few in number. And my father [Alvin Blount, Jr.], they moved--I had to be moved around because my father was very peculiar about his first--. His last name is spelled "Blount," but it's pronounced as "Blunt." And he contended, "I can spell it anyway I want to, and pronounce it the way I want to, in America." And she was a German teacher, and they had it. So, they just moved me to another class. (laughter). Speaker 1: So, this is in grade school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and the only thing he would cash Blunt on, B-L-U-N-T, was if it was a check. He cashed it. (laughter). Otherwise, he'd send it back. He was just that bold about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in grade school. So, you were at Lincoln Elementary School for how many, how many grades? Speaker 2: I remained there for two or three years. And then I went to Franklinton, North Carolina and stayed there until I entered high school in Raleigh, North Carolina in my first year of high school. And I'm trying to remember whether I went to the eleventh or twelfth grade, because the State of North Carolina at the time I came through, only had eleven grades. They didn't have 12 grades. It was some time, either--. But I finished high school in '39 [1939], but-- Speaker 1: Wait a minute. Was that true for whites and blacks? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Speaker 1: Just eleven grades? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. I just wanted to know, go back to elementary school. Speaker 2: Then, the cities in North Carolina had twelve grades before the--so, the school board used to be the city school board instead of the county. The cities had school boards that had made it twelve grades, paying for the extra grade, yeah. Speaker 1: Was North Carolina one of the few states to have eleven, or did other states have eleven? Speaker 2: All the South had eleven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that was standard in the South? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And blacks were cheated, because in the rural area when I went to school, they closed school for cotton and tobacco for the blacks. And the whites were still in school. (laughter) So we got--it didn't make a difference. We, you know, at that time, I feel, well, they weren't into black folks being educated. So, you know, so they--instead of you going to school to, say, the number of weeks you're supposed to go, you spent four weeks out to go out there and pick white folks' tobacco and cotton. Speaker 1: Now, so, you were at Lincoln for about three years? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Speaker 1: So, I guess--was it the third of fourth grade, you're back in-- Speaker 2: Back in Franklinton. Speaker 1: In Franklinton. Speaker 2: And then I stayed there through the seventh grade. Speaker 1: What was the name of that school? Because I'm trying to get the names and dates of the school. Speaker 2: B.F. Person-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Elementary School. Speaker 1: B.F. Person? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34903 Speaker 1: Now, how did, was, what was the difference between Lincoln [Elementary School, New Rochelle, New York] and B.F. Person [Elementary School, Franklinton, North Carolina]? Was there any noticeable difference in the level of education you were getting? Speaker 2: More individual. They had, in New York they had less pupil load in that school than the--. In the South then, they didn't think about pupil loads for black teachers. They'd just haul them in there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, were you in a room with multiple grades in the South? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in the South? Speaker 2: Yeah. In other words, it was--the first and second grades were together. The third and fourth grade was together. The fifth and sixth grades were together. And the seventh grade was usually taught by the principal. Because that's-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, the elementary school just went to seventh grade? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I started to Washington High School for my high school. Speaker 1: Now, is this Booker T. Washington High School? Speaker 2: No, it was--(laughter). I don't know whether it was George Washington, but, I know it wasn't, I know it wasn't Booker T. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, it was--the only thing they had was the Washington High School down there. Speaker 1: Okay. Because I know there are so many black high schools named after Booker T. Speaker 2: Yeah. (laughter). No-- Speaker 1: But that one was not. Speaker 2: Some of them were named after George Washington. And I stayed there until '39 [1939]. Story_ID: 34904 Speaker 1: So, now along the way in school, who were some, were there any special teachers or mentors that came along that recognized your talent? Speaker 2: I had a, what she taught was history and government, named Mrs. May Kelly Kellogg, who was my favorite teacher. She was, I was a little boy, and used to go in her room and help her out with grading her papers, and all that sort of thing. And she would give me a, you know, took me home. And then I had a chemistry teacher, Mrs. Sue Vick Perry. I guess she was responsible for me taking my major in chemistry in college. She was, they were my favorite two. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was it because of Miss Perry that-- Speaker 2: Mrs. Sue Vick Perry, we just called her. Speaker 1: Okay, Sue Vick Perry. Was there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was it because of her that you wanted to be a chemistry major? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I went to college and I became a chemistry and math major. I had a double major. Speaker 1: So, did you--what level of math were you able to take in high school [Washington High School, Franklinton, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: In high school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We had math through geometry. We had general math, algebra, trigonometry and geometry, plane geometry. Story_ID: 34905 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school [Washington High School, Franklinton, North Carolina], were you, did you--were you a student leader in school, would you say? Speaker 2: Yeah, I participated very much in student government. I was president of the student body. And I also was president of the, what we called the Crown and Scepter Club, which was the honor society. Speaker 1: Okay, Crown and Scepter. Speaker 2: And I graduated what you call it, the salutatorian of the class, second in the class. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were in high school from what, from 19-- Speaker 2: I was in there four years. And I finished in '39 [1939]. Speaker 1: Okay, so 1935 to '39 [1939]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is just before the war, and during the last years of the Depression-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When things are really rough. Did anybody in your family take advantage of any of the New Deal programs with FDR [President Franklin D. Roosevelt]? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. There were so many aids. I guess I'm the only one. I had--no, that was when I got to college, the NYA [National Youth Administration] scholarship. That's about all I know of taking advantage of. I had some other cousins that went to college, and I don't know how they went. Story_ID: 34906 Speaker 1: Was there a black doctor nearby at all, when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Growing up? Yeah. There were several. There was Dr. Perry, Dr. Roberts, Dr. Delaney, and another famous guy, I forget his name. But those are some I remember very well. Speaker 1: Dr. Delaney, huh? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was the cousin of Judge Delaney in New York. Speaker 1: Hubert Delaney? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright. So, I was just wondering if there were any... Did you have a friendship with any of the doctors, in terms of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Dr. Perry and Dr. Delaney. Speaker 1: Okay. And was Dr. Perry related to Sue Vick Perry [Blount's chemistry teacher in school]? Speaker 2: That was his wife. Speaker 1: Okay, there we go. Speaker 2: (laughter) Speaker 1: That makes sense. Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember he took my tonsils out, and she came over to the hospital to see me. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "I just came by, Alvin, to see if you could talk." (laughter) In those days, they were pouring ether down your throat. (laughter) Story_ID: 34907 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were salutatorian when it's time to graduate [from Washington High School, Franklinton, North Carolina]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And was, now, how many people graduated with you about, do you think? Speaker 2: I had that group--I guess about forty of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And someone sent me that list the other day. And I put it down somewhere. It might be in the material I left, leave for you to take. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is in 1939? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, how did you choose North Carolina A and T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]? I mean, not that it is a hard choice. But did somebody counsel you about it, or-- Speaker 2: I didn't know anyone who'd been to A and T. I looked at the catalog and saw some things in there I liked, that wasn't in the other catalogs. And my father [Alvin Blount, Sr.] looked at A and T as a farmer's school. He said, "You don't need to go to college to be a farmer, do you? My heavens! I ain't going to waste my money sending you up there." So, I got my NYA Scholarship and went on to A and T. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. NYA, that's the National-- Speaker 2: National Youth Administration. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's the first appointee that [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt made, black--Mary McCloud Bethune was head of that. She was the first black female in the government administration to head such-- Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 34908 Speaker 1: So, at North Carolina A and T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], I mean, so who were some of the figures there that made an impact on you. Speaker 2: I guess the fellow named Dean Wallace Gibbs. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: He was the dean of the school I was in. Speaker 1: What was his last name, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Gibbs. Speaker 1: Gibbs, okay. Dean Gibbs, okay. Speaker 2: And then there was my major professor, Dr. Marian Towns. Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Towns became the president, right, at some point. Is that right? Speaker 2: Not this Towns. This-- Speaker 1: Not this Towns, okay, a different one. Now, what did Dr. Towns, what did--so, the dean-- Speaker 2: Chemistry. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so he's chemistry. Speaker 2: Chemistry professor. Dr. Hubert Thaxton, he was the physics professor. And a Mrs. Kelly, she was an English professor--and several others there. I learned to meet a lot of them there, because I was president of the student body my last year there, and also vice chairman of the editorial board when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, okay. So, at A and T, did you, were you involved in any sports or anything like that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: (laughter). Not--most of my work was in the books and in the campus politics. So, I had a good number of--. One year I was president, I think, president of my junior class. I was elected senior, but after I became president of the student body, I couldn't hold two jobs. So, I helped to write what was known as a student handbook, and stayed there one summer at the request of the president to get that done, because they never had a decent handbook for students' rights and so forth, which I was interested in. And I also was president of the Pan-Hellenic Council, to try to keep the Greeks together. (laughter). That was a pretty solid thing. When I was in college, they had more fights among the sororities and fraternities. So, we had a panel of the council to sort of, they'd come by us to, when they got in trouble to sort of issue out penalties. I got--the Greek straightened out was one of my goals (unclear). Story_ID: 34909 Speaker 1: Now, you had a nickname in college [North Carolina A and T State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Tell us what your nickname was. Speaker 2: Well, I was weighing about 128 pounds. And when I ran for the student body, they had to pick me up and put me on a, (laughter), on a stool so the people could hear me, because I had a heavy voice. So, I got the name "Little Caesar." (laughter). And so everywhere I went in the crowd, you know, "There's the president of the student body." And somebody looked around and said, "Where is he?" And on the editorial staff of the fraternity, I was always that little small guy. And then I grew up to be this heavy-set guy. (laughter) I wasn't the same as I was in college. Speaker 1: So, was the name based on the character in the movie that Edward G. Robinson played? Speaker 2: I doubt it. Maybe someone could allude to it, saying that. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But when I was running for student body, there was a guy from my home town. His name was Bryant. He was a football player. And he was the one who used to pick me, "Come on, Little Caesar, I'll put you up in there, so you can hear." (laughter). And it was really an ordeal. At [North Carolina] A and T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], I almost won, almost like a presidential election. We started campaigning six months ahead of time, and so forth. And had I known what I was getting into, I probably wouldn't have gotten into it, because I was sort of made that way. So, but, you know, you get tied up with debating and all those sorts of things in life. You cater to those sorts of things, of beating somebody's heads. So, it was fun. And then, my fraternity was pushing me a lot. The guy I was running from was president of Alpha Phi Alpha, and I was the polemarch of Kappa Alpha Psi. And that was an issue. The independents didn't want us running, so they thought we'd be trying to run the school. Greeks--. It turned out to be good, so--. Story_ID: 34910 Speaker 1: Alright. So, now the war [World War II] started when you were in school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In 1941. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: I mean the war for the United States. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because it had been going on since the late '30s [1930s], I guess, in Europe. The war for the United States starts in 1940, with the bombing of Pearl Harbor [Hawaii]. So, do you remember when you heard about that, and what you thought? Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember hearing President [Franklin D.] Roosevelt on the radio, "The day that shall live in infamy." Those were his famous words. Then he--man, in about six weeks, our campus almost cleaned out, and the draft got them. See, before we got into the war, you know, we were all set up with these draft boards, with the expectations and so forth. I was majoring in chemistry then, and math, and I had a deferment on the basis of this being needed. So, my dean called me in and told me that "I can't get you any deferments any more, so make sure in these fields--" medicine, and he named one or two others. I said, "I'll take medicine." (Unclear) Story_ID: 34911 Speaker 1: Because I had a feeling all my life that anything you want to be, you should be. But I also had a feeling that a man without a good background in humanities should never strive to be anything. And most of my scientific friends said, "How do you justify that? Scientists don't have all the--" I said, "I justify it, because if you can't read, no need in going into science, is it, or anything? And if you can't write and express yourself, you're afraid to soar." I said, "Let's have a good background in humanities, and then do what you want to do." So, although I had a major in chemistry enough to manage, I also had a lot in the humanities that sort of kept me going. I went through English literature and all that sort of stuff, and gained what they teach you. I didn't know what a drama was before I got this sort of thing. So, it made me more intelligent. I said, I want to be intelligent, even though--I didn't want to be a dumb scientist and couldn't associate with society. We have that, good. So, well and good. But I didn't want to be that way. I wanted to be a smart scientist, but then I certainly wanted to be an appropriate communicator with my society. And the only way I got that was sitting in on a class in debate, in what we call public speaking. And then I learned what there was about propositions and positives and negatives, and how you go about-- Speaker 2: Did you participate in any debates yourself-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --in those days? Speaker 1: I didn't. I was president of the student body, and I didn't have time. But I sat in the classes and did the paperwork. I went away once with the debating team. They were out, and someone did fairly well. But I didn't, wasn't considered a member of the team. Because--and the reason I didn't--by the time I got back to my senior year, I had taken everything [North Carolina] A and T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] had to offer for me to fulfill the requirement just about, except a few things. And they almost kept me from graduating. At A and T, you have to have three hours in music appreciation. And I somehow didn't have but two. I don't know what happened. They called me and said you can't graduate. I went on and took those courses in composition with Dean Lawson. And he said, so he said, "Alvin, I think you did well. On the examination, you made 92," he said. I usually give an 'S' or 'B', but I'm going to give you an 'A', just to showboat what majors I got." And I waved--you guys over there, you know. But it was just fun to me then. I wouldn't do that now, but you know in college, you know, you like all the accolades you can get, you know. You appreciate it, being smart, because it was getting you somewhere now. But that's the fun in your life. Story_ID: 34912 Speaker 1: So, did you have to--so you were able to actually able to graduate [from North Carolina A and T State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] before you went into the military? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is, this is 19-- Speaker 2: '47, [1947]. Speaker 1: '47 [1947], okay. Speaker 2: I graduated in May and went into the military the next month. Speaker 1: No, not '47 [1947]. This is when, this is before-- Speaker 2: '43 [1943]. Speaker 1: '43 [1943], right. Speaker 2: Yeah, '43 [1943]. Speaker 1: Now, this is the first time you go into the service, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. But they had us--here's how they tricked us, and all that stuff. You join the ERC, Enlisted Reserve Corps, then you got a deferment. If you didn't join the Corps, then you're out there, they could pick you up anytime. See, you could go to the [U.S.] Army and say, well, I got to do this. And they say okay, we'd rather have you wait, after you're trained, than have you lose all that. So, and then when they came back for me, I had already been admitted to med [medical] school. So, it was a different color. They took me out of the Reserves and I went back to a civilian. (laughter) Speaker 1: Well, how long--I mean, so, when you entered the Army this first time, did you enter as a private? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: I entered down at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] as a private. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I left there and went to Camp Sibert, Alabama, assigned to the chemical warfare basic training. Speaker 1: Now, because of your background as a chemist? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I left there and went to Monroe, down in North Carolina with engineers. And then they got confused and they sent me back to A and T, which was called Specialized Training and Reassignment, something that the Army had for, you know, getting people in various fields they want to use. They sent them out. So, I came to A and T, back to a whole bunch sitting around, not knowing what the heck was going to happen to me. Then they sent me back to Monroe. And then I left Monroe and went to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] in '47 [1947], March of '47 [1947]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34913 Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about that experience. Now, Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] in 1947 had Dr. Charles Drew on staff. Did you have a sense of who he was then, when you went to Howard? Speaker 2: Dr. Drew was very interesting, and doctor--and professor of surgery. And he taught all seniors, and a former lecturer. And I remember he'd always give us a test. But, and he asked me the question, "What's a pus cell, Alvin?" And I knew what it was. I said, "Is it a white blood cell?" He said, "You're excused." So, I only got one question instead of ten questions out of it. And then I was in the first fifteen of the class at Howard. You were privileged to do your residency, or your internship, at Freedmen's [Hospital, Washington D.C.]. And he asked some of us to, he had some residents that he had trained. They were in the South, and in order for everybody to have a fair share at a good internship, some of us went to different places. Some went to Cincinnati [Ohio], some went to New York. I came to Winston-Salem [North Carolina], because it was home for me. And Malloy had done his internship, I mean his residency under Drew. So I trained under Malloy. And also they, at the same time was down at Wake Forest Baptist. They joined in to fill in, to make sure that they were trying to get our residencies approved. You see, at that time, I guess there weren't but about four or five places that you could get a residency for blacks. The best account of it is in a book called, 'The Black Physician in the South'. And if you can't find a copy, then I'll get a copy of it and send it to you. It's about the most complete book about what happened to us. In short, we were relegated in a community as a social position to take care of venereal disease, tuberculosis, and things of that--and the poor. And the better class of black folks went to white folks in the segregated South (unclear). But it's, I may have read it three times, just to make sure that I got it. But it's a shaker. And so, I came to Winston-Salem-- Story_ID: 34914 Speaker 1: Now, I don't want you to get--I want to go back to Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, District of Columbia] for a minute. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And talk about who was there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because-- Speaker 2: Okay, Howard University--Drew. That's the story, Drew. At the time I was at Howard, Howard was rebuilding its faculty. And there was a dean there before my--just before I got there--by the, his name was Newman Adams [ph.]. And the dean when I got there was Dr. Johnson, who was rebuilding Howard's faculty. You know, we only had two good medical schools--Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Howard, after to the so-called Flexner Report, in the twenties. Speaker 1: Well, what did the Flexner Report do? And what-- Speaker 2: The Flexner Report went through--Flexner was a part of the Carnegie Board. You know, he had--Carnegie had all those groups who were interested in the philanthropy of education in the South, for blacks. Speaker 1: Yeah, James Jean (ph) and Carnegie, Phelps Stokes-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And all those. Speaker 2: [Abraham] Flexner was paid to--say, you got fifty black medical schools. And when he got through, he had two that would qualify. Here's how he did it. They did not have what we need to--say, a first class medical class has to have a good hospital, a good teaching hospital. And they didn't have it. That's why Leonard--because you know there was a medical school at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], called the Leonard Medical School. And there were lots of graduates at North Carolina when I came out of medical school, who were still hanging around. And they had a good number of them down in the New Orleans [Louisiana] area that didn't last. And Meharry didn't measure up to the point, but it got a lot of help. And Howard tried to help them. See, Howard is both government and private supported, you see. So, it had no problem. Speaker 1: So, there were medical schools in other black colleges-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --before the Flexner Report. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And they didn't-- Speaker 2: Tennessee-- Speaker 1: Tennessee State [University, Nashville] had one? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All of this is in, in this book I told you, all of this is right there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's very interesting. Speaker 1: So, that must have been devastating for the black colleges. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 34915 Speaker 1: And then on top of that, we had problems when we got residences in medicine and surgery. That was it. They didn't want us in OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] because they didn't want us around the white women. They didn't want us in no specialty, because they thought ENT [ear, nose, and throat], and ophthalmology and orthopedics and plastic surgery--no. It's just a wonder--my grandson went to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] and, Brown Medical School, and he did his residency at Rush [University] in Chicago [Illinois], and did hand surgery out at Mayo [Clinic, Minnesota]. And then he had a spurt down at Miami as professor of hand surgery. And now he's gone back to Chicago (laughter). But you just didn't have that opportunity. And we don't have it really now. You'd be surprised to know how some of those--just know people, and get our people in. We don't talk about it. I would never divulge how some things developed. And they're--then this way, you have to have--you say I know it's right that these people should be getting this. Now, who do I go to that can give me some help? And you have to develop an attitude that we can't always hate everybody. I know good whites, good blacks, good Filipinos, and all. So, you have to work with a person on the basis of trust, and that they see the same way that you see. And that's what Howard [university, Washington, District of Columbia] taught us. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 34916 Speaker 1: So, at the time you were going to school, you say there were like two qualified black medical schools? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Then you can be--you can do residency, I guess, still at Homer G. Phillips [Hospital]? Speaker 2: Homer G. Phillips, Kansas City [Missouri]. Speaker 1: Kansas City. Speaker 2: Kansas City, Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], Harlem Hospital [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Harlem Hospital. Speaker 2: Provident [Hospital] in Baltimore [Maryland], Provident in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But again, that's all. And they, and Howard has not always had all these departments. See, when I was there they didn't have, you know, plastic in surgery. They didn't have so-called transplantation surgery. They didn't have heart surgery. They just had one man who was just trained in thoracic surgery. They had one man trained in neuro-surgery. They had one of everything. And I was fighting hard, trying to get others. And then to get salaries for them--which the university doesn't want to pay them any more than they're paying people on the Hill--then doctors just can't live off that. Their life ain't like that. I mean, if you don't make $200,000 a year in medicine, you can forget it, you're dead. Speaker 1: Now, this is in contrast with the image of the black doctor in the community as being the most important professional in the black community. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: The M.D. is lionized (unclear) you know. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: But that's the great goal that I always had in mind. Give me the same right to make the same money that you're making. If I'm on the colonel's hospital staff, I can make just as much as you make. You keep me over here at L. Richardson--and you're taking the cream and I'm taking the pot--because people won't go over here because they know we don't have qualified men here. The other thing that you know about medicine--in the early '20s [1920s], the American Medical Association [AMA] was to blame for all of it. And the blame for all of it was they said, you hospital administrators, you don't allow anyone on your staff unless he's a member of the County Medical Society. In the South, no blacks in the County Medical Society. And I'm going to send you something that you, I'm going to send you a copy of how we were able to get integration in medicine in Greensboro [North Carolina]. And I helped Phelps write it, but I dared him to use my name, because we knew the white brothers wouldn't accept it. So, I hate to get off these things. Speaker 1: No, this is good information. There's nothing wrong with it. Story_ID: 34917 Speaker 1: Just--but at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], before you get out of Howard--some of these names are resonating these days, like--I don't know if--I know LaSalle Leffall [also a HistoryMaker] was a student of Charles Drew, too. Was he there when you were there? Speaker 2: That's right. LaSalle was the chief of surgery, and the first black president of the American Cancer Society [ACS]. A very smart guy--finished his undergraduate at Florida A and M [University, Tallahassee, Florida] and went to Howard, and kept on going. Speaker 1: And I think Jack White was another protege. Speaker 2: Jack was a, Jack White was the smartest technician that I ever seen, a wonderful guy. Those guys hung around. They gave up everything. Jack certainly wasn't a rich man when he died, off what they paid him at Howard, but Charlie Drew was an inspiration. This boy stuck with it and was catching hell, trying to keep a salary there. Speaker 1: And did you have any--do you remember, we've heard a lot of stories about W. Montague Cobb. Speaker 2: (laughter) W. Montague Cobb was an interesting man. He was a professor of anatomy. For a long time, he was the editor of the NMA Journal, and also was president of NMA. And they-- Speaker 1: That's the National Medical Association. Speaker 2: Yeah, national, uh huh. He was, I knew Montague very well. In fact, I had him come down and speak at our local medical society once before he died. And he, I remember my famous question on anatomy. It was about four o'clock one morning, and he said, "Doc," he would call me Doc. "Well, sort of tell me about this bone." And I said, "Well, that looks like the acromioclavicular bone. "Yes, and what is the muscle that attaches right here?" And I thought--. So, he said, "So, I'm going to stop you. I'm trying to trick you." He said, "Nothing's attached." (laughter) He said, "Well, you go on." Nobody knew what the bone was, so--. I had a lot of things in medical school that I escaped, by doing the right thing at the right time. Well, I guess that's the way life is. I guess that's the way you live your life. (laughter) But Montague was one of the most astute professors that you've ever seen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And fought very vividly about the civil rights problems. When he died, he was still fighting the problem we call now, disparity in medicine. Speaker 1: He went on to become an officer in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], didn't he? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was president of the NAACP, sure, uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Anybody else, from that time? Speaker 2: Moses Young from South Carolina. He was professor of human anatomy. And he used to use the term, "You have to milk the cow each and every day, gentlemen." (laughter). His famous term, "You have to milk the cow each and every day." He means that you've got to learn today and learn tomorrow, retain it today and retain it tomorrow, "Milk the cow every day." That was his favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we had another guy there we used to call Blondy Newman. He taught biochemistry. He couldn't talk very clearly. He got his tongue tied up, but he was a good teacher if he could get it out. (laughter) So, the way you pass his course, was just get his notes. He had an outline there and everything, so every day he'd get his notes, because you couldn't understand him. But he was a smart guy, you know--M.D. and Ph.D., but he just couldn't talk. Professor of biochemistry, but he just couldn't get it over to us. Story_ID: 34918 Speaker 1: Now, did you ever have any regrets about not pursuing chemistry. You know, some scientists actually, you know, they talk about, you know, the fact that a lot of people think of a doctor or M.D. as a scientist. And they say no, a scientist is actually making new discoveries all the time, where a doctor is only like working with the discoveries of scientists on diseases, and that sort of thing. Is it, so do you have any-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess because I didn't get any further in it than an undergraduate level. Had I gone on to, you know, master's or Ph.D. or something like that, and had got cut off of research, I guess I would have. But I never--because as I said before, I think that with a potential mind--and just put it in that you can be anything you want to be, if you pursue it in the right way. I could have done the same thing in ministry. So, I could have done the same thing in something else--so, wherever I got my concentration. Even though I retired in '91 [1991], I still read two or three journals a month, because I like to keep up with the latest things going on in my field. And I go to my office four days a week and just see some patients, just because that's what I want to do. And-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, it's endless preparation. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Even when you become an M.D., you've got to still-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. So, you've got to, unless you--see, I always approach medicine--you got to know, of course, anatomy. You got to know function, you've got to know--. But you look at it from the problem standpoint. And presented it with a problem, then you got to analyze the problem. If a person says they got a headache and nothing else, then you're really stuck, because of all the many things that cause headaches. But you do know some of those things that cause headaches don't last always. So, get rid of those. And then if the headache is centered this way, then this maybe might be something inside the brain. So, let's do a CT survey and so forth. And if that doesn't show anything, let's go further than that. Let's do a contrast and so forth. Well, I've done everything I can do to get all this information. Let me call my friend in neurology and let him worry about it. So, we can worry about it together. Then he comes up with some answers. So, you don't practice medicine anymore to yourself. You practice with your colleagues, as a team. And that's the way I looked at it, even when I was doing general surgery. I mean, they want to operate on a person with a bad heart. You say, I can do this, all things being equal. And if I do have to do it, they must know the chances, the risks. Story_ID: 34919 Speaker 1: Okay. So, after you finished at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia]--now, did you graduate with any special honors or anything? Speaker 2: (laughter). I graduated from college [North Carolina A and T State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] magna cum laude, not med school. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, we had, we had--what did we have? We had an honor society. It wasn't the one that they have now. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: What happened was the first fifteen in the class made the honor society. I was number, had the odd number of thirteen. The man that was number eleven, it came up that he was a doctor's son, and they wouldn't let him in. So they cut, they took the first ten that year. (laughter) Speaker 1: That's terrible. So, your residency was in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] at Kate B. Reynolds Hospital? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, how long were you there? Now, this is an African American hospital-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or hospital for the colored community? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was there from 1947 to '50 [1950]. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's three years, pretty much. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And well, how did you-are there any stories from that experience? Speaker 2: During the residency? Speaker 1: Uh huh. Speaker 2: Oh, that was fine. I was, I had--well, this is the first time I really came in contact with whites in post-graduate training. So, I had some very good foreign teachers, and got all my requirements in, filing for my board in surgery. Story_ID: 34920 Speaker 1: So, everything worked out, you know-- Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: --fine there [residency at Kate B. Reynolds Hospital in Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and you're back at North Carolina. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then, so was it in 1950 that you went back into the military? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is, you join a MASH [Mobile Army Surgical Hospital] unit, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I went to [Fort] Bragg [North Carolina], I went to Bragg July 1st of '50 [1950]. And until September 1st, '50 [1950], I was what they called a civilian surgeon. I wasn't in the [U.S.] Army. They put me in the Army on September 1st, 1950 as a first lieutenant in the Medical Corps. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they made you a first lieutenant. Speaker 2: And that was--at the same time, I went to what we called the second MASH, which was formed at Fort Bragg, apparently. But I still worked at the hospital there at Fort Bragg until December. We left-19--December 31, 1950, we left going to Korea. We landed in Japan and found out they couldn't accept us in Korea, because the war was messed up in Korea. So, we remained in Japan on what we called temporary duty, going to various hospitals doing surgery. And got to Pusan, I think, in March or April of '51 [1951]. Speaker 1: Pusan, P-O-U-S--P-O-U-S-S-A-N? Speaker 2: P-U-S-A-N, Pusan. Speaker 1: P-U-S-A-N, okay, Korea. Speaker 2: And then we were named, got a new name over there--8225th MASH unit. (laughter). It simply meant that we were in the 8th Army then, and our number was 222. Speaker 1: Okay. So, MASH-- Speaker 2: I stayed with the MASH until-- Speaker 1: Now, MASH stands for? Speaker 2: Mobile Army Surgical Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: So, I stayed there traveling up and down that peninsula, moving up, until I think April of '52 [1952]. And then I came back to Fort Bragg, and stayed until September 30th of '52 [1952]. And then I came to Greensboro [North Carolina]. Story_ID: 34921 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the experience in the MASH [Mobile Army Surgical Hospital] unit in Korea. Because we were talking about it before we started the interview. Now, you were the only black doctor in the unit, right? Speaker 2: Uh huh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was--my expectations were that there were going to be some problems. But I don't know of any major problems that I had, because I happened to be with the office of personnel that pretty much stuck together. And we'd been together so long before we got there, until we got to know each other, you know, one of those sorts of things. Speaker 1: So, you mean as a civilian-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --surgeon you were with the same people, basically? Speaker 2: Yeah. They went into the [U.S.] Army also, like I did. They really--and I had a good time with everybody. I didn't have any--where they went, you know, "Aren't you going to this tonight?" We'd go to the movie every night, the ones that weren't working. That's about the only thing they had was movies. And of course, we had a nursing corps with us. They used to come to us and ask us to take them to the movies, (laughter) and all that. But-- Speaker 1: So, did you have any--there weren't any black nurses, though, right? Speaker 2: There weren't any black nurses. The nearest thing we had to black was the operating supervisor, a real beautiful Greek girl. And we used to pal around together. But I kept it from the serious side. As a matter of fact, I was married, so I didn't want to get looped into anything. Story_ID: 34922 Speaker 1: So, you didn't tell us about that part. Now, we have to maybe just pause here and rewind a little bit more now. Now, when did you get married, and kind of tell us about that? Speaker 2: Oh, I've been married twice. I was married shortly after I finished college. And that lasted until 1961. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Two children were born. And when I first came into practice in '52 [1952], seemed like everything was crashing in front of my face. Plus, the fact that she wanted me to actually give up medicine and go back and get a Ph.D. in chemistry. So, I refused to do it. So, anyway, we separated. My second marriage began--which was beautiful--on December 14, 1961, and lasted until November 19, 2009. She had two, and I had two. And we accumulated three. And one of the--three things that happened in the marriage was beautiful. We decided that we would not use anything like "step" or "half," so all of those seven children came up as brothers and sisters, and remained so, as such. Gigi, Gay, and Alvin were mine; and Gwendolyn, and the other two were through marriages to other folks. But they--talking about a tough, close family, they never seen-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My oldest son is the, he and his big brother Terry, and he introduces them that "This is my sister, not my half-sister, my sister." Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I'm going to ask you about them later towards the end of the interview. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just wanted to get to the fact that now you're married at this point in your career. So, this is your first marriage in-- Speaker 2: That was my first marriage, in Korea. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And was your wife a chemist? Speaker 2: My wife a chemist? Speaker 1: Yeah, the first one. Speaker 2: No, she was in elementary education. Speaker 1: Okay. And she was convinced that you ought to go back and get a Ph.D. in chemistry? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, why? Why was she concerned about that? Speaker 2: It was a, she was not as a devout Catholic as I was. And she couldn't stand for my being--I was in general surgery, and gone all the time and so forth. And she, it became a point we didn't see eye to eye on nothing. And one day I came home and she decided she had not had a (unclear), and all my clothes were on the back porch. And I called my father [Alvin Blount, Sr.]. He was in Raleigh [North Carolina], so he came up and got me. And I couldn't--after that, you know, people try to get back together. But being stern, I said, no, this business of going back together is the same old noise I'd hear, remember. You know, flashbacks. And so, so I decided to give up and try again. And my last one worked out well. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34923 Speaker 1: So, now, well back to--okay, so now at, now we're in Korea now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The Korean War is, I don't know. You've only been in one of them. I know you were in World War II, but you didn't, you never went over. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, you were in the armed services. Speaker 2: I was a student then, a student. Speaker 1: But, you know, the Korean War had a reputation of like being one of the bloodiest wars, in terms of people getting hurt and wounded and, you know, human waves of attacks by the Koreans. I mean, what was your, how did you feel? Speaker 2: Well, the MASH [Mobile Army Surgical Hospital] hospital was like being away from everything, in a field, supporting the division. And then you had also a civilian Korean population around you. And the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] was always busy, because here was a people called North Koreans and South Koreans, whose bodies and everything look alike. How could I look at you and say you're a North Korean or South Korean? Are you a communist, or are you not a communist? So, we were constantly having--. A person that I know, a guy who had his master's [degree] from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] was my house boy, Hung Keo. I'll always remember. They picked him up and said he was a North Korean. And he said, "I've never even seen a North Korean, Captain. What am I going to do?" And you can't step in and do nothing, because you're not allowed to interfere with, you know, the CIA. They just take them. I felt sorry for lots of people who were being unusually punished for things that they weren't guilty of. We taught him English. And he was interested--and talked about MIT and he wanted to go back and get his Ph.D. And we were over trying to help him, and that sort of thing. And then, they cornered themselves. They didn't help themselves, because they were cruel people to their own people. I used to, as the chief of surgery I used to go down to the Korean hospital, as we were asked to do, just to look in and see how they were doing. I came back and told my co-surgeon, "I can't do it." I said, "They're violating all the principles of surgery." Infections--they don't wash their hands. They ain't got no gloves. They don't put people to sleep. They operate on them just using a little local--and the patients are bucking all over everything. Just everything was in chaos. So, you were dealing with problems that I call, that just can't be solved in Washington on a piece of paper. And the only way to solve some of those problems is to have a large force of people out in the field to help them. But throwing a few million dollars into the government, where these people ain't going to see it--. I mean, if we give them all the support that we say, then those people should be better off than they were. Those were my observations, and I still say so. Here they are living less than the life of my dog. It's inhuman. And how should we expect a country to love us when they're not any better off with us than they were with their former people? And the former people, "You see there, I told you those Americans weren't keeping their word. You'd better come back over here with your home folk." And that's what they did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 34924 Speaker 1: But the whole thing, and I'm looking at all the lives that we lost that wasn't due to the gunfire. We were losing the war because Korea stabbed us in the back, killed their own people, civilians. And nobody tells that story, but it's obvious when you see it. And they were beautiful people, because they wanted to be human. And when they worked for you, you couldn't get them to go home at night, because they'd rather stay outside of your door than to go to those shanties that they were in. Speaker 2: There was a lot of poverty in the country. Speaker 1: That's right. And the other thing, they liked to work for us because they could get something to eat, because if they were hungry, we'd bring them something from the mess hall and give it to them, not officially. There were so many things that we in the service did, unofficially, that we can talk about now. And the orientation--somehow or another, I'll put it this way. Their orientation is just different from American orientation. And we may try it a thousand years: They're going to be Koreans, and we're going to be Americans. And I just think that it's no place for a humanitarian to try to get everything straightened out, because they'll go goo-goo. Because they're not also taught to appreciate anything. They're taught to get what I can today, because tomorrow is not promised. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now that was my--in looking at it for a black who have some reservations about how people are treated, because we've been treated so horribly here--but our forebears in particular. But, and the terrible thing about it, it's global now. When we ask questions about Boston, we don't have to look far for the reason. And it doesn't take all the money we're spending to come up with some fancy report by some special investigator whose education probably is less than ours, and his intelligence is something we question. And I tell some of my friends, you can't talk to me about that, you don't understand. You can't talk to me about that, because you're not me. So, don't ever--I tell my white--don't ever try to think black, because I can't think white. And there's a reason I say that, because I know that they can't be black for long, even if they try to take that attitude. You can take that attitude at a conference table, but they certainly can't take it twenty-four hours. Speaker 2: You've got three cultures going on there, yours and the whites and the Koreans. And-- Speaker 1: But of course, all these years I've lived have taught me that. So-- Story_ID: 34925 Speaker 1: Now, you were talking about the names that the unit had, and how they were changed. Now this--you know, of course, the MASH [Mobile Army Surgical Hospital] units become like the subject of a book later on by a fellow named Richard, I think his name was Hostel. Speaker 2: I read it. It's nice reading, but not all true. But I mean, it doesn't do me any good to say (laughter) that's a lot of ballyhoo. Speaker 1: Well, he's got a, Richard Hooker is the pen name he used for the book. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But he has a character called Oliver Wendell Spearchucker Holmes who's a doctor, a black doctor in the MASH unit, in his book. Do you think that character resembles you in any way, since you were the only black surgeon in the MASH unit? Speaker 2: I looked at it, this is not. Speaker 1: Okay, that's not you. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But I know when they made the movie, they included that there were no black characters in the movie, that I remember. Speaker 2: I, they, I got a--I guess I can, I got a copy of what they did when they did a documentary on me. And I got a copy of what they put in the movie, but it's been shown in Europe and in Canada. I don't know why it's not being shown in America. I'm trying to figure--I got it filed somewhere. They asked me to not let anybody else see it but me, or something. They said something about rights, copyright rights, or something like that. Don't copy this sort of thing. So, I just put it somewhere and said, "Well, I did the documentary, and I'm waiting to see it." So, I've got it somewhere. But as far as concerned, no, I don't mind anybody having it. I'm trying to get rid of a whole lot of stuff I got anyway now. Speaker 1: You were a consultant for the TV show, right? Or-- Speaker 2: Right, when I first came to--about three times they called me. And I got a little, they give you a little stipend. But I, you know, sometimes things are done like--so, if anything comes up--"Now, why didn't they call Blount?" and so forth. Well, after calling two or three times, I said forget it. Then they called me and so forth, at least to the things they said. I didn't see anything changing in the program. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you have any--what was your major critique of the show? Speaker 2: My, my major criticism on it was that, you know, we didn't have anybody--. They got a male playing the part of the female, you know, and that sort of--. Speaker 1: The character was in drag? Speaker 2: Yeah, all that sort of, you know. We didn't have anything like that. I mean, at that time if we had had some of that, we would have kicked them out of the unit before they got there. But I say it's alright for comedy, but what are you trying to make out of the MASH program? I know you want to make money, but I don't think this is a good way. So, I think that's why they didn't call me too much because I was--when we got right down to it, as a result of the program, it seems now, you know--off stations. I guess somebody's picked it up as a, to show it. But I never did think too much of it. Speaker 1: It was one of the most popular shows in television history. Speaker 2: Yeah, at one time. Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (simultaneous) I did, too. I used to listen to it all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I laugh. And people say, "Is that the way it was, Al?" I say, "Well, I wasn't in the same MASH." I said, "We had six MASH units. So, maybe that's one of them." Story_ID: 34926 Speaker 1: Now, you were telling me also that you had to--not only were there like difficult injuries to deal with, but you also had like bobcats coming out of the mountains, raiding the camps. Speaker 2: Those were things that sometimes they were sporadic, and sometimes they become a problem. In our unit, we had a problem with bobcats in the mountainous area there, going up to Quantraroot (ph). We'd just get right at the edge of the mountain--. Now I didn't see any of the so-called big lions there, either. I never saw one of those. I understand they were there, but I don't really think--they say that group of lions, most of them were from Siberia, when you trace them back. And Siberia is a good ways from Korea. So, I couldn't understand that. But bobcats were just like--bobcats were running around in the street. Speaker 1: They're much tougher. Speaker 2: Yeah, well it's tougher, and they'll kill you, if you get in a fight with them. So--and every time I saw one, "Boom." I didn't give them a chance to decide whether he'd kill me. I'd shoot him. The colonel used to say, "If y'all didn't kill them all, maybe they'd be nicer to you." I said, "Don't worry Colonel, we're trying to save your life, too." And war was hell. And then, you know, and ain't no way around it, war is war. Speaker 1: Is there a particular day or incident that you remember as being the most difficult? Speaker 2: Any day? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean is there a most difficult incident you could tell us about? Speaker 2: Yeah. There were difficult incidents because I didn't understand Korean warfare. There were certain divisions that could move up in front of us, that we were supposed to be supporting. And we could sleep all day and didn't get a case. But the subdivision, every time they would come up for six weeks, they fought everyday. The same thing for 1st Cal. But the 24th and 25th division, mostly blacks, I'd admit--but maybe we'd get two or three dribbled in, and so forth. But we'd get the worst, you know. They'd used to, not only shoot you, they'd take a knife and cut the penis just about half off, and leave it hanging there. And then you got to put a catheter in him, and you can't reconstruct--just sort of rush him to the van where they had the reconstruction surgeon, to see what they could do. Because we knew that this could do a lot to a guy's personality. But that's what the Koreans were doing. That war was, some of it was such that I'm glad I got back, because it could have done something upstairs. And we had a lot of that, too. People would just break down and couldn't take it. Speaker 1: So you were there like, you say, eighteen months, was it? Speaker 2: All total, it was about eighteen months. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But it, and it, you know--even though you had to be there--and you didn't know when you were coming home, because they may promise six months in, and then rotate. But they may say, "All that is true, but until we get someone we can rotate in, you'll have to be here." So, that's just the way the [U.S.] Army is. And you can't depend on promises. Story_ID: 36429 Speaker 1: Okay. In 1954, you came back [from the Korean War]. Now, that's the year of the Brown v. Board of Education [1954] decision. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Speaker 1: Had you been following that at all? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. In fact, did you know any of the lawyers that worked with Thurgood Marshall and Charles Hamilton Houston. Speaker 2: I met Thurgood Marshall on two or three occasions, all the time in different capacities. I mean, he and I were both Sovereign Grand Inspectors of the 33 degree Masons, and he wrote our constitutions when I met him, during that time. Then, I met him at, when I was in Washington at Judge Thompson, a friend of mine. He was there some years ago. Those were two occasions. But he seemed to be a nice guy. Seeing and just looking at him, I wasn't all that impressed--that's Thurgood Marshall. So what? "Man, how're you doing?" (laughter). But he had some smart people around him that really would make anybody--. But he had some really smart lawyers. Speaker 1: But we're going to raise the names of a couple more in a minute. Story_ID: 36430 Speaker 1: But, so you come back [from the Korean War] in '54 [1954]? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And you, you're in Greensboro [North Carolina], and you-- Speaker 2: I came back in '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: '52 [1952]? Okay, well, that's a correction then. 1952, you came back, okay. Now, did you start working for Moses Cone [Memorial Hospital, Greensboro]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Right away--. Okay. Speaker 2: Moses Cone wasn't built until '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was there a year ahead of that time. But even so, I was not able to join the staff. And there, again, in their constitution, you must be a member of the County Medical Society to become a member of their staff. That was true in most all hospitals in America. Speaker 1: There's a parallel in medical society-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to be-- Speaker 2: Yeah, staff privileges. Speaker 1: The American Medical Society is segregated, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's not, it's not that way now. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You can get on a hospital staff now without belonging to any medical society, unless you want to. Speaker 1: In those days, the American Medical Association was white, and-- Speaker 2: That was the key. Speaker 1: You had the National [Medical Association], which was black. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because blacks couldn't get in the American. Speaker 2: You just wouldn't believe that a black person basically became president of the American Medical Association about two or three years ago. You wouldn't be--at Cones we have a black chairman of the board of trustees, Dr. Smith, and a black chief of staff, Theresa Haygood (ph). It's just, it's just amazing when I think about it. I'm so proud. I just shake my head. But it took some blood and guts for that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, we're going to get into what happened here. So, when you got back in '52 [1952], did you go into private practice, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you went into private practice. And while the--I guess it was the County Building, Moses Cone? Speaker 2: No. Moses Cone was built by the Moses H. Cone family. That's when the Cone--the Cone people were textile executive people here in Greensboro. He had three sons--Herman, Cecil, and Benjamin. They was ancestors. The hospital was built as a charitable institution, irregardless of race, color, creed or national origin. However, you must remember, I don't care what you build--whether it's a university, whether it's a Catholic church, or if it's anything--at that time in the South, the South was segregated. When the Hill-Burton Bill was passed--this is another basic thing that entered into our suit. What the southern senators were able to get through [U.S.] Congress was that each state would have what is known as a Medicare commission. And strange enough, my wife was on the Medicare commission. (laughter). Speaker 1: This is in later on, in the '60s [1960s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, they were the ones who issued out the funds. The funds would come to the State, and the State would turn them over to the Medicare commission. So, this is where we run into the trouble. So, to get around that, make it belong to the County Medical Society, and that's it. So, what happened? It went further than that. I got ready to take the American Board of Surgery. I couldn't take it. Why? I wasn't a member of the County Medical Society. And they wouldn't let me take it. I went around the corner and did take a board with the American Medical Board of Abdominal Surgery. And they let me through without that requirement in '70 [1970]. And that was it. So, were you the first black doctor that integrated-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Were you the first black doctor at Moses Cone? Speaker 1: On the board? Speaker 2: Were you the first black doctor to practice at Moses Cone? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 36431 Speaker 1: There's a story to that. I was chairman in Greensboro [North Carolina] of the liaison committee between the Greensboro Medical Society--black, and the white medical society, Gilford County. They had a group of doctors, members from each of them. And I served as chairman. I was secretary of the Greensboro Medical Society. And although they had other people qualified, I had an application in. And I was appointed the first black doctor to the Gilford County Medical Society and the Greensboro Academy of Medicine. Now, there's another--added to it. They offered us, before this, what is called a scientific membership--which you go to the meetings, but the social events, you were excluded. Speaker 2: Scientific membership? Speaker 1: Yeah. And we wrote them back and told them this is the most insulting thing you can do, and did not accept it. Speaker 2: Yeah, isn't a goal of the American Medical Association to form a collegial bond between physicians? Speaker 1: Well, that's what they said. But you see, they didn't have a--. Here's the question. When you read this book, you'll understand the black doctor was never intended by the American Medical Association to be as full fledged as the white physician. I don't care how much training, what and what--if you're black, then you lost your qualification then. That went for [Dr. Charles] Drew, that went for all of us at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], and everybody, until they got them to--and so forth. So, there we had that right that we had in the South. And in--a lot of northern states were doing the same thing. It excludes, at that time it didn't exclude Connecticut nor Massachusetts at first. So, this is it, the thing that we were fighting about. It all eventually led, as you know, in a suit. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: In 1962. Speaker 2: A friend of yours who's a dentist, right, filed? Speaker 1: There were ten of us. Speaker 2: Well, can you remember all ten? Speaker 1: Yeah. I got them around here somewhere. Okay, let me see if I can give you--There was Dr. [Walter] Hughes, Dr. Blount, Dr. Jones and Dr. Alexander, Dr. F. E. Davis and E.C. Noel. And the dentists were Dr. [George] Simkins, Dr. Milton Barnes and Dr. W. T. L. Miller. And there were two civilians, one of which was named Lyons. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36432 Speaker 1: And it was Dr. [George] Simkins whose name was on it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Simkins was president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and in order to get this done, he had to solicit the help of the Medical Society, because we were the principal ones fighting for it. So, as the president of the NAACP, he filed the suit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course, you know, we lost in the Middle District of North Carolina. And we won in the Fourth Circuit by a split vote, three to two. And remember, the guy who voted against it. His name was Haynesworth from South Carolina, who had been nominated as a Supreme Court Justice under one of the presidents. Speaker 1: Right, right, he was. Albert Haynesworth, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. And out of that group, I'm the only surviving member of the people. So-- Speaker 1: Now, the lawyer for your group was Jack Greenberg. Speaker 2: Jack Greenberg was the principal guy who found the law. Everybody else had filed under it, but somehow he found something that stuck with the court in the Fourth Circuit. And they ruled that Hill-Burton's funds, no matter which way they were administered, that they couldn't discriminate. And that meant after you built it, then you've got to admit black doctors and hire black folks. We made sure the order was not only issued for us behind this--but that it would not be entered only for a physician--but we wanted the order issued to the bathrooms, to the kitchen, to every facet of the hospital every time you enter their grounds. And that's the way the order was written by the judge. And he said, "And if I find any of this violated, I'll hold you in contempt of court with the most serious consequences." Because the judge by this time, he's mad. He was tired of it. He said, "I'm tired of messing with this, I'm going to stop it here." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was the same judge who turned us down the first time. The second time he--after the Circuit Court of the Supreme Court confirmed it, he was rough on the whites. (laughter). The white folks looked at him, "What's wrong with him? We ain't done nothing." (laughter). Those were hell of a days in court. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But despite that, as I said, it confirms what I started out with. If you know what's right, have the courage to do it. We could have stopped many times, but--. So now, we not only work on that, we want to correct some of the disparities in administering the law. We know that some of our people aren't getting the care they should get--a whole lots of things in this disparity. But I'm too old to worry about it now. I'll leave it to the youngsters. Speaker 1: Okay. But that was a, you know, that was a landmark kind of decision. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And something that really shook up the rest of the country. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 36433 Speaker 1: Jack Greenberg of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, is he from this region? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is he? Okay. I didn't know. He's the only, he was one of the--well, of that generation of lawyers, he's the only Jewish one. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, who really--in the NAACP. He's probably not the only one, but he certainly-- Speaker 2: I belonged to an organization, and we had never taken in a white guy until we took in Jack Greenberg. (laughter). And the we'd never taken in a white guy until we took him in (unclear) New York. And there was a whole lot of fuss about it, you know. So, I was, we were sitting around debating. I said, "Well, you just can't have your cake and eat it too." That's what I always said. They don't want you in the organization--. So, we got in there. And if they don't want to get in our organization, we don't want them in there. I say you just can't be that way. I said--that's the way I feel about it, you know. And we wanted to go to their churches, but we don't want to welcome them to ours. I'm an Episcopalian. And we had that fight at our church. It's real hard working whites. Everybody was, "I wonder what they're doing." I said, "Why don't you invite--" One of the girls had a very beautiful voice, sings in the choir. And she's there every Sunday. And they still won't treat her right. But she's determined because she--and you know, we have a lot of white ministers in our church. It's changing. Every now and then when they come, our folks ought to stay awake. I say, you know, I say, "What you gonna do? We got a, in North Carolina, the Bishop is black. Does a nice job, too. But he's been one for about eight years. So, but you know, they don't like it. "Uh, he don't come to see us enough." So, it's not that easy. So, it's--and you're right, the infrastructure is worse than the means that created it. Story_ID: 36434 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask about you about the sit-in movement here [Greensboro, North Carolina] in 1960. Four students--did you know them before they-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --launched the sit-in? Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew all of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we have lots of, you know, in the South we have lots of railroads, underground railroads. And someone, you know, comes over Christmas. And most of the time they want a donation or something. And I remember Kenneth and I saying, I wish we could do more. I guess we were too coward to do it, but they went on down there on February 1, and held fast. Speaker 1: Now whose idea was it? Was it their idea? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was their idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know everybody says it is. But the idea originated with the students over at [North Carolina] A and T [State University, Greensboro]--that this was what they were going to do, no matter what anybody else said they were going to do it. And it wasn't hard. The history of A and T State University ever since I was there, is that striking and demonstrating was just part of being an A and T person. I'm serious. I was president of the student body, and we had one of the worst strikes on campus. The president called me and asked me what I think. I said, "Well, it's part of our heritage. If you treat us wrong, somebody's going to protest." And I said, Mr. President, this might be--. I told him, "Mr. President, this just might be the beginning of something larger than somebody having the courage to do it." And they did. That was an awful thing, you know. They're down there--in the South, they just (unclear) and snatch it. But they were careful about that because they knew that a good number was, well, were not so powerful. They knew how far to go before we were in court over it. So, every time they'd get into it, we'd get them to police brutality situation, and you broke that up. (Unclear) spending a lot of money to get around these things, and so forth. He about broke his arm. You got to pay him $500,000 and so forth. So to sue for disability, you know, (unclear) to get insurance, a couple of things. It's not, it dribbles down to money. And we know that, so that's how you attack them. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: One of the things you learn from that is, although it's done, our people as blacks is a group of homogenous people, all of which are unalike. (laughter). No two are alike. No two blacks are alike. You see, it's different. Sticking together, you can't trust them. (laughter). You expect a hundred, you're going to get twenty-five, or you may get five hundred. (laughter). That's been my experience with black folk. But I love them, because I'm one of them. But, living all these years, I have--. That's the reason why you find some of us a little slow in getting into things we used to get into. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: The older breed where I came from, came through a different sort of situation. The younger breed, we made all this for them, and they don't know how to use it to their advantage, some of them. Too bad. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 36435 Speaker 1: I skipped over '63 [1963]. Now, you knew Jesse Jackson when he was at North Carolina A and T [State University]. Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact, I delivered his oldest baby, Tara (ph). It wasn't (unclear) but he had us to do it--so he had the money. So, I delivered his oldest child, I think, or the next one. Yeah, I think he was staying right down here on Gillespie Street. But you know what? And my wife was a very good friend of his. My wife got real teed off. You know how women are. She saw Jesse somewhere, and Jesse ignored her. And Lord, she almost flipped. She said, "As much as I've given this boy." (laughter). But Jesse--. Have you ever read this book this guy wrote about Jesse? I got a copy in there, what is it? About [Martin Luther] King's death and all of that--. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: What's the guy who wrote this, 'The Truth About Jesse Jackson,' or something. Speaker 1: I can't remember. There's one--Barbara Reynolds, that was an earlier critique of him. Speaker 2: I read it. I just can't, couldn't believe that about Jesse. But-- Speaker 1: You don't think, you don't agree with her? Speaker 2: Uh uh. Speaker 1: Do you have an opinion about it--or you just didn't think he could do that, or that he was a part-- Speaker 2: Well, part of it is logical that--makes good sense. But some of it doesn't. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, I always like to give him credit for what he did here with us, and just leave it that way. But-- Speaker 1: Did you think that he was going to climb to national stature at some point? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Because he was like president of the student body, right? Speaker 2: I think--. Huh? Speaker 1: He was president of the student body, I believe, right? And he was on the football team. He was a quarterback. Speaker 2: Yeah. But he wasn't all that popular in each one of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he just happened to be in the right place at the right time. When they were leading--I think he was in leadership. And his aunt used to stay right up the street here from us here. But the reason I say so--some of those things--. I don't think his son would have done the things that he's done if Jesse had been a better role model for him. Because he saw Daddy do all these things, and he thought he could get away with them, too. I seem to think that. You know, Jesse got away with a whole lot of things that--. I don't think he's gotten away from them. He's sort of cooled the investigations down, because everybody's still--. The only bad experience I had with him--he came down to A and T and made about seven hundred and some odd dollars worth of phone calls during the time. And the president didn't have anything wherein his budget to take care of it. But being president of the foundation, I always had some sort of funds to help the school, so I paid the bill. And then I was man enough to tell him, you know. I said, "Jesse, come here, I want to tell you something." And I told him what the president said. He said, "That wasn't true, that wasn't true." I said, "Well, anyway I paid the bill. Don't worry about it." So, he thanked me. But, those sorts of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And also, he's not a giver of A and T. Most of us try to give at least two or three thousand dollars a year. I've never given--since I've been out of A and T, I've never given less than a thousand dollars a year, always. Always to the wire, to the places I think need the money. Jesse has come down and taken stipends. And normally, if you're going to do something for the school, just give the money back to the school. Speaker 1: But he doesn't-- Speaker 2: Not Jesse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm not talking about him. I'm just saying something that's actually true. So, if I don't think something is for sure, and don't know, I'm not going to run my mouth about it. Story_ID: 36436 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a chance to meet Dr. [Martin Luther] King when he was alive? Speaker 2: I met Dr. King on one occasion, years ago when he was at Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina], at Dr. Miller's house, just casual. But I never knew him personally and so forth. Speaker 1: And I was just, I was thinking that, now this is not on our outline. I was thinking about some of the other physicians, black physicians, involved in the Civil Rights Movement in those days. Not only you and Dr. [George] Simkins and the other, and the ten that were on the petition, but in some of the other cities--. I know in Biloxi [Mississippi], there was a physician that led a wade-in the water there at the beach, who we interviewed a few years ago. I can't think of his name right now. But there are, you know, there are other physicians. There was a physician in Mississippi that was chased out of Mississippi to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, there were a whole, been a whole lots of them in civil rights. In fact, before we were admitted to Moses Cone Hospital [Greensboro], there was a hospital in Georgia where a black had been on the staff for a long time. There were problems with it, though. Somehow or another, the great-- one of the arguments about us being on the staff, they didn't want us to give orders to white nurses. Speaker 1: Something as simple as that. Speaker 2: Uh huh, to white nurses. And to see any white patients in the hospital. But you see, before that, the hospitals I visited, the blacks were in the basement--dark and dingy, unsanitary, in a house outside of the hospital. Speaker 1: These are the patients, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, patients. So, what good is me being on the staff, and my patients are being messed around? So, but there have been doctors on staff, so in Georgia and somewhere else. And lots of places they may be, they've been on the staff, to take care of people. See, I think we've had a black hospital in Greensboro--over there in Richmond--in April of 1927, I think. The first black hospital was called a sanitorium, run by three doctors--Dr. Cordais (ph), Dr. Stewart, and Dr. Sebastian. And then that closed, and they operated on Market Street (unclear), Trinity Hospital. And that closed in 1927 when L. Richardson [Hospital] was built (unclear). That's the history of black medicine in Greensboro. Story_ID: 36437 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in 1964--this is the same year as the Civil Rights Act was passed, you became the first black physician to perform an operation at Moses Cone [Memorial Hospital, Greensboro, North Carolina], right? Speaker 2: Yes I did, a cholecystectomy (unclear). Speaker 1: How did that take place? I mean, was there, you know--because you being the first, there had to be some--was there any ceremony involved in this, or any-- Speaker 2: It is said that the white surgeons took a holiday that day. That's so far back I can't think whether it was true or not. More than likely, it was. But it was said that for two or three days, the white physicians would boycott this. I don't know whether they did or not, but that is said, and it probably is true. But I had been operating with them over at the black hospital. So, that wasn't anything new. I'd been at the [U.S.] Army hospital and I operated, so--. And my assistant was in surgery and gynecology, but he was also certified. So, we went in and did our, you know, before we do our operations, the first thing we do is we ligate the cystic duct and cystic artery. And then before we cut, we take a picture of the common [bile] duct to see if there are any stones in there. If not, you cut them and (unclear) come on out. And I guess we were there about an hour and ten minutes doing that. And they were amazed, because some of their doctors took two hours and a half or something. But that goes under the particular art of dexterity. And some people are fairly good technicians and others aren't, and no matter how much theory they know, they just can't do the small things, because we don't--yeah-- Speaker 1: We were talking about Jack White earlier-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: --about how dexterious he was. Speaker 2: And me doing them now, I'd be doing laproscopic. I'd just make two little holes and look down there and clip, clip, clip, clip, and in thirty minutes, I'm out. But (unclear), and then of course, the next day I have to (unclear) with an abdominal hysterectomy and, you know, the vaginal. I did, and I think the next day I had a cholecystectomy the day before, and lesions were left in the colon and enter into what we call entero-proctostomy, the thing what I've been doing all the time. And then they started drifting back and shaking my hands and saying, "It certainly went right, I'm sorry y'all had to go through this stuff." You know, I just took that pressure off them. "Yeah, man. But you see what you were doing, you were messing with my welfare because the patient wanted to come here, and I couldn't come here. So they had to get somebody here to do the operation. You're taking my money. (laughter). And so, that's the only thing we're interested in. You don't have to love me, or like me, or not. But you don't have the right to keep me out of this facility, because you don't want it. The people know it." Speaker 1: This is true. Speaker 2: Yeah. So there again goes-they of us (unclear) how to approach things and how to get things over to people definitely without having to put your fist on them. Don't get mad about it, just lay the facts out. Smarter thinker. That's what I, all my life--if you live in the South, and they do anything for you, you had to spend some nights thinking how you're going to get this done. Story_ID: 36438 Speaker 1: This is something, one aspect of your story that I found remarkable is that it's said that when you were building your house, members of the Ku Klux Klan guarded your, the building process. Speaker 2: Well, this house was built by two (unclears) who were Ku Klux Klansmen, who lived down here in Pleasant Garden [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: So, they actually built the house? Speaker 2: Yeah, they built the house. And they would ride by in the evening to see that everything was alright. You know, it used to be--you know, you built a house, you got lumber laying out there, people would steal it, and so forth. And then they--and one was named Dopey and I forget what--and Andrew. And I knew it. They said, "Well, you know, if you have anything around you and if they try to mess with you, you just tell me. Dr. Blount, I love you, because you're a good man." I said, "Well, Dopey, I'm glad you feel that way." And he came to see me as a patient. So, we get a bag of lumber and put it on his truck and take it back, and say, "Y'all ain't going to cheat Dr. Blount out of his money. Give him a piece of--" (laughter). He was just that kind of guy. So-- Speaker 1: So, you kind of--just by being patients--you were a doctor for some of their relatives and friends? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 36439 Speaker 1: And, one of the things that--well, the worst thing that happened to me about a white patient, was the chief of radiology got a thorn in his foot. And they found an abscess. And he showed it to me. I said, "Walter, you better go somewhere and get something done about that." He said, "Well, can't I, can't you do it?" I said, "I can't operate nowhere but here." He said, "Well that's alright." So, I thought I'd do him a favor. I got him in and did an I and D and moved it, got a left (unclear) and packed it, put in some IV and antibiotics--the routine things that I needed. I got him down in a ward in a private room, hid him. Then, two weeks later the chairman of the board of trustees fired him. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: For letting a black doctor operate, number one, and to be laying up in a black hospital. And he worked there. Another thing that happened when I first came to Greensboro [North Carolina], the white doctors called the black doctors George and Harry. And they called them Dr. Smith, and so forth. And you know what? I got in the habit of doing it too. Just being, and then I thought about it. I said we don't call--. So, one morning, Carl Freeman who saw some of my patients--. "Hey, Al, how are you doing?" "Alright." And he couldn't make rounds. He just went in and she told the administrator. The administrator laughed at him and said, "Now I wish that hadn't been Dr. Blount, because you don't want to tie up with Alvin, see, Dr. Freeman, he will rip you publicly, ridicule you publicly, just get his newspaper." And I would have. So then said the reason for it, he wanted to preserve good human relations. I said, "Well, we certainly wouldn't be using any tactics that we used in slavery, would we?" He said, "What do you mean, slavery?" I said, "You are Mr. Charley and I'm the nigger." I said, "We passed the same board." I said, "I'm insulted enough that you won't let me in the County Medical Society, so I can't take my board in surgery. Now, I've got to be insulted because you're going to call me a nigger." "I didn't call you a nigger, I called you--" I said, "If I call you Art, and you call me Al, you call me Al. If I call you Dr. Freeman, and you call me Al, you're calling me a nigger." I said, "That's the way I interpret it." "Well, the other doctors have been--" I said, "They are here because they have been improperly trained. And they depend on you to grant them their rights." I said, "I have my credentials, and you don't have to grant me my rights, just respect them." He did. So, I had no trouble after that. Story_ID: 36440 Speaker 1: The same thing in Greensboro [North Carolina], when we got a jury commission. The white folks claimed that they--they properly impounded the juries. They didn't. We finally got a bill passed through the legislation to serve on the Jury Commission. And I was the first black to serve on it. The Republicans were in charge then. I was a Democrat. But I told the Republicans when they came to get me, I said, "I'll serve if you give me a unanimous vote. But if everybody don't vote for me, I ain't serving." Do you know I came back? They gave me a unanimous vote. Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: That's, I guess in my curriculum vitae, because I can't-- Speaker 2: Roughly, in the seventies or the eighties? Speaker 1: Yeah. I gave it. You got a copy of my curriculum vitae. All the facts you'll find there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's in the, I think it's around '70 [1970] something. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Let's see. Okay. Speaker 1: That's how this came up. So, we formed the Jury Commission, and then I had to beg to get off of it. Story_ID: 36441 Speaker 1: So, through the '60s [1960s], things kind of "normaled" out here [Greensboro, North Carolina]. I mean, things became more normal in terms of-- Speaker 2: Since the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 1: African American relationships in the hospitals with the white doctors? Speaker 2: Yeah, we're more together now. We're seeing whites and blacks in the same group practice. As I said before, a black chairman of Moses Cone [Memorial Hospital] board; a black chairman of the staff so far. And we've seen that improve. As one of the guys said to me, they said, "Dr. Blount, you old rooster, you. You're the only thing that's sitting around that would object to some things that they want to do." And I said, "No, I'm not the only one sitting around." I said, "I hope there's others who will take up where we left off." But you can't--here's what I'm saying, you can't go here and stop the motor on the car in the middle of the street and expect it to sit there, again, without someone lending to it. It's obstruction. And so, sometimes we lay ourselves out there, obstruction to some things that we could do, because we don't approach them the right way. And I think you see that. That's all I've always said, is as long as we do it right, I'm okay. But whether I get it done or not, I'm going to ask the question, and maybe someone else will remember the question and do something about it. But if the question or proposition is never put forward, no one ever thinks about doing anything about it. We were perfectly satisfied before some of us came here about two hospitals over there, the hospital situation, knowing that it wasn't equal. We were perfectly satisfied at one time about the school districts here. We knew where the better schools were. And we said, "You can keep them. But for God's sake, if we want to go there, we'll go." Then suppose you come over here and go to some of these that (unclear). You know, that's been the argument. So, those of us in the South, I won't say we're far out, because the North has well been satisfied with the fact of segregation so long until it's a daily thing. I was in Minneapolis [Minnesota] for a Kappa's anniversary. I was talking to some guys, "Y'all going to do it this way? We don't do this in North Carolina anymore, not until we got the Republicans out there taking over." But there again, we just wait our time, and we'll get back where we are, and so forth. But we are in a process now where money is the thing. So, that's the way it is. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36442 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over your career, now, you retired in--theoretically retired anyway-- Speaker 2: In '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Retired in '94 [1994]. You retired as a surgeon, I guess in '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you still have a private practice? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: When you look back over this time, what would you consider to be the highlights of your career? Speaker 2: I'll always be careful about highlights. (laughter). All I was saying all my life--and when we do things right, we don't have problematic situations. Since that time, I think we've learned to do things the right and acceptable way, such that we're getting better results in human relations. And get some things that nobody could imagine we could ever have gotten. We see in a good number of meetings now, mixtures of whites and blacks and, "Hey, hi," and so forth. The women do it more than the men, seems to me. When I look at TV, I always see something with black women and white women together. I don't see too much of white men and black together. (laughter). But so, what's happening is women are taking over a big bit of the world anyway. So, no president dares to go to the White House now, unless he put women on his cabinet, because he knows that's how he got there and so forth. So, the highlights, the most highlights I've seen--we've learned to do some things together, and it's paying off. I'm not saying the hate is gone, because you just don't get rid of the Daughters of Confederacy overnight. It's going to be (unclear) you'll see this little daughter and everyone else. They're taught certain principles of the Confederacy. And no matter how nice they are, they are taught certain principles, and they're going to keep those. And I'm not sure so that all the principles of the Confederacy are bad. But even though they may not be bad, as long as they serve to deter the rights and privileges of others, then what shall we call them? That's the way I look at life. And we're always finding new names everyday, a very common one I learned from my kids. "Hey, how are you doing?" "I'm good." That's a new term. When I was a boy, I never heard someone say I'm good. And you didn't either. So, we--these new things--as I've gotten older, I've learned to accept them. So, I've learned something. I go to meetings now, like always, and enjoy the fellows. I have--this way--I'm not a class man. First I'm a (unclear) man, and I'm a grand master of North Carolina, honorary pastor and puritate of the Shriners and the Sovereign Grand Inspector. But I never sit with them. I come in just like (unclear) and sit down over here and cross my legs with the fellows. "Man, why don't you sit with the Sovereign--" I said, "I've got to get over there and find out what those guys are thinking about." (laughter). "You old crones are still saying the same thing everyday. And that's how I enjoy myself. I learn from them. But you, how in the world am in going to learn from them unless I associate with them? Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36443 Speaker 1: I would hope that every black citizen would realize that he is a citizen and try to preserve the right as a citizen, number one. As little as it may be, I would like to see every black citizen vote, because that's where it all stops. When you vote, you vote for someone to take your rights and represent you by your vote. Now, if you don't do the things that they laid down for you to vote, do it, as much as you dislike them. You can fight them, but do them, so that you can vote. Don't be caught out there in the fight and you're still not winning, and you still not getting any results, you're losing. Number two: in realizing that, I would like for every black to further exercise himself as a citizen and realizing that the only hope for our new generation is the pursuit of education. Just those two. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36444 Speaker 1: Likewise, now when you, you know, look back at your career today, what would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: That, I never thought about too seriously. And the reason I haven't thought about it is because I'm a person whose among so many people. And at times I'm with this group, and at times I might be with another group which are not always easy to equate. So, I would think that, as such, I would consider myself the superior in understanding where I am at all times and doing what's necessary to do what my environment dictates me to do at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess that's hard to see. But I can be down there with George and Joe and we're playing golf raising (unclear). But I can sit with [President Barack] Obama in the White House and accomplish on economics, and still play the part of trying to understand how it's going to benefit us. Story_ID: 36445 Speaker 1: In that regard, because you mentioned [President Barack] Obama, now you're ninety-one years old now. Did you ever think that you would see a black president of the United States? Speaker 2: No. I'm just being pretty frank. No, we didn't, we didn't, and nobody else did either. They may say, I knew, but--and I think that we're, we don't--I never--after going to Korea, and after being on tour down in Laos and some of those other areas while I was doing my tour there--I saw this world coming to one where we would have to think globally. And as much as we may try to keep people out of America, they're going to still be here, and they all aren't white. So, our country is changing. The nature of what--when you really look at the vote, you can see that Obama got all the--well, ninety percent of the black vote, ninety percent almost of the Spanish vote, Asians and all that. And then on top of that, the liberal whites--what kept him from winning? And this is the thing that's worrying the conservative party. So, let's just sit on things, and again, it's too hard for them to get back, because we can't beat them and so forth. This is my thinking. And I'm thinking that no more will we be having states anymore. But you can see that, look what Mr. --Obama is down in Mexico talking to Mexicans about money. And they're telling him, "You know, we're getting a lot of your imports from here. And we want something to balance it. We want you to buy something from us." And he said, "Now, you're cheap labor." Well, that's not what they want, you know. That's been my life. At ninety-one, I must say that I have enjoyed it. I've enjoyed a life of my family and my friends, and as my father [Alvin Blount, Sr.] say, "Don't ever say you don't have any enemies, but just try to contain them." (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36446 Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us something about your family, more about your children. I think you--you named them before, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. My oldest son, Terry [Terrance], he's a CLU, a certified financial advisor. My daughter, she owns and operates a service that takes depositions in courtrooms and wherever. My next daughter, she is a secretary to one of the commissioners out in Memphis [Tennessee], and also has a little business off to the side where she uses her computers and so forth. Let's see--Gigi, the one you met here today, Gigi went to Duke [University] and Emory [University]. She's a lawyer, but her husband works for Booz and Company as one of the senior vice presidents. So, since she had the baby she doesn't work anymore. She retains her license she said, but (laughter) she doesn't work, so--. And then Jay Jay is a housewife. She finished State in Carolina. She's with--an electrical engineer and computer engineer. And then she went and got her MBA in accounting, and works with one of the largest accounting companies in the country. And when she married her husband--he's senior vice president of a company that he's gone to in Austin. He's a personnel, in personnel. And so, he stopped her from working to raise the children. (laughter). And little Alvin [Blount, III] is the baby of the family. He's with, finished [North Carolina] A and T [State University], and he's with U.S. Public Health Service in Cary [North Carolina]. And that's the gamut of them. And me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My wife [Gwendolyn Harris] died in November 19, 1909 [2009?], had a stroke. And so, I've been trying to keep the gang together ever since then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, Martha, she's been with me about thirty years. She looks like she's a baby but she's way up there in age. (laughter). She looks after things here for my kids. And they-- Speaker 1: This is Martha Reid [ph.], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh. Yeah, she's very, very dedicated. So, I guess I've been blessed. Story_ID: 34945 Speaker 1: Okay. One other question occurred to me before we end this. And that's that you deal with family practice now. And I guess, is it largely in the African American community? Speaker 2: White and black. Speaker 1: White and black, okay. Aren't there, well, let me ask you like this. Are there health concerns that African Americans need to focus on more than, you know--are there some health concerns we need to focus on more than others? Speaker 2: I think so. If you know that a population is, let me put it this way. If you know that we as African Americans certainly have problems with certain problems that are serious, like hypertension and its complications and diabetes and its complications leading the team. And if we know that maternal welfare is a problem--. Some people particularly go through nine months, no care. And if those who go through nine months, there's a risk--there's a chance they could lose the babies' lives. There are certainly, certainly problems. You'd be surprised, though, that out of all the health care that is offered to us as African Americans, look at the percentage of those African Americans who refuse to accept any form of health care, particularly in preventing and prolonging their lives. You'd be surprised. The white race is large enough, it's true, and we talk about it. But those people go to doctors. But we won't. And I imagine it's because we can't, even if we go to doctors, some of them can't buy the medicine. Not all of the people, you know, have Medicaid and Medicare and all these sorts of facilities and health services to give them medicines after the doctor prescribes them. Story_ID: 34946 Speaker 1: So, poverty compounds the problem. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. So, not only does poverty--the greatest thing that poverty does, not only is not having it, it compounds one's ignorance about the necessity of doing it. And yet, we still complain about certain things. Others, I think, complain about certain things, that are available to us. We just don't accept it. I see it everyday. And I do mostly referring things now. And I see things to be done, and this guy should be seen and that guy should be seen--and get them to them. I don't sit there as a practitioner--because I was a general surgeon--and see something, and no, well, I'm going to try this. I'm going to try anything. I'm going to send you someone. That's what I've been doing mostly--giving a good examination, finding this. I saw a person, for instance, with a mole on the leg. And I wouldn't have seen him if I hadn't had him undressed and examined. He said, "You know this thing looks like it's getting larger." So, I get him quickly to someone to see it, and it turns out he's got malignant melanoma. And yet, he was examined some three months ago. When I got the doctor's records, I didn't see any mention of an examination of the extremities. So, when you go to a doctor he's supposed to examine you, not just take your blood pressure and listen to your chest and pass you on it. And so, white doctors--if you're dirty, they ain't going to touch nothing. See, somebody takes the blood pressure, take it. So, look at all the disparities. It's not only in seeing patients, it's in the treatment of patients. Sure, we all feel comfortable with a nice, clean person who doesn't smell. We can sit down and talk. And one that comes in and got liquor on the breath and all loud and everything. Human nature would say, "Now, let me get this son-of-a bitch out of here as soon as I can. I mean, it's too bad. That's human nature. But we don't do anything about it, to teach our people. My goal is, I often tell a patient, "Now listen, we're going to refer you to Dr. so and so. You take a bath before you go down there, or else you're going to get kicked out." And they do that. And we don't mind doing that. Now, you heard me make certain remarks about our people. And they're honest remarks, because I want them to do something about it, as well as someone making it known that this is what you should do. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34947 Speaker 1: What do you think about, do you think that things will get better when the [President Barack] Obama health plan is fully in effect? Speaker 2: Well, I think a good bit about the survival of the Obama health is being sabotaged so much, until it hasn't gotten a chance to do what it wants to do. And one of the greatest sabotage is mishandling the funds. Everybody--for instance, I have people who have diabetes. And, you know, with diabetes they give them a shoe to wear. You got people now, they go around and find out, "You got diabetes?" Knock on doors, selling them shoes. They say "Yeah." "Well, sign this and take it to the doctor and tell him you're entitled to shoes." And after they bring them to me, I say, "Mr. so and so, when I get ready to tell you you need some shoes, I'll tell you that you need some shoes. I don't need him to tell me that." "But I'm entitled to them." I say, "No, you're not. You're not entitled to them until I tell you you are." "I'll get another doctor." "Go right ahead." I'm just not going to be guilty of just signing my name to get someone out of my office. That's malpractice. In all the ninety years I've been in practice--I mean not ninety years. No, let's see--. Speaker 1: That's quite a record, that's a-- Speaker 2: Never had anyone to come up and even try. If I made a mistake, I learned enough to go to the patient, and say, "Look, if anything goes wrong with this operation--we may get a good result and we may not." "Alright, doctor, I'm glad you told me." What people get--some people, because they think the doctor is dishonest because he didn't tell them, or wouldn't talk to them. That's the one that comes to me. I mean, there are some cases that are just obvious neglect, that, you know that-- Speaker 1: Leaving your tools inside the person and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 34948 Speaker 1: Well, is there anything that I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No. (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: I'll leave that reservation to you. Speaker 1: Alright, well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, you live your life, and you die hopefully a good citizen. And I don't worry about being remembered. I worry about my life while I'm here. Now, that's being selfish. I mean, some guys want a statute put up. They want their name here and their name there. That's sort of very personal with me. And you have to understand how it is--that when you get too fancy about what you're doing and you begin to get too fancy about bragging about the things that you wish to be doing, then it's you who's feeling that way. So, you don't have to worry about who remembers what you did. You perhaps might want them not to remember what you did. (laughter). So, I'm just, I don't worry about it after I'm gone. I've said to my kids--my wife died (unclear) years old. We'd be cremated and so, I have a little urn there waiting for me. And after the time has expired, you can cremate and put me in it, and you don't have to say anything. Because I believe you live your life, and that speaks for itself. Speaker 1: Alright, well, thank you very much. Story_ID: 34949 Speaker 1: Okay, Sir, go ahead. I'm ready now. Go ahead and tell us. Speaker 2: Okay? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's a picture that was taken when I was about 46 years old, just after the Foundation had made an award to me, A and T State Foundation; Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's an award given to me by the Moses H. Cone medical staff, Achievement Award. Speaker 1: And whose there with you? Speaker 2: That's the president of the medical staff. It's, what is his name. "Martha?" "Yeah." "What's the nephrologist's name?" "Alvin Powell." "Huh?" "He got the first name you got, Alvin." Yeah, Alvin Powell, yeah. Speaker 1: Powell. We won't forget that first name. Speaker 2: Oh, that's a picture taken, a bunch of Kappas up to Martha's Vineyard. I don't know what the occasion was, but I was visiting my daughter. She has a home there; That's one of the pictures of mine going into Gilford Health Care. I was medical director for quite some time; This is a picture of where I was elevated to the--big name, Honorary Pastor and Puritate Potentate, the Shriners; Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: These are pictures of three of the members of my class at A and T in 1943. That's on the occasion of the 50th Anniversary. Speaker 1: Do you want to go from left to right? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Starting there? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Do you want to-- Speaker 2: The name is Watt, Cooper and White, beginning on the left. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture my wife and I took after I'd just gotten a tooth pulled, with Jackie Robinson, a baseball player. And that's my late wife. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Gwendolyn. This is a picture taken at a Foundation banquet of three presidents of A and T State University--Dr. Gibbs, Dr. Proctor, Dr. Darden, and yours truly; That was taken when I finished my medical degree at Howard in 1947. Gee wiz, man, I wish I looked like that now. (laughter); That picture was taken in 1957, the Class of '47' [1947] at Howard University; And that's part of the program of the 1947 Class; And that's a picture of an article written for Cone. Open it up for just a moment. There's one thing that you might want to copy. Speaker 1: There's one of your examinations there. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, that's in my office; Okay, let's turn right; Now, that something that I think is one of the biggest things I've ever gotten as an award. Speaker 1: It's kind of self-explanatory. Speaker 2: That's the president of Moses, the chief executive officer, Tim Rice in the middle. And the other two are his executive assistants. And the other doctor sitting down with me, he was at Moses Cone the first day it opened. And they honored the two of us on their 60th anniversary. Speaker 1: And there's more here. This is, here's the Malcolm X picture here. Speaker 2: That's a picture taken on the retirement of President Chancellor Renick at the Foundation. And I think I was speaking to the Foundation on that occasion. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's all of the ones that you all have selected. Are there others that you want to share? Is that it? Or should we call it a day? Speaker 2: That's good. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Well, thank you. Speaker 2: Alright...