 Story_ID: 122940 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Porter Versfelt. Observing from HistoryMakers is Scott Stearns; also observing is Warren Watson and Natalie DeSantis. Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 1: Thurbert E. Baker, T-H-U-R-B-E-R-T, middle initial E, for Earl, E-A-R-L, last name Baker, B-A-K-E-R. Speaker 2: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: 12/16/52 [December 16, 1952], born in Edgecombe County, North Carolina. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 1: Right now I'm the attorney general for the state of Georgia, the 52nd attorney general for the state of Georgia. Speaker 2: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 1: Today is 8/6--15--is today the 15th, 19-2003 [August 15, 2003], I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And sir, where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: Right now we are located in the office of the attorney general, which is located at 40 Capitol Place [sic, 40 Capitol Square], Atlanta, Georgia-- Speaker 2: Now before we go into depth-- Speaker 1: --Capitol Avenue [sic, Capitol Square]. Story_ID: 122941 Speaker 1: Okay. Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish-type questions I am compelled to ask you. And they just require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food would be hamburgers. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: A favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Florida. Speaker 1: And sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: It doesn't get any better. Story_ID: 122942 Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family. I'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us and your date and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Mary Helen Baker. She was born May--I'm sorry--March 17th, 19--let me get her date right--1943 I believe is her date of birth. Speaker 1: Okay, '43 [1943]? Speaker 2: Did I get that wrong? Or '33 [1933]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Thirty-three [1933] [March 17, 1933]. Speaker 1: --be more like it, right. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, about to get the dates wrong, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: March 17. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you were born in '52 [1952], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, okay, all right, and where, where was she born? Speaker 2: She also was born in North Carolina in Edgecombe County. Speaker 1: Okay, now how much do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you, you trace that side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, I know, I know a little bit more about her side of the family. My mother is part of the Wiggins family out of North Carolina, Edgecombe County. And I can trace it back pretty much to what would be my great-grandparents, John and Winnie Wiggins, great-grandparents, her grandparents, and of course her mother, my grandmother, Hattie Wiggins Baker, and then of course my mother. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what, what's the story of the family? What, what story do they tell, and do they have any stories that go back to the nineteenth century or? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it, it, it's interesting. The family is pretty much a family of farmers. As I understand it, they all grew up and were raised in the Edgecombe County area of North Carolina, which is near the Coast, just east of Raleigh. But they were pretty much farmers and always lived a life on the farm. I, I hear stories about them basically growing enough food to support themselves during the course of the year. They were big in tobacco and cotton and peanuts, in terms of growing those things. But essentially, they were farmers growing up. It wasn't until, I assume, my mother's generation of, of descendants started to grow up and to decide what they wanted to do that some started to move away from the farm life. Speaker 1: Okay, now are there, are there stories about slavery, or, or the, the Civil War, or Reconstruction, any of that? Speaker 2: You know, there may be, but I, I am not privy to that. They've not shared any stories with me about that. As far as I can remember back, the family were pretty much farmers. They were sharecroppers at one time, so they worked on large farms. Eventually they were able to move off and to buy their own properties and to farm their own lands. But at least my knowledge and history of the family tree doesn't get that far back to the days of slavery. Speaker 1: Okay, but did your, your great-grandparents or your grandparents talk about any of their struggles and, and goals and aspirations when they were farming and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: You know, it, it was always interesting. And, and I spent more time with my, my grandmother, Hattie Baker. Back in those days, the extended family was still the way people lived. And my grandmother, bless her soul, lived with us until she passed away. But she would always talk about raising the family. She had nine children, seven girls and two boys. And it seems to me, at least from her stories, their whole life was centered around raising the family, and farming, and trying to make a living. It was very tough back in those days. I don't think they had a whole lot. They were certainly not wealthy. As, as we like to say, growing up on the farm, they were pretty much dirt poor, but they had a great family, a loving family, and they all pulled together, and they all did their chores around the house. So, I get a lot of stories. I have a lot of recollections from my grandmother primarily about life on the farm, working in the tobacco fields, picking cotton, you know, how much money they would make back in the day when they were picking cotton, and you know, I get those kind of stories. But they're all stories of family life, pretty much. But one would imagine and, and one would think that it wasn't as easy as they sometimes made it appear to be. Story_ID: 122943 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your, your mother [Mary Helen Baker]. What, what, what was she like and what did she do? Speaker 2: Great, great lady. You know, if, if, if I could speak to one person or identify one person that I think really struggled to, to make a, a life for herself and for her children, it, it's my moms. She, she grew up one of seven sisters. She was kind of in the middle of the pack, so she had a lot of responsibilities as she was growing up, helping to raise her siblings. But she got married and divorced early. I, I really was raised by a single mom. I didn't know my father well at all. But my mother took the responsibility of raising me--I've got one brother and one sister--and really, really brought us through, through difficult times. I, I, I have a lot of recollections of dif--different jobs that she, she worked trying to make ends meet; but a God-fearing woman, a lady that loved her family, a lady that would do what was necessary to put food on the table and keep a roof over our heads. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what was her occupation? She, she did a variety of different things you said. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, she never, she never went to college. She had a high school education. But she, she did a number of things. After basically leaving the farm, she had a, a number of different types of jobs. I, I remember one in particular. She worked at a, at a, at a cleaning facility, a laundromat. And, and I remember it because there were those days when I was a small kid, going down to the community cleaners to see. And I, I swear I think it--I thought it was two hundred degrees in that place. But she was back there pressing the clothes, the shirts, and the suits and whatever, and I remember that well. She did that for a number of years. I think she, she felt and we all thought she had, had arrived when she got a job working at a furniture manufacturing facility there in Rocky Mount, North Carolina, which is where we all grew up; didn't pay a lot of money, but it was a clean environment, and it wasn't two hundred degrees. Story_ID: 122944 Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, North Carolina is famous for furniture manufacture, right? Speaker 2: It is, a lot of furniture manufacturing, in particularly in the western part of the state. And we were on the eastern side of the state, but there was a manufacturer there, which was really one of the larger employers for the Rocky Mount [North Carolina] community. Now you gotta understand, Rocky Mount was not a large place. It was a small, small Southern town, and jobs were hard to come by. And I think my mother [Mary Helen Baker] was extremely proud to have been able to land a job at the local furniture manufacturing company. And as I was saying earlier, you know, it was a much better work environment. I went out there a few times just to visit her when I was older. It certainly wasn't as hot as working in the laundry, in the cleaners, and she enjoyed it. But she also went on after that, and this is as she got a little bit older, she worked for a pharmaceutical company, working basically on an assembly line process there in Rocky Mount. And, and she retired from that job. But I think that was probably the highlight of her work career, working at that pharmaceutical company. Story_ID: 122945 Speaker 1: Tell us about your, your father. Can you give us his full name and spell it for us, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I don't a whole lot about my father. He and my mother [Mary Helen Baker], as I understand it, divorced early on, and, and we didn't really grow up with my father. His name was David, as I understand from my mother, but, but didn't, I didn't have and don't have a lot of recollection about where he comes from or what he did. Apparently that relationship didn't work out early on, and, and they separated and, and divorced. So we were, we were a single family, we were a family raised by a single mother, and that's where all of our recollection would be. Speaker 1: Was there a story about how they met and--or where they met? Speaker 2: Not one that was shared with me (laughter). I suspect when things--relationships come and go pretty fast, there's not a whole lot that gets passed along down the generations of, of children. But I have, I have absolutely no knowledge or recollection about how they met. I suspect it was, you know, right there in the Rocky Mount [North Carolina], Edgecombe County [North Carolina] community. Speaker 1: Was your father from Rocky Mount? Speaker 2: I think he was. I think he was from that area. I think he subsequently moved away, but I'm not sure exactly where he moved off to. Speaker 1: Now, now did, did you ever meet him? I mean did you ever, ever recall-- Speaker 2: I, I'm-- Speaker 1: --meeting him? Speaker 2: --I'm, I am sure when I was small I probably did, but we've not had any, any relationships or ties with him since I can recall, I mean, but we were very, very young when they divorced. So I don't really have any recollections there. Speaker 1: Was there, was there another family member or someone in the community that, that kind of stepped up and took like a role of a father in, in some ways for you? Speaker 2: Well, you have to understand and remember, you know, back in those days, you know, the extended family was sort of the rule of the day. And we had any number of aunts and uncles who were there to help shelter and provide for the extended family. You know, during the summers, for example, you know, we, we would always spend our summers working on the farm. And there were the uncles and the aunts, and so there were always fatherly figures around to make sure that when, when the kids were getting out of line that you get whacked somewhere on your body part and that they get you right back to where you ought to be. So, so we always had that. I don't think we were ever lacking for a father figure in, in the extended family setting. Speaker 1: Is there any one particular person that, that, that stands out to you as someone that you looked up to as a, I mean as a male figure growing up? Speaker 2: Well, well, growing up, if, if, if you're talking about family members, you know, I, I had and spent a lot of time with my uncles out on the farm. My William, my uncle Benjamin were, were always there. And I remember them pretty well because, you know, we spent so much time working with them, and they were like fatherly figures to us also, to my sister, myself, and my brother. And I remember them fairly well because they were pretty stern. You know, they, they were businessmen back in those days. They, they, they probably didn't have a lot, didn't make a lot of money, but they knew how to run their farms, and they knew what they needed people to do. So I remember those kinds of conversations and people of, of that ilk kind of giving us the guidance that we needed and really keeping us out of trouble. We didn't get into too much trouble back in those days, but they kept us on the right track. Speaker 1: So, so you were raised in an extended kind of situation with your mother and your other relatives, your aunts and uncles, in the same household or same-- Speaker 2: Not, not, hot always-- Speaker 1: --area. Speaker 2: --yeah, not always in the same house, but in the same general community. Back in those days, we didn't move too far from each other. And, and so, you know, it seemed like a long ways, but as I go back now and I trace how we drove to each other's house, it probably wasn't any more than ten or fifteen miles apart for anybody. It seemed like much farther back in those days. But no, we, we, we were pretty close to each other, and, and we spent a lot of time with each other. Speaker 1: Okay, so in your, in your own particular household, it was your, I know your mother, your, your brother, your sister, and was there anyone else? Speaker 2: And my grandmother [Hattie Baker]. Speaker 1: Your grandmother, okay. Speaker 2: You know, as my, my grandmother got to be older, she ended up staying with my mother and, and our family. And so, that was our household, my, my brother, my sister, my mother, my grandmother. That was our immediate household. But because grandmamma was there, all of the other siblings for my mother tended to gravitate to our house. That meant we got to see everybody a bit more. Story_ID: 122946 Speaker 1: Now what's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory of anything? My goodness gracious, well, this goes back pretty far. I mean, I, I remember, I remember running through tobacco and cotton fields early on in life; I remember mules; I remember chickens; I, I remember cornfields, you know, those kind of vivid recollections that you have just from, from an environment that was so commonplace for me back in those days; I, I remember school; I remember kindergarten; I remember walking to--we didn't have a car early on; I remember walking to kindergarten early, early in the mornings and, and coming home; and didn't have buses to get us there and didn't have cars to transport us, so I remember making that walk; I remember my kindergarten teacher, wonderful lady who was pretty stern and, and kept us on the lines and, and learning ABCs; I remember family life; I, I remember foods that we ate, difficult sometimes to get a square meal, but always had something to eat. I have all of those recollections from my early, early childhood. Story_ID: 122947 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Probably corn, chicken, biscuits, oatmeal. You know, it was kind of weird. We, we, we ate oatmeal back in those days, and a lot of people tell me nowadays that that was pretty good. I didn't think it was pretty good 'cause we ate it every morning. But, but I remember those foods; you know, I remember tractors; I, I remember red Farmall tractors, you know, trying to drive it or ride on it; I remember carts being pulled by, by mules. I, I remember all of those things because it was probably part, a significant part of my growing up experience there. Story_ID: 122948 Speaker 1: What about school? What, what, what school did you attend? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I went to kindergarten, and, and back in those days, kindergartens were not as fancy as they are nowadays. It was in a house and a little old white house on a corner. I'll never forget it. We walked to it. It was probably--this is just my, my guess--probably thirty or forty other students there in kindergarten. They fed us around lunch time, which was always good. I enjoyed the experience. You know, I, I remember elementary school, walking there too, O.R. Pope [Elementary] School, there in Rocky Mount, North Carolina. It was, it was interesting. I always had a great desire to go to school. I, I--it never bothered me to go to school. I looked forward to getting to school, and, and I'm, I'm not so sure it was to learn, but it was just to be around people. I always enjoyed people and being able to talk to other people. And, and so I liked the experience of going. So I spent, I spent a number of years at O.R. Pope School-- Speaker 1: Now, now-- Speaker 2: --going through grades-- Speaker 1: Now is this an all-black school or they had-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, back--you know, we didn't--I didn't have an integrated schooling until I was in senior high school. In, in North Carolina we had middle schools, so I went from elementary school to, which was one through six, to junior high school, which was seven through nine, and then I went to high school, which was ten through twelve. Now, the first year of my high school experience was at an all-black high school, and then they merged the two high schools there in Rocky Mount. So it was not until my eleventh grade year that I actually attended an integrated high school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you started school when you were five. That's about 1957, I guess. Speaker 2: Born in '52 [1952], yeah, it would have been about, yeah, 56 years later, '50--'58 [1958], somewhere right around in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: The, the high school that I attended--I mean the elementary school-- Speaker 1: yeah. Speaker 2: --that I attended was O.R. Pope-- Speaker 1: Pope, okay. Speaker 2: --Elementary School. And, and then I left there and, and went to, to finish out my elementary experience, a school called Baskerville, J. W. Baskerville Elementary [School, Rocky Mount, North Carolina], and then I went to high school, Parker Junior High School [Rocky Mount, North Carolina], and then [Rocky Mount] Senior High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 122949 Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you about grade school. What were your favorite subjects in grade school [O.R. Pope Elementary School, Rocky Mount, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: You know, I was a pretty good student. I'm not sure that there was anything that I felt was, that I liked so much more than another. I just liked being in school pretty much. Now I didn't like math. If you ask me what I didn't like, I, I was not always the best math student. We had--I'll never forget when we were in [Parker] Junior High School [Rocky Mount, North Carolina] they taught us math over a TV, and we didn't have a live body. We'd all go sit down in our assigned seats, and there was a lady who would come on this TV screen, and she'd teach us math. I hated it, absolutely hated it. I think I went to law school just so that I wouldn't have to do any math, you know. But that, that was prob--if you ask me what I didn't like, it was probably that. But I, I, I was, I was pretty good in, in most of the other classes, and I don't know that I liked one much more than the other. I, I--you know, science I was a little fond of. I always enjoyed the sciences. But you know, for a long time I knew what I wanted to do and that was to be a lawyer. And so I, I sort of in the back of my mind always thought I needed a general background in, in most things. Speaker 1: Now, at, at, at what age did you have this aspiration? When did this, when was this born? Speaker 2: I gotta, I gotta tell you this story. Now my mother [Mary Helen Baker] tells me this story, so I cannot swear that it's true, but she says it. She says that when I was five or six years old, that I would run around the house and tell everybody that I was gonna be a lawyer. Now this is kind of weird for a five or six-year-old kid. But she says, you know, Thurbert, when you were that young, you would tell everybody that you were going to be a lawyer. Now this was pretty strange because we didn't have any, any professionals in our family. I mean we were all farm--sharecroppers and farmers. And so everybody just got a kick out of it. But she says it was, was that early. Now I have these, these memories of running home every day after school--and I'm sure I was still in, in early grade school--not to play, but I wanted to watch 'Perry Mason.' We had a little small black and white TV. And you know, half the time it wouldn't work, but for some reason it always worked when Perry Mason was on. And, and I really loved this, this show because I, I, I would sit there and I'd be fascinated. I knew what the ending would be, you know. At the end of the program, the guilty person would break down and confess all of his or her crimes or sins. And, and I'd say, you know, truth and justice prevails another day in America. So, you know, it was, it was a good program, but I enjoyed it. But, but I knew, I knew early on that's what I wanted to do. Even from my own recollections, I knew that's what I wanted to do, and I, I never, I never wavered from that at all. Speaker 1: Oh, what other things did you like to do? What, what kind of a young man were you when you were growing up? Speaker 2: We, we had great times. I mean I was your typical young kid. I mean we, we, we wanted summer to get here. Summer couldn't get, get, get there any quicker than, than we had hoped for. But I spent a lot of time growing up in a rural environment. And even when we were in Rocky Mount, which was not that large of a city, you know, I remember, you know, running around without shoes, barefoot, as we used to call it. I remember I, I thought I was an entrepreneur early on, so I had two jobs during the summer, picking blackberries. I'd pick quart jars of blackberries. I'd sell 'em for twenty-five cents a quart; I remember that--cutting grass; we'd cut yards for fifty cents. And I spent a lot of my summer making money picking blackberries and, and cutting grass, but also just sort of running, running through the woods. We had ditches all over the place. I think there was no greater fun that I had than running through the ditches of, of Eastern North Carolina. And you know, some days I'm surprised we didn't get snake bitten or you know, hurt out there, but never crossed our minds, never wore shoes, didn't care where we were going, but we were just having fun during the summers. So it was, it was, it was a different life experience I think than from what kids get nowadays. Story_ID: 122950 Speaker 1: Now was, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Church was always a big part of it. You know, when I was growing up, church was, was really not an option. You know, nowadays I believe there is an option. You know, kids can decide if they wanna go or not. I just always assumed everybody went to church on Sunday morning. And, and moms [Mary Helen Baker] would pack us up and put some clothes on. And I remember these little short pants, seersucker pants, and coats, and you know, a little tie that never fit, and, and, and we'd go off to church. And it was a family experience. And so we grew up in the church. My, my, my grandparents were primitive Baptists, if you know what Primitive Baptists are. Speaker 1: No, now tell us, what, what is a Primitive Baptist? Speaker 2: Well, it, it's interesting. It, it is, and I'm not an expert in this area, but, but the Primitive Baptists were probably more conservative Baptists. I mean they were mostly rural, country folks, as, as we like to say. But, but they were very devout in their religion, very stern about who they were and their relationship with God. And it seems like they went to church all the time. That's what I remember, because we'd get taken off to some of the country churches, you know. We'd sit with our grandparents, and, and we listen to the preaching and to the sermons. But as I was growing up in Rocky Mount, we were Baptist and still, I still am. But I remember those, those experiences. Some people tell me that I spent most of my Sunday mornings--we'd have to go to Sunday school in church, and they said I spent most of my time running through the church building. But I still think to this day I'm a better person because I was there, even though I was running all over the place. Story_ID: 122951 Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what was the name of your church? Speaker 2: St. James-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: St. James Baptist Church [Rocky Mount, North Carolina], and we had a fire and brimstone preacher. His name was Reverend Mason. I'll never forget him. I mean you'd leave that church on Sunday mornings scared to do anything wrong (laughter), you know. Your, your soul was gonna go to hell if you did something awfully bad. But, but I have, I have some very fond memories of spending a lot of days at St. James Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Now did you--were you able to--did they give you a lot of responsibilities and tasks in the church when you were coming up, things, things to do? Speaker 2: No, not really. I, you know, I just had to be there. My mother was pretty active in the church, but the kids were not. You know, I don't know that we had a lot of youth programs. Nowadays, the churches really reach out into the communities and try and provide activity for, for kids and or elderly, as a matter of fact. But back in those days I don't recall that we, we did a whole lot. Our, our job was to be there, to sit down, and be quiet until the service was over, and that's what we did. Speaker 1: Was that difficult to do? Speaker 2: They tell me I was all over the church half the time. I, I, you know, I, I'm, I'm not saying that I was. I'm not making a confession about this, but my mother [Mary Helen Baker] tells me that there were a few days she had to pull my ears and, and get me in my seat to make sure that I was stationary and listening to what was going on. Speaker 1: Okay, now was, was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Music was always a big part of, of my childhood experience, and I think for, for all of us who grew up there in Rocky Mount and especially out on the farm. You know, there's not a whole lot you do when you grow on a ru--in a rural part of this state and in a small city. So, so one way that you can escape the confines of that fairly limited involve--environment--is to, to listen to music. And so, you know, I was, I, I was a big Jerry Butler fan. I was a big Temptations fan. I was a big Supremes fan. I mean back in those days I thought Motown was the only music industry in the world. But, but we, we did, we enjoyed music as we were growing up. We enjoyed church music. I mean that was, that was always fun for us. We--it's changed a little bit over the years. But we enjoyed a lot of different forms of music, good recreation for us. Speaker 1: Now were there, there many I guess indigenous arts and crafts and folk music and that sort of thing in Rocky Mount? Speaker 2: Not as such. You know, Thelonius Monk is from Rocky Mount, if you know Monk. He, he is a Rocky Mount native. But Rocky Mount was not a hotbed for musicians, not, not even in the, in the, in the wildest stretch of your imagination. But I think we were like most small towns in American, I mean, you know, kids growing up. You listened to music; you, you have what we called house parties, you know, that we'd go to on occasion; not a whole lot of organized activities, so you made do with what you had. So if somebody's parent was bold and brave enough to let us have a party, that's where we'd go. Speaker 1: And so mostly your music was on the, on record players or on the radio, or? Speaker 2: Forty-fives, man, that was it, the, the forty-fives on the record player. You know, I, I look at 'em nowadays. They lasted about a minute and fifty-eight seconds. You know, that was the length of a record back in those days, but yeah, that was it. We'd, we'd get a record player; we'd listen to the radio. TV was not a real big thing, but the radio was. Story_ID: 122952 Speaker 1: In school, now in, in, in grade school [O.R. Pope Elementary School, Rocky Mount, North Carolina], before I get you to high school, were there any, any teachers there that took a particular interest in you that you-- Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't know that there was during my grade school days anyone that, that, that I recall having a particular interest. And when I was in the first grade, my first grade teacher was Ms. Townsend. And, and I remember her spending a lot of time with me, which I was very appreciative of and--'cause you know, when, when you're that young, you think everybody pays more attention to you than they probably really did. She probably paid as much attention to every other kid as, as, as she did to me. But I always thought she was, was fond of me and would make sure that I was getting things right, you know, whether it's numbers, or letters, or alphabets, whatever the case might have been. And so I have this recollection of, of Ms. Townsend. It wasn't until I got to [Parker] Junior High School [Rocky Mount, North Carolina] that I think and have some recollections of teachers really starting to focus in on what I was doing and, and, and really trying to make sure that I was learning the basics, the skills that were needed to, to be successful. Speaker 1: Well, well, who were some of those teachers? Do you remember some of their names? Speaker 2: I gotta tell you about my, my ninth-grade English teacher. Her, her name is Gloria Gray, and she was tough; she was absolutely tough. And, and the thing that she did for me, though, was that she gave me a great appreciation for the English language. And, and, and she would not allow you to come into her classroom and to speak poor English. And I, I was in Rocky Mount earlier this year, and I was speaking to a group there, and she was in the audience. And, and I said to her from the podium, I said now, Ms. Gray, I just want you to understand that if I split a verb, it's, it's because I intended to do it. And don't come up here and get on me because I messed something up. But she had that kind of, that, that kind of interest in, in me and what I was doing and was very helpful to me. I, I was always thought she was probably one of the great guiding lights for me in, in my, in my educational experience. Speaker 1: Okay, any, any, any other teachers in--that you remember that-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, the, the, the English class was probably the one that stands out most in my mind. You know, we, we had a number of good teachers. I, I, I can't pick one out over and above that one, but we had a number of good teachers. And I think back in those days they really spent a lot of time. The classes were probably smaller. They had the ability to spend more time with students, something as, as, as simple as shop. You know, I had a, had an instructor. His name was Mr. Sharpe back in those days, spent a lot of time, you know. We made things, you know. I, I'll never forget making a shoebox. I was so proud of this shoebox, you know, but, but it was proud of the class project. And he spent a lot of time with me. But I, you know, I'm, I'm not sure kids get all of that attention nowadays. Speaker 1: Now did you share with any, any of your teachers your aspiration to become a lawyer? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I did, I did. I, I think certainly from, from junior high on it was pretty well known around Rocky Mount that Thurbert wanted to be a lawyer. And, and I, I to this day, I, I think I believe what my mother tells me about how early I started talking about it. But you know, when you're getting to the seventh, eighth, and ninth grade, you start, at least back in those days, you're starting to talk about what you want to do. And, and it was pretty well known that's what I wanted to do. And I never thought that I couldn't. Here's the interesting thing, I never thought that I couldn't. I just thought it was a matter of making sure that I got the, the, the preparation, and the training, and the education that I needed along the way. Story_ID: 122953 Speaker 1: Tell me now, when you were in, I guess in middle school [Parker Junior High School, Rocky Mount, North Carolina], I guess the Civil Rights Movement, it really started to heat up. Were there, was there much discussion in your family, or were, were you keenly aware of what was going on in the country, how things were changing? Speaker 2: You know, here's an interesting, here's an interesting tidbit of history, and, and I have read this, so, and I don't have any particular knowledge, but I would have been there at the time. I have read a number of articles that say, that, that indicate that Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech that was delivered in Washington, D.C., the famous speech, was actually delivered first in Rocky Mount, North Carolina. And he used Rocky Mount, as he was moving and making his way up to Washington, D.C., kind of as a test for that speech, interesting bit of history. I don't know it to be true, but I've read a number of articles from historians who point to that. They pulled the newspaper articles out about when he was there and the speech that he gave, and it seems strikingly similar to the speech that he gave in Washington, D.C. But we had--we were not unlike any other Southern towns, small Southern town. There were race problems that existed back in those days. I remember, as a, as a young boy, seeing clashes between the KKK and, and blacks there in, in Rocky Mount, North Carolina. I don't ever remember anybody getting hurt. It was probably more talking and shouting than anything-- Speaker 1: --excuse me-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --anything else. Speaker 2: Now most people today, you know, especially young people, have never seen the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] in person. But were they, they, were they a regular feature of Rocky Mount? Speaker 1: No, they, they were not a regular feature of it. But at, at some points in time you would see that kind of thing bubble up. As a matter of fact, I can only remember one time in my life actually seeing members of the KKK, in robes, in the Rocky Mount vicinity. Now, I'm sure they were there, but Rocky Mount was, was pretty much a quiet town. And a lot of stuff that was probably happening was happening underneath the surface. It wasn't bubbling up to the point where you were having street riots or, or, or parades in which, you know, one extreme faction or another might have been participating in. I don't really have those kind of recollections, but you know, we had, we had those problems. I mean the schools were segregated for a long time. And it wasn't until my eleventh-grade year that we, we integrated the schools. I, I remember the turbulent years after integration of the high school [Rocky Mount Senior High School]. A lot of, lot of friction back in those days. I was always one trying to make sure we got people together to make the high school a good high school. So I remember some of those challenges, but you know, Rocky Mount was probably typical for most small Southern towns back in those days. Story_ID: 122954 Speaker 1: I remember a lot of people growing up our age probably watched 'The Andy Griffith Show' on television. I think that takes, I think it takes place in North Carolina, but-- Speaker 2: Mount Airy. Speaker 1: Right. But there are no, there are no black people in it hardly. There's one, there's one black woman that always would be in the, you know, in the town meeting scenes. But you know, it--I don't know. Did you all ever discuss the--I mean race relations in the, in, in Rocky Mount [North Carolina], were, I mean were, were, were black people really intimidated by the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK], or had there been a change, or I mean did you-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --or was it so-- Speaker 2: Well, let me, let me ask-- Speaker 1: --gradual you didn't notice it, or what? Speaker 2: --let, let me answer your last question first. I, I don't recall that blacks were intimidated by the Klan. We didn't see the Klan a whole lot. Now that does not say that they were not there. We just didn't see them as much as you might have seen them in other places. Race relations I think was always an issue that was bubbling underneath the surface, and sometimes it would spill over. When I was in [Rocky Mount Senior] High School, after we had integrated, I, I remember serving as co-chair of the Human Relations Committee there in high school. And our whole job was to try and improve relations in the high school after we had integrated. Speaker 1: Now was there an incident, or a movement, or an action that, that precipitated integration? I mean how did it happen? Speaker 2: Now, you know, you're asking me a question that, that I don't know the, the correct answer to. Speaker 1: I know you, you, you, you were in school yourself then, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in, I was in school myself at that time. I believe that it was just a sign of things that were progressing, that we were progressing to, that, you know, somebody looked around and realized it didn't make a whole lot of sense to run two high schools when you could run one, and, and have everybody in the same location. No, I, I just think it was integration was a thing that was making, getting a foothold in the North Carolina public school systems back in those days, and we were just part of it. Speaker 1: Well, I just wondered if you, your family, or the, or the people in your community had any sense of the, of the struggle, you know, around that sort of thing. I know in Greensboro [North Carolina], the, the sit-ins-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --in North Carolina at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro] and the ear-- Speaker 2: The sit-ins. Speaker 1: --earlier, Robert Williams' actual confrontation with the Klan, you know, gun battles with the, with, with Klan members and so forth. I just wondered if people had, had a sense of what-- Speaker 2: I, I think people were acutely aware of what was going on around the country, as well as in other parts of North Carolina. We didn't have those kinds of dramatic confrontations that I recall seeing on TV there in Rocky Mount, not that Rocky Mount was any better. I'm, I'm not saying it was any better than any other city, but we just didn't have those kinds of things occur. It was a small place pretty much, so we just didn't see a whole lot of that. But, no, we knew it was going on obviously. Speaker 1: So you think, you think that maybe things were--deals were made, you know, out of the, the public eye around (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I suspect so, I, I suspect so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and it was kept pretty quiet. You know, we just didn't--the layperson, myself, you know, I, I, I didn't see a lot of it, and I'm pretty certain most people didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 122955 Speaker 1: Well, how was it to attend an integrated school [Rocky Mount Senior High School, Rocky Mount, North Carolina] after attending a segregated school [Booker T. Washington High School, Rocky Mount] for so long, yeah? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was, it was interesting. Most of us, as we were growing up, black kids were, were very interested in, in going to Booker T. Washington. You know, in every city across America in the black community there is a Booker T. Washington High School. Speaker 1: Or, or a [Paul Laurence] Dunbar. Speaker 2: Or a Dunbar. That's exactly right. And so, so I, I, I really looked forward to going to Booker T. because they had a great band. They had a great football team. I mean high school football was pretty big back in those days. They had a wonderful basketball team, and I wanted to go and be a part of that experience. And then, of course, after my tenth grade year, we, we integrated. And, and we, we, we had challenges that in hindsight don't appear to be that significant, but back in those days, were really big things. I mean, what is your school mascot going to be? We at Booker T. had a mascot, a lion, the Booker T. Lions. At the white school, Rocky Mount Senior High School, the, the mascot was a gryphon. I'm sorry, well, not a gryphon, was the blackbird. Well, you know, black kids were a little bit sensitive to going over to a white school and having a mascot call the blackbirds. And so, we ended up--and this was part of what we did in the Human Relations Commission--we were able to work through a compromise where we took the gryphon as our mascot, which is a mythical beast that was part bird and part lion. And so we were able to kind of work through those kinds of challenges. Now back in those days, that was a big issue. You know, I look back on it nowadays and I say well, (unclear), I can't believe we spent all that time fussing about that, but, but we did. Speaker 1: You're lucky you had a mythical beast that could--(laughter) mesh both. Speaker 2: (Laughter) We got lucky, we got lucky-- Speaker 1: If it had of been a snake-- Speaker 2: --on that. Speaker 1: --and a raccoon or something, you would have been in trouble. Speaker 2: We would have been in trouble. But, but it was those kind of things, you know, who's going to be the principal? We had a principal. The other school had a principal. Who are the teachers now, you know? Did your best English teacher get to be the best English teacher in the integrated high school? Who's gonna be the coach, who are the coaches gonna be? You had sports teams that are coming in. Speaker 1: These are serious questions, and you know, other people we've interviewed have lamented the loss of black talent when integration took place. Teachers, some teachers were not hired for the, the major high school. And a lot of the black teachers were, were left on the wayside, you know. And was that true in Rocky Mount, or was it fair or? Speaker 2: Pretty much. I, I, I think in, in hindsight, if you look back at the number of administrative personnel, coaches, etc. that came from the predominantly black high school to the integrated school, I, I think they were put in positions less than what they had at the black school. And I think that was always an area of sensitivity, not just for those administrators, but for the students. And we all went through that. I, I think that was probably the case in most instances where you saw the integration of, of black and white high schools in the South. Story_ID: 122956 Speaker 1: Now was there, was there, were there social concerns [at Rocky Mount Senior High School, Rocky Mount, North Carolina]? Now you were on a committee to try to solve some of the social problems, but what would happen at prom time and those kind of times? Were there, were there--did, did you have two separate proms, or did you (unclear)--(unclear) or what? Speaker 2: No, that, that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was never a problem in Rocky Mount. And, and quite frankly, I don't remember there ever being problems at the prom. We all went. There was never any discussion about having separate proms. We just had to have a place big enough to, to accommodate everybody. As a matter of fact, I'll, I'll never forget one year--and I think this might have been prom-related, because I had my tuck [tuxedo] on. I remember having this tuck and this big bowtie, you know, that would choke a horse. I remember that. Speaker 1: It's the '70s [1970s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, back in, back in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. But [HM] Jerry Butler was our performer for the prom. Speaker 1: Now does Jerry Butler have a North Carolina background at all? Speaker 2: I don't think he does. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And how we-- Speaker 1: How did you get-- Speaker 2: How we got Jerry Butler to come to Rocky Mount, North Carolina, I will never, ever know the answer to. But to this day, I now know Jerry Butler, and, and, and I will see him here in Atlanta, he's performing for different groups, or I'll see him in Chicago [Illinois]. And I'll say to him, I said, Jerry, do you remember coming to Rocky Mount, North Carolina. He says I absolutely do, Thurbert. And he'll tell me why he remembered. He, he fell and almost hurt himself while he was there, so he, he, he always remembers Rocky Mount. But here was an integrated school where we were now having a, a, a major black performer come in to perform. So I don't really, to answer your-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --question, I don't-- Speaker 1: His--"Dream Merchant" was his hit during that-- Speaker 2: "Dream Merchant"-- Speaker 1: --was at that time, yeah. Speaker 2: --well, yes, indeed, among others. But I, I don't remember us having those kinds of problems at the prom. Most of the things that we had to deal with were the issues like I just, just mentioned, you know, what, what is your mascot gonna be, who are your instructors gonna be, who's gonna coach the teams, those sorts of things. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you begin to--now you started fencing in high school, right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or was, was it at the University of-- Speaker 2: College, at the University-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: --of North Carolina [University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: So we'll, we'll, we'll wait for that one then. Speaker 2: That's another story --. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --by the way. Speaker 1: But what other activities were you involved in in high school, and how did you decide or, or how did you get to, you know, to, to decide on going to the University of North Carolina in the first place? Speaker 2: When I, when I was in the tenth grade, from the eighth, ninth, and tenth grade, I, I was pretty much into athletics, and, and I did a little bit of everything. I played basketball, which was my favorite sport; I played football; I ran track, never did play a lot of baseball, but I did kind of in an intramural league around the city. I, I think once I got to the eleventh and twelfth grade, I was really starting to get focused on education. And, and I really just, as I like to say, I got in government, and, and that's when I really started to focus on student council. And you know, and I ran for president of the high school, and you know, I wanted to be classroom president. I mean I did a whole lot of that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Did you win any, any of those positions? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, I was president of my class. I ran for president of the school and, and just barely lost that, but I was always very active in what I called government. I was always on student council. I was sort of one of the high school leaders back in those days, voted my junior and senior year one of the ten--I can't even remember the categories, but it's kind of the ten students who-- Speaker 1: Most like to succeed. Speaker 2: Most likely to succeed, yeah, you remember those categories. But I was always very active, and so I, I, didn't do a whole lot of sports from my eleventh and twelfth grade year. It was mostly focused on, on those sorts of things. Story_ID: 122957 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation from [Rocky Mount Senior] High School [Rocky Mount, North Carolina], I mean how did you, how did you choose the University of North Carolina [Chapel Hill, North Carolina]? Had they--the perception that I think people in the country had from just watching the basketball team on television, that it was an all-white school basically. And I guess it had started to change. You know, you saw all white players with Dean Smith. And the guys that spread out (unclear)--four corners and stuff, you know, everybody was white at the university. But how, how did you end up, you know, choosing the University of North Carolina? Speaker 2: Probably a lot of reasons. One, we were always impressed as, as kids growing up. We were always impressed with the University of North Carolina because of the basketball program. And I think every kid who grows up in North Carolina and loves basketball looks at Chapel Hill and Dean Smith. And it's probably not the best reason to decide where you wanna go to school, but the reality was we all thought it was a, a cool place to go. I had some friends who were there at, in high school with me who were going to the University of North Carolina, or had applied to go there, and that was a factor. But I think there was a, a, another reason that was kind of underneath the surface of it all. I had a guidance counselor who told me one day when I was sitting in her office that she didn't think I needed to--she didn't think I should apply to the University of North Carolina, one, because she didn't think I could get in; and two, that she didn't think I could make it at the University of North Carolina. Now, you know, back in those days, and even to this day, if you really want me to get motivated to go do something, tell me I can't do it. And, and I think that really, really gave me the impetus to, to focus a lot because I wanted to prove that I could go to one of the nation's best institutions and not only get admitted, but to do well, and I did. I apply, I got accepted, graduated here with, with 3.0 [grade point] average and--or better. I can't even remember the exact number now. But I had a wonderful undergraduate career at, at the University of North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, what was it like when you, when you arrived on the campus? Was it like you imagined it to be, or was it, was, was it a welcoming environment, or was it kind of austere or, or what? Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't go there looking for a welcoming environment. I went there to, to get a good education, and that was first and foremost on my mind. If we got a welcoming environment, that was just gravy for me. But I had a few friends who were from Rocky Mount, who were already there. And so we had contacts, you know, that we could, that we could share. My, one of my best friends in high school also got admitted to the University of North Carolina, so we just decided to be roommates. So we, we remained roommates for four years there at-- Speaker 1: Is, is this another black student? Speaker 2: Yes, another black student, so, so that, that always helps. You're kind of bring somebody from home that you know and, and you feel comfortable with, and it helps you to make the transition. But, but it was a good experience for me. I, I, you know, I was always an outgoing person. You know, I wasn't gonna go there and sit in a room. I wanted to get involved with the campus life. I wanted to do things. I wanted to experience life on a campus that, that large. He thing that, that I remember most is how big the campus was. You know, back in those days, I suspect the student body in Chapel Hill was probably twenty, twenty-five thousand students. And, and the campus was so large you had, I remember you had to take buses to get from one end of the campus to the other or thumb a ride with somebody. But it was a challenge, and, and it was one that I was excited about and looked forward to. Story_ID: 122958 Speaker 1: All right, now, sir, you were the Atlantic Coast Conference Saber Champion, you know. Can you talk about that. I mean, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, this really, this, this is really weird for a black kid coming from Rocky Mount, North Carolina, first of all. We gotta put this in the proper context. But I gotta tell you how I got involved in fencing. Had never fenced a day in my life, loved the old "Zorro" movies, you know, so but that was as close as I got to a blade. But when I went to [University of North Carolina] Chapel Hill during my, my freshmen year, we had to sign up for classes. And we went over to the old Tin Can [University of North Carolina Indoor Athletic Center (1924 - 1977)], we called it, to, to, to do it. On--and, and I'm always embarrassed to admit this, but on the day we were signing up for classes, I overslept. Now you know I must have been in panic mode, you know. I'm on this big campus. I gotta go get classes, and I oversleep. Well, when I get to the gym to sign up, there's only two, there were only two classes left for P.E. You had to have P.E., and you have to take two eight-week courses. The only two left, badminton and fencing. All right, so, I applied, I'm signing up for badminton and fencing. It just so happened that I took fencing first, and the instructor happened to be the coach of the fencing team. Ron Miller was his name. And after the eight weeks fencing, Coach Miller said, you know, Thurbert, you're pretty good at this. If you would agree to come out for the fencing team, I'll exempt you from your next eight weeks of badminton, twist my arm; I'm ready, you know, sign me up. I don't wanna take badminton anyway. And so that's what happened. And so, I, I, I, I went out for the fencing team, apparently had a, a very good knack for fencing. A lot of fencing, I determined in the later years, was all about quickness of hand and feet, and, and good hand-eye coordination. I had always played sports in high school and was fairly good at it, and so I thought it was a natural transition for me. But apparently I had some skills at it, and, and went on not only to, to make the team, but to start for four years there at Chapel Hill and to become one of the top fencers in the ACC [Atlantic Coast Conference] history, ACC Conference history. Speaker 1: Yeah, you're one of the top fifty I think, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it, it was interesting, and I, I really liked it because it, it, to me, it was a, a one-on-one sport, and, and you had to be very disciplined in your approach to it, and you had to really outthink the guy who was on the other side. And, and there's a lot of strategy that goes into how you score points. But we got an opportunity, because we had a fairly good team in Chapel Hill, we got an opportunity to travel really around the country. And you know, for a kid from Rocky Mount, North Carolina, who had never been on an airplane before and had never eaten a steak dinner, this was pretty good stuff, you know. We got to move around the country. We got to go to all of these great tournaments, and we got to see people from different countries. We'd go to New York every year to what we called the Martini and Rossi, which was an international competition. And it was just a, it was a wonderful experience, but it was part of my college experience that I look back, and I have fond memories of. Speaker 1: Okay, and it--I guess the fencing community is more of a, in terms of patrician kind of a sport. You know, I mean you see a lot of people with money, I guess, engaging in that, I guess-- Speaker 2: I, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm-- Speaker 1: --like polo or something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --not--and see, that, that's a, that's a perception and maybe a myth. I'm not sure that's the case. When I was at Chapel Hill, the school was just starting to recruit some of the top fencers in the country. A lot of the kids that we recruited were kids out of New York, out of the Northeast, who had fenced in high school. You know, I didn't know kids did that in high school. But yeah, they did it in high school, and they were very good at it. And so we were recruiting these kids. But these kids did not come from families with money, or wealth, or prestige, or power. They, these were average kids, who one way or another found their way on a fencing strip one day, and the happened to be good at it. And, and so they came out of rough neighborhoods in a lot of instances. And, and--but they were good at it, and so we recruited. Most of the students who fenced there in Chapel Hill were just every average day people, who just happened to like the sport, and they were pretty decent at it. So I think that perception that you have might be somewhat of a myth. Hey, listen, if this guy-- Speaker 1: I guess it's of the past-- Speaker 2: --could go and do it, I, I guarantee that shatters all the myths about (laughter) who fencers are. Speaker 1: I guess it's changed a lot of I guess over the years. Speaker 2: Oh, it's changed a lot. Story_ID: 122959 Speaker 1: Now what else did you do at the University of North Carolina [Chapel Hill]? Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was always very active in, in, of course, schoolwork. You know, that was the time that I thought we needed to, to really get busy and to, to start preparing for law school. So, you know, I never lost sight of the fact that we, that we needed to, to be mindful of, of what was going on in the classroom. But I also used to do a lot of recruiting of minority students. This was one of my, I thought, a great responsibility and a wonderful opportunity. But when I was at Chapel Hill, I actually headed up a minority recruiting program for the university. One of, one of my friends who was a dean there at UNC, Hayden B. Renwick, who, who you may not know, but for many of us black students who attended the University of North Carolina he was somewhat of a legend. And he was pegged by the university to help it increase its minority enrollment there in Chapel Hill. And so he instigated a program back in the, in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] to actively go out, and to meet with minority students around the state, and to try recruit 'em to come in. He did that through students who were member--who were already there at the university. And I got involved in his program, and went on to, to head it for him at one point. But it was a wonderful experience. I, I mean they let us take a car, and we could drive to different cities, and we'd get to meet with all of these students. I'll never forget my experience in Charlotte [North Carolina] one year. I was talking to a group of students, and the parents were all, would always be there. And there was this really shy kid who was stand--sitting in the corner, tall, lanky kid, and wouldn't say a thing. And after the meeting, he came over and he said well, Thurbert, I'm really thinking about going to Chapel Hill, and I wanna play basketball. 'Cause back in those days you think you gotta be great to play basketball at Chapel Hill, and I was just okay, guy, you know. Turns out, it was Walter Davis. If you remember Walter Davis, who was one of the great basketball players-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --at Chapel Hill. Speaker 1: He plays with the Phoenix Suns now. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, a great player. Speaker 2: Absolutely, but, but I remember that story. But I remember having the experience of seeing a lot of kids who, who wanted to come to Chapel Hill. And so we spent a lot of time recruiting them and then trying to help them to make sure academically they were passing muster there at the university. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, did you have anything to do with the recruitment of Phil Ford when-- Speaker 2: Well, I'll, I'll tell you story on Phil Ford. Phil Ford, who I think was one of the greatest basketball players of all time, college and pros, is from Rocky Mount, North Carolina, as, as is Buck Williams, who you might remember, was a great in the NBA. Speaker 1: Yeah, and great power forward. Speaker 2: A great power forward. Buck Williams is from Rocky Mount also. But what I remember about Phil is that Phil was really a few years behind me, and he was in my brother's class. Phil would come to the basketball courts in the neighborhood, and he'd always have a nice basketball. And so we always wanted to use his basketball, but we didn't want him to play. He was like the kid, you know, so it was like give us your basketball, and we may let you come and play before the day is over. Turns out, he, he's, he's just, just a phenom. And you know, it wasn't until I had left Rocky Mount that I started to read stories about how good this kid actually was. And then, of course, we recruited him at Chapel Hill, and he became the all-time assist leader, and way up there in scoring, and just, just a wonderful guy, but a tremendous basketball player. Story_ID: 122960 Speaker 1: So things were, were fairly easy at University of North Carolina [Chapel Hill, North Carolina] for you? I mean were, were--I mean, I don't know. You seem like you got a lot, lot of op, opportunities. But you know, I realize you're one of the first wave of black students at University of North Carolina, so there were no obstacles or anything I guess? Speaker 2: I had--I'll, I will tell you this, I had a, I had a good time at Chapel Hill. The best four year of my life I spent in undergraduate school in Chapel Hill. We had a pretty good support base there. When I--you know, my class was not the first class of black students to go to Chapel Hill. There were several who had gone there before, before I got there, and there were several black students from Rocky Mount [North Carolina] who had gone to Chapel Hill. So we had kind of a, a chain of, of people there that we could go to. College was, was a good time for me. I, you know, I always did fairly well in school. I, I made myself available to do other things, which kept the experience a good experience. Fencing, recruiting was always a great part of what I did, so. Speaker 1: Did you join the Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity]-- Speaker 2: No, you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, now remember, this, this would have been in the early '70s [1970s]. We, we did not have fraternities and soror--black fraternities and sororities at the University of North Carolina in those days. It wasn't until my junior and senior year that we started to get black fraternities and sororities at the University of North Carolina. But by this time, I'm about ready to leave to move on to law school. Now I, I joined, joined Omega Psi Phi, became a member in the graduate chapter right here in, in DeKalb County, Georgia-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --one of the best decisions I ever made, by the way-- Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: --to all the frat brothers out there in the country. Speaker 1: Now did you major in political science or-- Speaker 2: Majored in political science. Back in those days, and, and this is an evolving discussion, but, but back in those days, conventional wisdom was that if you wanted to go to law school, political science was probably the best undergraduate major for you, and, and that's what I did, enjoyed it, had a wonderful time at it. In hindsight, I think now, you know, probably English is, is as good as political science. There are a lot of other disciplines you can get into that would train you to be, or at least give you the foundation, to be a good lawyer. But back in those days it was political science, and, and that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay, are any of the, are, are there any professors at the University of North Carolina that stand out that you really admired or, or had a relationship with? Speaker 2: Well, I, I--not professor, but I mentioned Dean [Hayden B.] Renwick to you just a minute ago. And he, he was probably the most influential person for me at the University of North Carolina. And, and, and I really appreciated what he did because he, he was always that individual who would speak up on behalf of the minority students there at the University of North Carolina. And whenever there was an issue, whether it was, you know, whether or not we needed to have a black student union, whether or not the course curriculum was appropriate, whether or not we needed more minority professors and instructors there at the University of North Carolina, Dean Renwick was always the one out front, you know, really taking the heat for those initiatives, back in, in those days. Speaker 1: Was, was he white? Speaker 2: No, he's black. Speaker 1: Black, okay, all right. Speaker 2: He's, he's a black dean, was there at uni--UNC--now lives in Charlotte, North Carolina. But to this day, I still stay in, in close contact with him and his wife, who was by the way, an instructor there at, at UNC for years herself. But he was always kind of a hero for me because he, he, he didn't mind speaking his mind. He didn't mind championing the, the cause, whether it was popular or not, and he was always there for us. So, so if you ask me somebody at UNC who I look up to and, and really respect, it would be Dean Renwick. Story_ID: 122961 Speaker 1: After graduation, you had to decide on, on--you know, you were--well, you, you had--how did you decide on going to Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] for law school? That's what I guess we should say. Speaker 2: Two, two, two reasons: one, I decided early on that I needed to leave [University of North Carolina] Chapel Hill because I was, I was growing too fond of Chapel Hill. You know how sometime you get very complacent in what you're doing. And I, and I thought as I was getting to my junior and senior year in Chapel Hill that, you know, the rest of the world isn't like Chapel Hill. I mean you, you gotta get out and experience it. It's not, it's not always this easy. It's a small town. It was a college town, and everybody kind of caters to the, to the university. I wanted to see a, a, a, a bigger universe, and, and I didn't want to, to stay there. I thought that if I stayed in Chapel, in Chapel Hill for law school, I'd probably never leave. And I've always had it in the back of my mind that I, I wanted to expand my experiences and expand my horizons. So, you know, then it was a question of where to. And, and I had the experience of, of going to Atlanta [Georgia] on a number of occasions just to visit. I was told about Emory Law School, which I understood to be a great law school. I came down to visit. I was so impressed with the city, and I was equally impressed with the law school, and I knew. I mean soon as I set foot on campus and went to the law school, I knew that's where I wanted to go. And so I applied, and I got accepted, and of course the rest is history. Speaker 1: Well, this is all history (laughter), so. Well, you know, who were some of the instructors, and--at Emory that--were there any instructors that were particularly difficult or, or helpful, or, or any that stand out? Speaker 2: Both. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Helpful, I'll, I'll, I'll never forget my, my, my Property instructor, Real Estate Law and Property Issues. His name was William Agner. He's now deceased, but, but he was--they called him the bull. And he, he gave me the best advice for a practicing lawyer that I ever got in law school. He says, you know, Thurbert, he says, winning a case is just half of it. The other half is you gotta get your money, and you know, you gotta get paid. And he says don't ever assume you're gonna always get paid when you, when you handle a case. But he was real practical like that. And, and I always appreciated it. Sometimes law school could be very theoretical. And, and you know, you come out and you know all the theory, but you don't know how to get from your office to the courthouse. And, and it's that practical side that you miss sometimes in law school. But he was real practical. Professor Fear struck fear in all of our hearts. He, he taught Criminal Procedure there at Emory. And I, I will tell you it--I was always intimidated in the class, and as was the other students. And, and I remember, you know, coming in some days, and you try and hide behind the book so you wouldn't get called on. That's a remedy for--that's a solution and, and, and the best way to get called on in his class. He sort of pick you out. "Mr. Baker, lower that book back there, and let me ask you this question." But he was, he was difficult, but he taught us well. But it was always a, a, a tense moment when we sat in those classes. Story_ID: 122962 Speaker 1: But Emory [University Law School, Atlanta, Georgia] was a hard school. I'll, I'll, I'll never forget the first day we were there for orientation, they--and I don't even remember who it was speaking, but the professor said just look to your left and look to your right. One of them won't be here by the time you graduate. You're not all going to make it. And I was bound and determined to make it, so I wasn't gonna be one of those that didn't get through the process. Speaker 2: Was there ever a time when you thought, well, hey, I, I'm not gonna make it, I--you know, a time when you thought you might want to give up? Speaker 1: Failure was never an option for me, never was, not in high school, not in college, not in law school, not I life; it was never an option. So I, I, I never really thought that. It, it was all a question of how much I had to do to be successful at that level, and I knew it was going to be a challenge. Now, you know, I was at Emory. I was not on scholarship at Emory, so I had to make my way through the financial piece of it. You know, moms [Mary Helen Baker] would send me twenty dollars a week, you know, which was a life saver, but I still had to make ends meet. I had to buy books. We had to pay for classes. One of my earliest experiences in Atlanta [Georgia] was working for Maynard Jackson, Mayor Jackson at the time. I got to do a work study program that he allowed me to do or the city of Atlanta. And this was just as a law student, but he needed someone to come in and to, to work on the property, the deeds that reflected property holdings for the city of Atlanta, really to organize 'em. And, and so I had a wonderful chance back in those days to meet Mayor Jackson, to, to work at the same time, to make money through the work-study program, to then be able to pay for classes, and books, and, and that sort of thing. So those were the challenges. It, it, it wasn't necessarily are you going to make it, because that thought never crossed my mind. It's just how do we get from point A to point B? How do we get through three years of law school? How are we gonna pay for all of the classes? How are you gonna eat? You know, how are you gonna pay your rent? Those sorts of things. But you know, nothing in life that's worth having is, is going to be easy; you gotta work for it. Story_ID: 122963 Speaker 1: Now what, what was Maynard Jackson like? Speaker 2: I, I, I thought he was a great person. And I, I've been friends with him now for a long time. And we all still mourn his passing here in Atlanta [Georgia]. But, but you know, what you see is what you get for Maynard Jackson. He was always very interesting. And, and back in those days, he was, you know, mayor; he was running all over the place; he was extremely busy. But, for those brief opportunities that I had to sit down with him to figure out from him what he wanted to do, and, and, and how we could do it, you, you always thought you had his attention. And, and you were gonna be the most important person in the world at that point in time. And, and that was kind of the impression that you got, so I, I, I continued to have a great deal of respect for him. We all, we all sorely miss him. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's funny that people always say that about Bill Clinton, that he, you know, he, he focuses on people like that, you know, in that sense, but-- Speaker 2: Same, same gift. And, and it really is a gift-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and a talent. You know, we hear these, these stories about how Maynard never forgets anyone. That's true. I mean if he ever met you, he would commit your name to memory, and, and he'd always know you. So he'd see you anywhere, and hi, you know, how you doing? And he'd remember the names. He's, he was pretty amazing about that. Story_ID: 122964 Speaker 1: You finished Emory [University Law School, Atlanta, Georgia] in you said I guess in the late sev--in Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Seventy--seventy-nine [1979]? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you have a hard time getting a job after you finished? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Here's what I thought when I got out of law school, that I wanted--somebody had put it in my brain that if you ever wanted to be a good lawyer, you needed to learn how to try lawsuits. And so I wanted to learn how to try lawsuits when I got out of, out of law school. And you know, law students talk about what they're gonna do and what they like to do. I had some friends who were gonna go off and work in a big firm. But we all understood what that process involved, which was basically you get to carry somebody's briefcase around for about four or five years, and maybe one day they'll let you go to court. I didn't wanna do that, and so I, I thought I needed to get some trial experience. So what I did when I got out of law school, and I--this was by chance. I didn't even think that I wanted to do criminal law, but I ended up working as a public defender in Fulton County [Georgia]. I had some friends who were over there, and they just kept telling me about the great trial experience they were getting over there in Fulton County. And so I went over, and it was a good decision because I got to try a lot of cases. And, and I got really in the, in, in, in the mold of, of being a lawyer, being able to think on your feet, being able to make objections, being able to flow with a court, being able to understand juries. And, and that was a good decision for me. I then got, I, I guess recruited is a good way to describe it. I got recruited away from doing criminal law, defense work, to doing environmental litigation, of all things. Some friends of mine were, were at that point working for the United States Environmental Protection Agency in the regional counsel's office, and had asked me if I'd be interested in coming over and being a regional counsel. At that point in time, hazardous waste litigation was a big issue in the country. It was--there was a new act that had been passed by Congress called RCRA [Resource Conservation and Recovery Act] that, that controlled hazardous waste in the country and how one disposes of it. I went over and did that for several, several years, really had a great time being an environmental lawyer for that period of time. And then I got recruited away again to go do private practice. And I did that up until the time that I came over to the attorney general's office. Story_ID: 122965 Speaker 1: Well, you, you were a state rep [Georgia State Representative] though from '89 [1989] to '97 [1997]. Now that's a big deal that we need to discuss, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How did--you were, you had your own practice after the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], Baker and, and, and Shivers [Baker & Shivers]. Speaker 2: And Shivers. Speaker 1: Right, and you were the senior partner? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, and, and it was a wonderful experience. We, we had, it varied, but we had probably up to forty, forty-five people in the law firm. I called it a midsized firm, but it was a pretty good size firm. And, and we did a lot of litigation, a lot of defense, some plaintiffs' work, and it was a wonderful experience not just in terms of practicing law, but in terms of managing your own business. And, and that was a lot of fun for me. But you know, at the same time, I was also involved in my other love, which was government and politics. And so, back in 1988, I'll tell you how I got to be a, a state legislator. Sometimes people think that, you know, there's this grand scheme, and then everything just kind of works to this grand scheme. And you're gonna go do what you were preordained to do. It didn't happen that way at all. I was always very active in the community. And we had any number of little community groups in DeKalb County, which is where I lived, that wanted to be involved in local government, as well as state government. So the desire was there, but I didn't necessarily think that I was gonna run for the state legislature, until one day a good friend of mine came up and said, you know, Thurbert, you know, we don't have real good representation from our state rep. We can never find him; he never responds. Would you consider running? And said if you don't run, I wanna run, and I'd want you to be my campaign manager. And so I said, well, let me think about it, but what I really wanted to say was let me go talk to my wife about this. This is the other piece of the puzzle that you have to figure out. And so I went and I talked to my wife, and I talked to some others. And I got really good responses about it, and, and so I decided to run. And that was my first race for public office in my life--won. It wasn't easy, I, I will tell you that, but we won. And it's, it's been a wonderful experience for me. Story_ID: 122966 Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us about your career as a state rep [Georgia State Representative]. What were some of the highlights of that? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, getting elected was, was a highlight for me. I, I'd never run for public office before, but I was no stranger to hard work. That, that happens when you grow up on a farm, and you're up early ever morning. We ran a very hard race, and, and I think I must have knocked on every door in the district back in those days. We ended up, though, quite frankly, in a runoff with the eight-year incumbent at that time. And we just decided we had to go back to the drawing board and work even harder, which we did, and, and we ended up winning. So, that was a, a very, very good experience for me. But after my freshmen year in, in the legislature [1989], I, I had an interesting thing happen. Governor, then governor [from 1991-1997], Zell Miller, called me up one day. And you know, it's, it's not normal to get a call from the governor after your first year as a, as a state rep. But he had an interesting question for me. He wanted to know if I would become one of his administration floor leaders in the Georgia House of Representatives. And in Georgia, governors cannot go onto the floor of the House or the Senate to introduce their bills, their legislation, or to argue for them. And governors are the ones who, who really set the agenda and introduce all of the significant legislation. They have to designate someone as their administration floor leaders to do it, the person who speaks for the governor, the eyes and the ears of the governor. And, and, and I was, I was a little bit in awe of, of the possibility of doing it and the responsibility. I, I've, I've gone back and asked him on occasion, why me? And apparently he had talked to the Speaker [of the Georgia House of Representatives] at that time [Tom Murphy], and talked to the lieutenant governor [Pierre Howard], and gotten good reports, and just thought I would be a wonderful addition. And to make a long story short, I agreed to be one of his floor leaders, but that got me into government at a different level than what I would have been exposed to, had I just gone through and, and been a rep from DeKalb County. Gubernatorial politics and, and running the government is, is a different phase. But for all of the years I was in the legislature, from that day forward, I was Governor Miller's floor leader in the House of Representatives; wonderful op--opportunity to get involved in government at, at a very high level and really I think to make a difference in Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, what, what legislation were you particularly noted for? Speaker 2: Well, I, I got to tell you my--the, the thing that was probably the most difficult, the most exhilarating, the most far-reaching piece of legislation that we ever managed was the HOPE Scholarship [Helping Outstanding Pupils Educationally]. And I gotta tell you, you know, back in those days, being in the Bible Belt, in, in the Deep South, talk about a lottery to fund education for children was not a very, very popular topic, and we had our challenges in trying to get it passed. I'll, I'll tell you just the inside story. I mean we, we--I figured something out. On Tuesdays, we'd have--I'll give you an example--100 votes. We needed 123 votes to pass it. We'd have a hundred votes on Wednesday. Legislators would go home on the weekend and come back on Monday, we'd have 40 votes. And I was trying to figure out what happened to those 60 votes. Would they go home and, and, and went to church, and the preachers would beat up all of them about the ills of a lottery. And so I finally told the governor, I said you know, we're gonna have to take our vote on this lottery before legislators go home, or we may not ever get it passed. But to make a long story short, we fought very hard for it. I believed in it; I, I thought it was a good thing for the state; and if we stayed true to what we promised, which was that this money is going to go for education and education only, then we would have done a good thing for Georgia. We had a very, very close vote in the, in the, in the legislature. We did pass it. Georgia at that point became the only state in the country where we could say to our children, if you're willing to work hard and to make good grades, you can get a tuition-free education. To this day, I think it's the most far-reaching thing we've done in the history of Georgia, and it set us aside and apart from virtually every other state in the country. Story_ID: 122967 Speaker 1: Is there anything else you wanna tell us about that [Georgia House of Representatives]? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you know, the legislature was always a love of mine. And, and, and I would have, I would have done it probably for sometime longer than I actually did, but for another call that I got from Governor [Zell] Miller. And, and this call was about the office that I now currently hold. And I, I remember Zell, Governor Miller, at that time saying that my predecessor at that time, Mike Bowers, was going to be resigning to run for governor, and he wanted to know if I would be interested in coming over to serve as attorney general. Now that was the good news. The bad news was you're gonna have to immediately start running, because the election was about a year off. I'd never run statewide before in my life. I thought it would be a tremendous challenge, but I like challenges in life, and ultimately agreed to do it. So I served by way of appointment for about a year, but then was right on the ballot in 1998, and won statewide, and won in overwhelming numbers, when a lot of people didn't think an African American could get elected in the Deep South, and in particular to an office like the Office of Attorney General, just had not been done before. But we worked hard; we campaigned hard; and, and we got elected, and not only once, but we've gotten elected twice, and in even bigger numbers the second time around. So were doing something right. Speaker 1: Now and this is in the face of an increasing, I guess, conservative swing in Georgia, a state that one time had Jimmy Carter as governor, a very liberal, considered a liberal person, now has Sonny Perdue, a Republican conservative, you know. How, I mean, how were you able to get elected in those, in that kind of an atmosphere, you know. Is, is it kind of hostile to Democrats and-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I don't think so. I, I don't think the state and the electorate is hostile to, to Democrats or Republicans. I think Georgia is just Georgia. And, and I think--this is my own personal opinion--that the key to electability in Georgia is, first of all, understanding the state and making sure that you are talking about issues that are important to the voters of this state. Listen, I, I learned a great lesson when I was running statewide. I don't care where you are in this state, whether you're in the mountains of North Georgia, or you're in Tybee Island, or you're somewhere east or west, most people are concerned about the same things. Most people want to make sure that they can make a decent living. They wanna be able to feed their families. They wanna be able to put a roof over their head. They wanna make sure that they can educate their children. They wanna make sure that they have a safe environment in which to, to work and to live. If you're able to, to talk to people about those kitchen-table issues, the things that really are important to most folks, and to give them a vision of where you wanna go, and how you're going to help them help themselves, then you can get elected in Georgia. And I think that's what we were able to do. Obviously in the Office of Attorney General, I spent a lot of my time talking about making the state safe. We've engaged a lot of public safety initiatives that I think have made Georgia a safer state. And so, long as we're able to do that, and we're able to connect to the average person here in this state, I think you get elected. And, and I'm not sure that that changes, regardless of which party you run from. If people have a sense that you're able to do those things, then you can get elected in Georgia. Story_ID: 122968 Speaker 1: In terms of the attorney general's office, I know crime and safety is a big, big issue in the State of Georgia. And you were responsible for pushing through legislation for two strikes, you're out law or, or provision in the state government, right? Where-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, what--can you tell us-- Speaker 2: We did, we did that when I was floor leader for then-Governor Zell Miller. And what we were trying to, to address was an increasing rate of, of very crime in this state. You know, what do we need to do, as a, as a state, not only to, to, to punish those individuals who are committing your murders, and your, your armed robberies, and your rapes, and your, your child molestations, I mean what do we do to those people from a punishment standpoint, but also how do we send the right message that we aren't gonna put up with that here in Georgia? And we want to, therefore, deter those kinds of activities, and so we, we introduced and passed the two strikes and you're out legislation, which at that time and still is, some of the toughest legislation in the country to deal with violent, violent criminals. And what we've said is when you commit one of those, we call 'em the seven deadly sins, then we're gonna me sure that there's a minimum amount of time that's served for the first offense. And if you're crazy enough to come back and commit one of those crimes again, then you have to serve life without the possibility of parole. Now I've gotten calls from reporters all over the country since the passage of that, that legislation, wanting to know what we attribute the drop in violent crime rate in Georgia to. And, and I'll tell you, I can't prove this with any degree of statistical certainty, but I will stake my reputation on it, on the fact and the belief that the reason we see that drop is because criminals know that if you commit those seven deadly sins here in Georgia, there's a serious penalty to be paid. And they, they simply don't do it. I mean it's, it's real basic math here, real basic. I, I don't wanna go off and serve ten years, or I don't wanna go off and serve life without parole, so therefore, I don't do the crime. And, and I think it's been a, a tremendous support for us in the law enforcement community. Story_ID: 122969 Speaker 1: Now, that raises an interesting point because in, I know in the black community today, not just only in Georgia, but all over the country, we have a record number of young black men doing time in prison. In fact, the majority of any state's prison population are young black men, for the most part. Speaker 2: En--endangered species, as I like to call us. We've got to find some way to reach out to these kids, and to make sure that they aren't getting off on the wrong track early in life. I, you know, I do speeches all the time, and I talk about the changing face of crime in America. It has gotten so young now that these kids aren't even old enough to have a driver's license. And many of those faces are young black males who have gotten in, in trouble for one reason or another. We've got to find a way to intervene in these lives early enough so that we don't have to go arrest a kid who's fifteen and just stole a car from downtown Atlanta [Georgia], because if he stole a car at fifteen, he may commit an armed robbery at seventeen. And we don't want him to get on that track. One of the things that I've done, and we've just finished a very successful conference here in Atlanta, I've hosted a conference that we call Preventing Crime in the Black Community. It is a nationwide conference that I have hosted in conjunction with the state of Florida. Law enforcement agencies around the country have come to support it. But we focus on those very issues. We look at our youth. We're trying to understand the dynamics of what's motivating so many, many youths to make those mistakes so early. And we're trying to put some buffers around them to make sure that it doesn't happen--wonderful opportunity to sit down with experts who know this business and can help us, but also to focus on parents. You know, I talked a little bit earlier about my experiences growing up. We had parents who were sitting there to tell us you can't do it. You need to come in before that pole light comes on at night, you know. If you're not here by the time that pole light comes on, you're in trouble, you know, and they meant it. But in this day and age of modern technology, where I think parents are so often to be running between pillar and post, and we got our Blackberries, and our cell phones, and our laptops, and we're running all over the world, we sometimes forget that there are kids in the household who need some attention too. And so these kids learn their own values among themselves, and we don't always like the values they learn. But it tends to lead them to problems down the road with the criminal justice system. So, we not only focus on those kids in our crime conference, but we also focus on parents, making sure that parents understand that there is an obligation, still, to help raise these kids. I, I like the extended family concept. That's what I grew up under. Story_ID: 122970 Speaker 1: Yeah, these days it seems there's increasing--there's an increasing number of, of young people without really viable parents, not immediate parents-- Speaker 2: With no parental guidance. Speaker 1: --with none. I mean the, the, the parents-- Speaker 2: With, with no parental guidance. Speaker 1: --aren't there anyway to--they're caught up in, into drugs or some other, or they may even be in jail, one of that, this large prison population. So, I mean, do you think that the, the front-end activities on the part of government are matching the, the back-end activities? In, in other words, is there enough, is there enough effort on the front side to keep people from going to jail in the first place or committing crimes as it is on the back end, I mean the, the punitive side of it? Speaker 2: Yeah, not, not nearly enough. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It, it is very disproportionate. And, and one of the things we try and do in my crime conference, preventing crime conference, is to look more toward those front-end solutions. You know, what is it that we can do to make sure that we don't have this problem in the first place, and we're not having to pay thirty-five thousand dollars a year to house somebody in the, in the system, in a prison, here in this state or somewhere else in the country, much cheaper ways to do it, those individuals have an opportunity to become productive members of society. But we, we don't do enough on the front end. I don't, I don't--but I don't think Georgia is unique. I think that's a, that's a, a, a phenomenon that you see all over the country nowadays. So, so it's not just Georgia where you're seeing it. But we're, we're realizing, we're understanding that these are very complicated issues, they're multifaceted. The problems are not--can't be pegged on just one place or one person. But we have enough disciplines out there, and we have enough smart people out there who can come to the table and help us figure it out. And if we're willing to get people, if we, we're able to get people willing to listen and to participate, then we can make a difference. Speaker 1: Yeah, I--we, we had a conversation the other day with a politician here in, in Atlanta, who--well in the area, who suggested that you, you can't win elections by talking about, you know, the crime prevention, that you win elections by talking about severity and punishment and longer prison sentences and that sort of thing. Do you, do you-- Speaker 2: I, I, I think, I think there is a balance there. I, I, I don't know that one or the other wins you an election. But, but I think most people would agree that if you're talking about a criminal justice system, you've got to focus on the system from beginning to end, from cradle to grave. That, that, that, that one piece of it doesn't give a full explanation for what's going on. And, and so I think you probably gotta have some sense of both sides of that equation would be my guess. Story_ID: 122971 Speaker 1: Now recently you've had some conflict with the governor, Sonny Perdue, and can you explain what, what some of this has been about? Speaker 2: We, we had, we've, we've had an interesting disagreement, let me put it that way, here in Georgia. And it all evolves around--or revolves around--the question of who makes the legal decisions for the State of Georgia. Now I've always thought the attorney general makes the legal decisions for this state, as well as in any other state in which an attorney general is located. But, but, to make a long story short, Governor Perdue, after getting elected, decided that he didn't like the fact that I was--had appealed some maps to the U.S. Supreme Court that were passed by a previous legislature and under a previous governor. He didn't-- Speaker 1: These are redistricting maps? Speaker 2: Redistricting maps. And he didn't, he didn't think that I needed to pursue the appeal, because a federal district court had told us that the state senate map had three districts in it that were unconstitutional. And of course we, we didn't get a real good explanation for why that was the case. And I thought we needed to get an understanding, so we appealed it to the U.S. Supreme Court. And the U.S. Supreme Court accepted it. They wanted to rule on the case. The new governor came in and decided that he didn't want this state to appeal that, that issue, and first asked, and then ordered me to dismiss the appeal that was pending. And I politely refused to do so, with this statement: You know, from as far back as 1877, when the state of Georgia and the general assembly debated, and I mean hotly debated, the question of what the Office of the Attorney General ought to be, whether or not it ought to be an office that works for the governor, or whether or not it's an office that's independent of the governor and any other constitutional officer, they decided that Georgia needed a state in which the attorney general could serve as a check and balance on government, even governors. Somebody needs to be in a position to tell government when it is not doing things the right way. And that responsibility from as far back as 1877 fell on, at the doorstep of the attorney general. And so with that history in mind, and understanding the great importance of separations of powers in this state, we told the governor thank you, but no thank you. The attorney general makes the legal cause in this state, and we think we've done the right things for the right reasons, and we're not gonna retreat from that position. So that created the dispute, and ultimately the governor brought a lawsuit against me for doing--for refusing to follow his request and demand. We'll see where that goes. Right now, the, the issue that was--that he tried to prevent a ruling in the U.S. Supreme Court is really a moot issue now because the U.S. Supreme Court has already ruled. Speaker 1: And that can't be reversed by-- Speaker 2: That can't be reversed. Story_ID: 122972 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? We always ask this question of people we interview. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: We know you're the attorney general-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for everybody in Georgia, but-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I think that there are probably any number of, of things that we have to, to be mindful of. You know, this, this economy that we find ourselves in right now--and, and we're still feeling the effects of recession--have, have taken their toll, taken its toll, in particular in the African American community. You know, 9.1 million Americans are now out of work, many of whom are, are African Americans, and that doesn't even include those people who are, who have just given up, you know, looking for a job, or people who are working in jobs that are, that pay much less than, than what, what they were accustomed to making. We can't ever lose sight of the fact, as a community, that, that, you know, one of the true ways of staying competitive is to make sure we're getting the right educational base. And, and I always tell folks, you know, we gotta keep our kids on the right track, make sure they're understanding the need to get educated to be competitive in this marketplace because it's a tough marketplace out here. I don't think there's any question about it. And so we, as parents, have to get more involved with our kids, and make sure that we're trying to keep 'em on that, on that path, because if they aren't there when these recessions hit, and people start to use their jobs, guess what, we're gonna lose our jobs. And, and so we've gotta be in a competitive mode in order to maintain and to hold on. I, I think that's one message that I've been, been trying to carry and to carry forward very, very clearly. In the attorney general's office, you know, again, we do a lot in the criminal justice system. As a matter of fact, just tonight I'm going to be speaking to the National Black Prosecutors Association. They're meeting here in Atlanta [Georgia] this week. And I'm gonna go over and do a keynote message for them. But I'm gonna talk to them about the role that black prosecutors play in the criminal justice system. And we've always got a tough challenge in the criminal justice system. Sometimes people say we're too lenient on what we do. Sometimes people say we're, we're too strict, and we don't give anybody a break. But ultimately, what we're trying to do is to bring some balance in the system, and make sure that justice is blind, make sure that everyone gets treated the same way, be--regardless of their race, color, gender, national origin. We, we wanna make sure that the system works the same way for everybody. Not to say that somebody who's committed a crime ought to be let off just because of who they are, but to make sure that the system is working fairly. And I think sometimes we have to keep telling ourselves that. And I try and figure out ways, in particular for the black community, that we can prevent some of these kids from getting into the criminal justice system. That's a collective process. I, I don't think that, you know, any one person can do that. We've got to have a lot of players at the table to help us do it. And so if we're, if we're able to keep 'em on the right track, and we're able to keep 'em in school, and we can educate these kids, then I think we're gonna get a much more productive community. Story_ID: 122973 Speaker 1: You serve on the DeKalb County Library Board [DeKalb County, Georgia]. You've been on that for a long time, and you're--are, are you a deacon at Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] or you're just-- Speaker 2: Trustee. Speaker 1: Trustee, okay. Speaker 2: Trustee at-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --at Ebenezer. Speaker 1: You're, you're part of the Board of Governors of the Georgia State Bar and many, many activities. What would you consider at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, if I had to, if I had to point out one thing, it, it, it would probably be the idea that as an African American who, who, who wants to run for an office--it just happens that in my case it's a statewide office--that these things are possible in Georgia or anywhere else in the South. But you've got to be willing to work hard to get there; that there are no shortcuts in this business. And if I had a legacy to leave, it would be a legacy of hope, a legacy of inspiration to those who will come after me. I won't do this job forever. I'll move on to something else I'm sure. But we've got to make sure that, that our kids understand that they too can be an attorney general, they too can be a governor, they too can be a president. But they've got to have the, the preparation, and, and be prepared when the opportunity permits itself. You know T--Reverend T.D. Jakes [HM Bishop T.D. Jakes] talks about those, those windows of opportunity that come about in our lives, and when they come, you've gotta be prepared to step in. That's what I want to leave. That's the legacy I wanna leave, a legacy of hope and inspiration in knowing that if you're properly prepared, when that window of opportunity opens up, you too can make the leap, and you too can be a HistoryMaker. Story_ID: 122974 Speaker 1: Okay, and one final question. This is slightly different from legacy. But, sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: It--probably a lot along the same lines that I just mentioned. I, I've always thought that if, if, if you had to remember me for one thing, it would probably be a person who never, ever gave up in the face of, of adversity, in the face of, of growing up in a single fam--a single-parent household, in the face of, of being dirt poor most of your young life. You can still make it. You just can never give up. And you always gotta be committed to what you're about, and believe what you wanna do. And, and even in those bad days, you'll see a silver lining at the end of the rainbow, and you'll be able to do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you, sir. Speaker 2: All right, thank you. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Appreciate it...