 Story_ID: 4436 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Clark Burrus. Burrus, B-U-R-R-U-S. Unlike Roland [Burris]. I think--wait a minute, I think I just--. Speaker 1: And Clark? Speaker 2: C-L-A-R-K. Speaker 1: (videographer adjusts Burris' microphone) Speaker 2: No problem. Speaker 1: (off-camera voice) All right, carry on. Speaker 2: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: November the 5th, 1928, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 2: And what is your occupation? Speaker 1: I'm retired now, but when I was working, my last career was in banking. And prior to that I was in public service. I've had a lot of jobs and a lot of bosses, but only two employers. Story_ID: 4437 Speaker 1: All right, before we get started in depth, we ask about, we ask about five People magazine-ish questions. And they just require a short, but, you know--. The first one is, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Color? Brown. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Seafood, different types of seafood. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring and Fall. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, as you know, I have a second home in Florida if you want to call that a vacation home, vacation place. Then it would be Southeast Florida. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Nothing comes to mind now, but--. Speaker 1: (off camera videographer and cameraman make adjustments to camera) Speaker 2: Okay, I was asking about the date of your birth and place of your birth? Speaker 1: November 5th, 1928, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we did that. And what is today's date? Speaker 1: Today? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: October 1st, I guess, of 2002. Speaker 2: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We're at 1900 S. Michigan in Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 4438 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family background. Do you have any knowledge of what your family was doing in the nineteenth century or during slavery or Reconstruction? Speaker 2: No, I tried to do a family tree at one time, but it's just--this is down in Jackson and Gulfport, Mississippi--and there's just not enough relatives left around that can remember. So, I started and got back awhile. And I know a little bit about it. My mother [Mattie Hall Burrus] came from a rather prominent black family. Her brother was at the largest funeral parlor complex in Southern Mississippi. And the way they did it there in those days--their funeral parlor was in Gulfport--but they had facilities in most of the small towns from mid-Mississippi down to the southern part of Mississippi. And the way they did it, which is interesting--they--. When someone died, they would go pick up the body, bring the body back to, to Gulfport, embalm it, prepare it and then bring it back to their facility in the particular town and that's where the visitation would be. And then services would be at the, at the church. So they were probably the largest funeral facility in Southern, Southern Mississippi. Speaker 1: Now, sir--. Speaker 2: And the rest of my--. Other parts of my family on my mother's side and my father's [Lemmie Burrus] said were primarily educators. Our family goes back at Alcorn College [formerly Alcorn University, then Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College, later Alcorn State University] in [Alcorn State] Mississippi for--I guess, back in--well into the 1800's. Speaker 1: Okay, what was your mother's name? Could you state her name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Mattie, M-A-T-T-I-E, Hall, H-A-L-L, Burrus, B-U-R-R-U-S. Speaker 1: So was it the Halls who were the funeral--? Speaker 2: It was the Halls, right, correct. And they're still there by the way. Speaker 1: And when was your mother born? Speaker 2: When? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: 1894. Speaker 1: And do you have any idea how long the funeral home, business was in the family? Speaker 2: It was certainly all of the nineteenth century, the twentieth century. Speaker 1: And part of the nineteenth century, but you don't know how far back it goes? Speaker 2: No. Forever. Story_ID: 4439 Speaker 1: Now, what about your father? Can you state his name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name is Lemmie Burrus, L-E-M-M-I-E, Burrus, B-U-R-R-U-S. And he was from Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me something about his side, side of the family. Do you have any--? Speaker 2: I know very little about his side of the family. When he came up to Chicago [Illinois], I think he had one sister living, and they had a daughter who died a few years ago at, over a hundred. And she lived in Chicago. I knew, I knew none of the family that lived in Jackson, if there were any. I not only didn't know them, I didn't know of them. Okay, so that--. So you don't have very much information about his side of the family at all? Speaker 1: Very little. And it was a small family. I'm not sure there were--as far as I know there were no siblings. There was only one sibling, and he died when, before I was born or when I was a youngster. Speaker 2: Now, when you were young, did you have occasion to visit Jackson or Gulfport [Mississippi]? Speaker 1: No. I'd heard so much about the way they treated African-Americans that I had--not only didn't go down there--but had no desire to go down there. And ironically, and later in life I started going down there and found out today that you're treated as well, if not better there, than you were in Chicago. As a matter of fact I still--. Eventually I bought a home Florida, I would visit Biloxi [Mississippi] , which is right next door to Gulfport every year to play golf. And I guess in the last seven, eight, ten years, they put the gambling boats right there on the gulf. So it's gotten to be--from a sleepy town, southern town--it's gotten to be almost like Las Vegas [Nevada] strip now. Speaker 2: Now, did your mother and father have a story about how they met? Speaker 1: If they did, they didn't--. That's the old school, you know, they didn't--I didn't find my mother's age until she died. They never talked about that sort of thing. It was something that youngsters didn't ask. Although in later life when I found out about my mother's family, I was quite proud of them. They were all very, very--from the very intelligent family. As a matter of fact, my cousin who died a few years ago was Dean of Students at Alcorn [formerly Alcorn University, then Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College, later Alcorn State University, Alcorn State, Mississippi]. His wife whose currently living, just retired last year, was a Dean of the School of Music. His brother, Tommy, my other cousin, my other cousin is Director of the Department of Chemistry. His sister, Jackie, who is also my cousin, is retired as the Dean of the School of Nursing and Private Healthcare at Florida A&M [formerly State Normal College for Colored Students, later Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. And her brother is--. Her husband, I'm sorry, is a--who also just died maybe five, five six years ago--Dean of, Dean of A&M, FAM-U [formerly State Normal College for Colored Students, later Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. And their daughter, who was brought up to work at the bank, when she got her Masters, went back, and now she's getting her Ph.D. at University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida] in Finance. My mother was a--taught at Alcorn back before I was born, although that's--. They're from the old school so when you got married and had children, then the wife became a housewife. And so she gave that up when they moved to Chicago. Story_ID: 4440 Speaker 1: So they [parents Mattie Hall and Lemmie Burrus] did meet in Mississippi. Speaker 2: Met and married in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. So, where was that? When did they get married? Speaker 2: It's got to be in the--. At one time I did know. It's got to be back in the, in the teens, late teens or early '20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because it was--my brother [Lamar Burrus] and I are the ones who survived. There was a daughter, older sister, who died at a young age. I had a younger brother who died also at a very young age. Speaker 1: Now, when your parents were in--. Did they talk about why they moved? Well, other than racism, is there any other reason why they moved to Chicago [Illinois]? Specifically rather than some other place. Speaker 2: They moved from Mississippi because in the South, you must understand, there is a very close-knit group of black elites. And in those days, a lot of it was based on color, skin color. My mother was very fair, you will notice when you see the pictures. And my father was dark. And my mother's family really didn't appro--, did not approve of her marrying him although he was, he was a very successful insurance person in Jackson [Mississippi]. So, a lot tension developed because of that. So, the two of them said, well, you know, they didn't particularly care for being in Mississippi living in that kind of an environment. So they moved to Chicago. And Chicago is--I assumed they moved to Chicago because it was one big city directly north of Mississippi--you know. Other than maybe St. Louis [Missouri] or Kansas City [Missouri]. If you notice that most of the--when you look at the migration patterns, the folks from Georgia--not as far west Alabama--but Florida and the Carolinas, moved up to New York. Mississippi and Louisiana moved to Chicago and west moved, west of there, moved, migrated to the West Coast. Speaker 1: Right, that's pretty much true of--people see Chicago as kind of a Mississippi place, you know, in terms of the black community. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. I think you'll probably find more roots from Mississippi in Chicago than you'll find in any other, any other state. From any other state. I think that's true. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so. Story_ID: 4441 Speaker 1: Now, what did your father do when he came to Chicago? What line of work did he--? Speaker 2: Well, that was back right before the [Great] Depression. It was during the war years--first World War--right after the first World War. And he couldn't get a job in his profession. So he went to the Railway Mail Service and spent his whole career working right there. Which was, you know, this was right before the Depression. So that was middle to upper-middle class living standards that he enjoyed. So, I never recognized that I was poor until I was fairly, fairly grown, you know, close to being grown. And then I really was not poor. We were never on [Unemployment] Relief and there was never a question of, you know, food and house. There was never a question of shelter. And in early, mid-'30s [1930s], I guess, we moved from where we were renting and moved to, over to Langley [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] where we bought the three-flat building. So we were, you know, certainly middle class. Speaker 1: Now, where did he work again? Can you say that for us once more? Speaker 2: The Railway Mail System, which is sort of a first cousin to the post office. And he worked there for--until he died--until he retired. Speaker 1: Was this like sort of a nineteen, a early twentieth century version of the Federal Express [Corporation] or something? Speaker 2: No, it was a twentieth century version of the post office. It was, it was not a postal service. They were certainly better paid and better working conditions and more opportunity. But still they delivered the mail. Back in those days you must recall the transportation service that was primarily--business services--were primarily through the rail, not through the air as it is now. Airplanes were just being introduced in commercial industries. And if you wanted to move from one place to another--heavy goods--it was done by the Railway Mail as opposed to trucks, as opposed to airlines, as, as you have now with Federal Express and United Parcel [United Parcel Service] and that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I meant. It was similar to Federal Express, maybe I was I thinking something--. Speaker 2: Yes, but it was--. Instead of Federal Express, which was mostly air--. And this is all, all rail. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. All right. Speaker 2: And he moved up to be a manager, one of the very few blacks who were managers there. But then he was a well-educated person though. And I imagine if the Depression had, hadn't hit there, he would have probably gone back in the business. He was a fairly successful insurance person, and was a part owner of the insurance company. Back in those days, you had what was called 'debits.' You know, so people would pay twenty-five cents a week or month or so and, and they had a burial policy so they could--. And they knew that their, that their burial was taken care of and there'd always be a little left for all the beneficiaries. Story_ID: 4442 Speaker 1: Now what did you mother [Mattie Hall Burrus] do basically? Speaker 2: My mother was, taught economics at, at Alcorn [formerly Alcorn University, then Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College, later Alcorn State University, Alcorn State, Mississippi] until she married and started having a family. And when she moved up here, she never worked. My father [Lemmie Burrus], you know, was the provider, and she was a homemaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Now it's just you and your brother [Lamar Burrus]? Speaker 2: Right, although there were four of us born, but two didn't live, you know. They died at a very, very early age. Speaker 1: Now, were you the oldest or -- Speaker 2: Youngest. Speaker 1: The youngest. Speaker 2: The younger of the two. Speaker 1: The younger of the two, okay. Can you just kind of reflect back and give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Chicago [Illinois], you know, when you came along? Speaker 2: Unlike today, Chicago back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]--. It was two separate periods because in the '30s [1930s], you were just coming out of the, trying to get out of the Depression. And in the '40s [1940s], it was the war years, and a lot of prosperity for those who did not go to armed services to fight. But there was something called Restrictive Covenants [on property deeds] that existed in those days, which means it was lawful to restrict the movement of white and blacks. And so there were defined borders in which the black community lived in. And it was later in life when I began to really understand it. And you can really apply the law of supply and demand to it, you know. You have more people than you have facilities, so you can increase the rent or you can, you could increase the sales value of, of households--of houses, housing. And when I was coming up the boundaries were clear. It was--. On the west it was South Park [South Parkway, later Martin Luther King Drive, Chicago, Illinois], on the east, it was Cottage Grove [Illinois]. On the north, early in life it was 63rd Street [Chicago, Illinois]. And on the south, it was South Chicago [Illinois]. As a matter of fact, when we lived on Evans, the community we thought was integrated was really changing. And my next-door neighbors were Italians who were--the children and I grew up and we just--we never knew the difference. Except that you knew you didn't go across Cottage Grove, right? And conversely, they, the white youngsters never came west of Cottage Grove. Speaker 1: Now, you were on Evans in what hundred block (unclear)? Speaker 2: 64th, 64th and Evans [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], 6411 Evans. Right next to the ward headquarters. And the 6300 Block of Evans was, was eighty percent white when I was a youngster. Speaker 1: Was that considered Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. That's Woodlawn. Speaker 1: Woodlawn, Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Park Manor is south and it was solid white when I was a youngster. Story_ID: 4443 Speaker 1: So, so the neighborhood was mixed when you--? Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, I was Christian and Archibald Carey's [Jr., Chicago, Illinois preacher] church--which was right there, well not in--AME [African Methodist Episcopal]. And that was a mixed church. The white congregation had their services at eleven o'clock to one, twelve-thirty maybe. And the, the blacks had theirs from two to three-thirty. Speaker 1: In the same church? Speaker 2: In the same facility, same facility, right, That's where I was christened. My father was Methodist. My mother was Baptist. But we grew up--my brother and I--grew up as Baptist, not as Methodist. But apparently they had, there was a good understanding. Occasionally, I would go with him to his--his church was on 36th Street [Chicago, Illinois], Grant Memorial. But we, we were Baptist and we, we grew up in the church. It was a, it was a wonderful experience for me as a youngster because I'd never, I never had the problems of gangs and cheating and skipping school and doing things. Other than the normal things. We would go to the grocery store and steal marshmallows and, you know, have a marshmallow fry. Until my father found out about it. That was the end of that. But this is all pre-teens kind of thing. And that was--. That, and flipping the streetcar, you know. That was about one of the only kind of things, the only law violations that I ever committed as a youngster. Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by flipping the streetcar? Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, the streetcars--they don't have streetcars anymore though. The closet thing to a streetcar that we have now is, is the system of trolleys they have in San Francisco [California]. But there was a fixed-rail system. And the streetcars ran on those, and they were just like a train coach. And what you could do is jump on the back of it and hang on. And the driver upfront, you know, couldn't see you and nor could the conductor who was in the back. They couldn't see you so you'd ride it, and you could save yourself three cents without--. (laughter) That was what it cost to ride. And then, of course, if you did that extensively in the '40s [1940s] when I was in high school and you had to go all the way to Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois], we'd, we'd flip 'em even if you had the money cause, you know--. Yeah, but, and my folks never--. We were never without. We didn't, I didn't have to flip it to go school. I flipped because it was a thrill, you know. So that was my, those were my unlawful days. And everybody was doing it, you know. As a matter of fact, I had the money in, in my pocket because my parents would always give it to me. But everybody was flipping, and it was a thrill ride, almost like going to Riverview [former Chicago amusement park], you know. Except one time, I flipped it on the wrong side, on the inner side, so when the streetcars pass each other--I mean, you know, it was just enough room for me to squeeze in there--you know. I did that once. And then from then on, that point on, you just flip over on the other, flip on the other side, on the outside of the streetcar. But it wasn't a-- Speaker 1: Dangerous, also. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very dangerous. But, you know, who thought about that when you're, you know, ten, twelve, fourteen years old. Story_ID: 4444 Speaker 1: Now, what other kind of things did you like to do when you were coming up here -- Speaker 2: Oh, I was in athletics. I was a, I was a outstanding athlete. You know, I, I lived across the street from the playground. I spent all my time in the, my free time in the playground. I'm playing baseball and softball and, and football. And in the wintertime, I skated in the Silver Skates, you know, which is a--the amateur, local amateur Chicago [Illinois], Metropolitan Chicago tournaments that they had in those days. And I ran track in the summertime. And I got, I got a drawer full of medals from the CYO [Catholic Youth Organization] and so forth. And in football I--was probably my strongest, was undoubtedly my strongest sport. I went to Texas State University [formerly Texas State University for Negroes, later Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] on a scholar, on an athletic scholarship. And in fact, I went out for the Bears and the Chicago Cardinals, you know. I was too small. I wish I had the weight then that I have now. And I was thin but the weight was muscle and not the fat that I have now. But I was just too small. But I was--. I played semi-pro football and I got a lot of, lot of recognition locally in the papers. And naturally you get into the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and 'Chicago Defender,' but you know, I got a number of it in the [Chicago] Tribune. And in those days, there was a '[Chicago Daily] Times.' The 'Chicago Times' and a 'Chicago Sun', merged. It's, now it's called the '[Chicago] Sun-Times.' The '[Chicago] Daily News' and '[Chicago Herald-American] Herald American News.' Before television, the major news media was the printed words so you got a lot of--. There was need and demand for a lot of news, written news. Now, it's, you know, you have two dailies and you have a number television stations and radio stations where the events of the day are broadcast. Speaker 1: Now, what high school did you attend? Speaker 2: I went to Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And talking about the gerrymandering, I lived on Langley [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], which is next to, one street west of Cottage Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Eight blocks east of me was Hyde Park where all the University of Chicago professors sent their school--their children and so forth. I had to go from Evans all the way to Stewart to go to Englewood, which is where I went. Which has got to be three times the distance to--within the--the boundaries. And they were strictly enforced back in those days. It was Cottage Grove. And it was no reason other than that was the boundary between the white community and the black community. Story_ID: 4445 Speaker 1: Now, let me backtrack a minute and talk about grade school because we haven't talked about that. Now, what grade school did you attend? Speaker 2: I went to McCosh [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], and I was fortunate. I lived right, directly across the street from it. And I stayed, you know, I spent, you know, all of my grade school years there. And that was a very enjoyable time. Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers or--that you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, sure. The, the faculty was mixed--mostly all females--a mix between African Americans and white teachers. And the two teachers that I remember vividly was Mrs. McNeal and Mrs. Rhodes. Mrs. McNeal because she lived about five doors from me. Don't forget, this is a very close community. So the, all the students, and virtually most of the teachers lived right in that, that community. African American teachers, that is. The white teachers lived outside. And there was a, it was like a small, what I think of as a Southern town. And if you were bad, I can illustrate--. The greatest illustration I can think of is I was acting up in school. I guess I was in fourth or fifth grade. And my parents [Mattie Hall and Lemmie Burrus] were very strict in terms of, you know, you must be a good student. You must study hard and you're always attendant, and you didn't act up in school. And my brother [Lamar Burrus] was a excellent student. He didn't, but I was sort of the rebel of the siblings. And I was having a particularly bad day, and I was just, you know, talking and throwing spitballs at the other students. I was just disrupting the class. And when I thought about what I was doing, I says, you know, "this is really a shame, you know, I, I better get home quickly after school so that I can do all the things that my parents want me to do so that when they--." If they heard about this, then they'll feel nice about me because I did all my chores, you know, cut the grass and took the garbage out and whatever else, the things that we had to do. Well, when the bell rang at the end of the school day, I flew out the house--out, out the school--ran across the street where I lived so I could start doing all the things in case my mother heard about how bad I was. And I ran in the house, and my jaw just dropped. The teacher was sitting was sitting right there telling my mother all about it. Speaker 1: (laughter) Let's pause right here. We have to change tape. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So she was right there. Speaker 2: Oh, she was there, and I said--. So, incidentally, if the law was applied then as it is now, in terms of corporate, corporal punishment, my parents would have been executed because they didn't spare the rod at all, you know. My mother, she gave my spanking, which was--I could always tolerate because she was--I'd always hide under the, duck up under the dining room table where the blows couldn't be directly struck. But, which didn't bother me too much at all. But frightened me was that my father worked afternoons or evenings, that shift. So he got home at, you know, ten or eleven at night. And when he got home--obviously, my mother told him about it because he came in and woke my brother and I up. 'Cause he, he never gave one a whipping without the other one. And my brother would get it because I was always the one who was bad. And--. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) He would get a whipping too? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. But it would--. I didn't realize until later on in life that his blows were just, the blows to him were just not nearly as ferocious as they were on my backside. Story_ID: 4446 Speaker 1: We're talking about the teacher sitting right there at the table, you know, right in your parents' home. And you were talking about when you would get a whipping, your brother [Lamar] would get one too, but it wouldn't be quite as bad. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, well, no. Obviously 'cause I didn't realize it then, but--. He really, he very seldom did--acted up, you know, did mischievous things, you know. But what my mother [Mattie Hall Burrus] would do, was say, "I'm gonna tell your father [Lemmie Burrus]." And we would go to bed--and we knew what was gonna happen when he got home--and we'd go to bed around eight, eight thirty. He'd get at eleven o'clock. He would wake us up. And, of course, I didn't understand it then. He would wake us up, turn all the lights on and says, "get yourself a good night's sleep." And he had this razor strap just hitting himself on the wrist, you know. Bam. Get's up, "you see this strap. It's on my wrist now. It's gonna be twice as hard in the morning on your backside. Now, go to sleep." We didn't sleep at--(laughter). We couldn't sleep a second, you know, for the rest of the night. And the next morning, he'll wake us up. He'll come in there and he would come in. Didn't understand that--(unclear)--and make a lot of noise. Bang, open the door and slam the door. So we knew it was him. 'Cause normally he wouldn't do that. Okay, which one of you want to be first? And by this time, we're both dying a thousand deaths. I don't ever remember him whipping me, but I can always--I'll never forget--what led up to it. Another illustration, and then we can move on. I told you we used to. It's a funny thing, you know, kids I guess have to--. Things are better when you do something that's outside the box, so to speak. We had these weenie roasts. We'd go buy the weenies, but we'd steal the marshmallows because we're--that makes them taste a little better. We'd dig holes in the ground in the vacant lot, got holes in the ground, you know, put wood and stuff in there. And, and we'd roast the weenies and the marshmallows. My father told me, we couldn't do it, you are too young for that. Well, we were just out there having a great time. And, and we didn't realize how late it was. And, oh, it got to be about eleven o'clock at night, and at this, this--. We we're pre-teens, you know, seven or eight years old. And then everybody's having a (unclear) time. I'm just talking and I'm just telling the children's jokes and so forth. All of a sudden everything got quiet. And so then I turned to my brother and I just said, "well, we're doing a bad joke telling jokes." And then all the kids were just quiet, and they kept looking back past, behind me. And I turned around, there's my father sitting there, just listening to them. You know, just keep, continue, you're having a good time, you know. By this time, we just started dying. And he said, stay. And we said, dad, we'll go home. "Nope, just stay and enjoy yourself. Let me know when you get home." And we wanted to go home because he knew right then, you know. He started walking, we're two steps behind him (laughter). He got to the front porch. He said--. All of a sudden he had--I recognize now it was all planned--but he had this razor strap there sitting right by the post. Sit down on the steps, you know, you folks, you kids enjoying yourself. It was a school day, you know, eleven o'clock at night. He says--. He kept hitting his wrist with this razor strap. Bang, bang. It just sounded like it was, the world was crashing in. And we were trying to explain to him, you know, it wasn't our fault, you know, the other--trying to blame it on the other kids--you know. He said, but didn't I tell you you shouldn't do this. Bang. And all of a sudden you could hear this noise. It sounded like a drum and bugle corps. And we were just shaking. Then he says, "well," he says, "you kids have got to be at school in the morning, so you're ready to go to bed." So we says, "fine." He says, I'll wake you up before it's time to go to school." That means he knew we knew we were gonna get this whipping. And this was just--. I never roasted another--. I didn't even marshmallows after that, you know. But, you know, he was a very bright, smart guy. He knew how to get to us, rather than just come in ranting and raving. He would just let us suffer through the night, you know. Story_ID: 4447 Speaker 1: We youngsters had something we called Indian cigars that you get off the, the trees, whatever trees they were. But we had one in our backyard, and once they dried you could smoke them, just like, you know, like a cigarette. And we was out there smoking our Indian cigars. And he [Father Lemmie Burrus] caught us. He says, "it's all right, if you want to smoke. That's all right, you should smoke. Come on upstairs." And I went upstairs and--my brother [Lamar Burrus] and I. He took us in the bathroom. And my mother [Mattie Hall Burrus] said, I could just hear her pleading, "now, (unclear) you know, they're young kids and they won't do it anymore. Tell him you won't do it anymore." "Aw, dad we won't do it anymore." Took his razor strap and gave it to his wife, my mother. I said, "we aren't gonna get a whipping?" He says, "I don't mind you smoking." He had a cigar that was probably was a regular cigar, but it looked like it was about three feet long. Took out his little pen knife and cut it in half, gave my brother one and gave me one. But in the meantime, what he did, I knew something was funny because he took towels and put around the window sills, towels, all along the door jams, which no air could get out, stuck one in each one of our mouths and lit it. So we didn't know what--. He says, "puff. You don't let that good cigar, good tobacco go to waste." We started puffing, you know, it wasn't so bad. After about five minutes, it was like getting to us. "I've had enough, daddy." He says, "puff." He made us smoke those cigars. Well, I thought I smoked the whole thing down, but probably I smoked, you know, about that much of it. By this time, the room was full of smoke. We're coughing and our eyes are burning, you know, and, of course. And he's used to it so it wasn't bothering him. He goes, "puff." "Dad, I don't want anymore." "Puff." And needless to say, we didn't touch another cigarette until we were grown (laughter), any type of cigarette. But it worked, you know. And when he let us out we were dying. And my mo--. We could hear our mother out there, "they've had enough, honey, don't do it no more." Let them come out. "Puff," you know, so we had to sit down and puff this cigar. And that, that was worth twenty beat--twenty whippings because until we were grown, we didn't even think about smoking again, you know. Plus, every time you would look at an Indian cigar and all you'd think about is that big cigar he had us in the bathroom with, with the--. All the smoke stayed in. There was no fresh air coming out at all, our eyes were watering, and you know, we're choking and--. That was the end of that. That was a lesson well taught, because, you know, we didn't smoke, you know. And that we didn't smoke because it was wrong. We didn't smoke because we didn't like it. And that was the purpose of the, of the little exercise he had put us through. So, he was quite a man, and he died when I was in high school. Um-hum, he died when I was in high school. But he, he raised us and he put, he, he invested his money so my mother never worked. When he died, I was in high school and my brother was in the Army. She never worked after that. She could always take care of us because we had the rent from the place and his pension. And she was good at sewing things so she could always turn the collars around on shirts and we always were clean, you know. She'd wash. I was never dirty. She wouldn't allow us to go to school dirty, We'd go to work, we're selling papers and things like--you know, what kids will do. And she made us do our homework. And since she was--. Both of them were college trained, so they understood the need for early childhood education, so they were very strict on us doing our homework and studying. And the exams they gave us was, were always, always tougher than the ones we would get in school. And so I could always get such good grades because the, the--. When we got through with their exams, what we took in school was a piece of cake. Story_ID: 4448 Speaker 1: Now did you mother [Mattie Hall Burrus]--? Now, she came out of Alcorn [formerly Alcorn University, then Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College, later Alcorn State University, Alcorn State, Mississippi], right? Well, she taught at Alcorn, but did she graduate from Alcorn? Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my father [Lemmie Burrus] graduated from Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: So was school--? How did you like school? Was school easy for you or was it--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a good student. My brother [Lamar Burrus] was more of a brilliant student because it came easier for him, to him than it did for me. But, you know, I was trained to always do the work so it just never occurred to me that it was any other way to do it, but doing it and bringing home good grades. And my brother was really the--. He was Valedictorian of grammar school and he was the Salutatorian of the high school. So, you know, he was--. I was always known as Lamar's baby brother. I didn't have a name. I was Lamar's baby brother because he was--you know--anyway. We were just twenty two months apart. So I was right after him. And, you know, I didn't mind it, you know, because I was so proud of him. And I was an athlete too so I would get my moral satisfaction out of my accomplishments on the athletic field. But I was trained to do the work so I was, I was a good student. I never ditched class like, you know, so many kids would do and go to the show or take their girlfriends out. I never did that. Through grammar school and high school. I never did. When work was to be done, you know, no matter how much it took me. I knew he was smarter than me because it took me longer to get it done than it did for him. But, you know, my grades were always solid like his because, you know, he was my brother, you know, and I wanted to be like him. So, that--. The church--well, in order of priority I think in terms of shaping my life--my parents, the church, athletics because I never ran around with the gangs. Of course, gangs were not like gangs of today. Gangs then used to fight with sticks and now they shoot you and kill you. It was not--never anything like that, that I knew about anyway. Speaker 1: What were the major gangs around your neighborhood (unclear)? Speaker 2: I belonged to the Crusaders, but the Crusaders was an athletic club. Well, we played--(unclear)--semi-pro football. But there were some we called the (Fins?), the Four Corners when I was a kid. And the--. Down on Thiry-ninth Street, can't think of the name. But it was the biggest, baddest gang was from Thiry-ninth Street. But we really didn't have any out in our neighborhood. I mean it was no intramural fighting, you know. We had clubs, athletic clubs, and so I played football, basketball. Story_ID: 4449 Speaker 1: I was a, I was a ice skater too, you know. Speaker 2: You were very active, weren't you? Speaker 1: Yeah. I wa, I--. The '[Chicago] Tribune' used to give something called the Silver Skates. I skated in that. I was a ping pong player too. I went to the semi-finals on the table tennis tournaments they had citywide, you know. But primarily, it was football and baseball and track. However, I was very fast. But I never trained it because, you know, you went out there and you worked--. You train and train and train, and you'd go to a track meet and it wouldn't be but fifteen people out there. Then you get on the football team and the stands were full. So, you know, if you're gonna work that hard and be good at it, you ought to be recognized. And the way you're gonna do that is have people sitting out there with you. So, yeah, I was--. I played football in high school. I was--. Well, I got a lot of scholarships, you know, scholarship offers. Speaker 2: Did they have an All City team then or -- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I was--and it's ironic--I was second string, All Conference, second string, All City, and second string All State. That's only because there was a school, Tilton Tech [Tilton School, Tilton, New Hampshire?], that had two players, (Max Swissovitch?) and Bill Gay who ended being, you know, All Americans at the, at Tilton--. I mean at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana] when they graduated. And, and I was always recognized as being the, the best athlete--the best football player next to them. But see I could only be second string because there was only one half back, and that was always Bill Gay. And I was a halfback. And so I couldn't be All Conference, section. I couldn't be All City because it was Bill Gay, then Clark Burrus. And when it got to All State, it was Bill Gay and Clark Burrus, yeah. And they went on to, to--. Both of them went on to Notre Dame and became All Americans. They were very good. But, you know, still I was recognized because I--. Most of the Big Ten [Conference] schools gave me scholarship offers, but I couldn't accept any of them because my father [Lemmie Burrus] died when I was in high school, as I mentioned. My brother [Lamar Burrus] was in the army and my mother [Mattie Hall Burrus] was there by herself, you know. And she, you know, she had never worked, so somebody had to be there. So I just--. And plus, we had agreed, she and I, that we would send my brother to medical school. So--. And I was willing to do that, you know, work while he was in the army. I just went on to school, you know, went on to college after I finished high school in 1946. And wait for him to get out then, I was gonna do whatever was necessary was work, you know. and, of course, my mother had--. She could always take care of us, but it was no way she was gonna pay tuition, you know, through college and medical school. And I didn't realize what the costs was, but I knew it was gonna be substantial. And so I was willing to do that, you know, because he was certainly the brighter of the two. So when, when he was in the army, I went on to college just to, you know, that was my, that was my hiatus between high school and working for the rest of my life. And I had no problems with that at all, none at all. Except my brother came out and he wanted to get married. And he would not--. He started going back to college, but it was, certainly it was not pre-med type of curriculum he was taking. And so I just stayed in college instead of going to work to send him through school. And I was--. My mother was very disappointed because I mean he was extraordinarily bright. And I was more than willing to, you know, to, to bask in his, his glory and stay in his shadows. But he didn't and I did. See what I had that he didn't have was tenacity, the perseverance, the dogged determination, you know, that I could do something better. He didn't. He wanted to get married and he his wife--and his wife was a super lady--but her, her ambition was to have a job and a check every Friday and, and have a drink of wine on Christmas and a big night out was going to movies, you know. That's all she wanted. And he didn't have the drive to, to oppose that. Which just hurt me, you know, because I was willing to, to forsake all of my, my vast education. But since he didn't do it, I stayed in school, you know. And I was a good student. I used to get real good grades, but that's because I worked so hard at it. And he got good grades because it just came to him, you know, naturally. Story_ID: 4450 Speaker 1: Now, you went to the University of Southern Texas--? Speaker 2: Texas State [formerly Texas State University for Negroes, later Texas Southern University, Houston Texas]. Speaker 1: Texas State? Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Texas State, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And where is that? Speaker 2: Houston. Speaker 1: Houston. Speaker 2: It's now called Texas Southern, but it was Texas State then. And I went there because I didn't, I couldn't go to college until after he [brother Lamar Burrus] got home from the army because I had to be there with my mother [Mattie Hall Burrus]. But when he got home, you know, it just became clear that he was gonna get a job and work and get married. Then all of the scholarship offers I got from the Big Ten [Conference] schools up North, well, they were looking at the high school students in their day. So I went to Texas Southern, for the only reason is because that's where most of my buddies also got--a number of my buddies also got scholarships to. But I got him to other schools, historically black colleges, you know, Kentucky State [University, Frankfort, Kentucky], Tennessee [State University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know, all of those. And I got offers from those, but I went to Texas, now Texas Southern, because that's where most of my friends got scholarships to. Story_ID: 4451 Speaker 1: What was that like? Were there any teachers there that stood out, any administrator that you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a bus driver I remember. And I didn't know anything about the segregation. And I wasn't there for three or four weeks, and, you know, it was gerrymandered. Unlike in Chicago [Illinois], you had black communities here, you had wards. You had the third, fourth and fifth wards which were solid black. And the school was in the third ward as I recall. And I would say, yeah, you stayed there and you stayed in the black community because it was, you're comfortable there. And we went downtown to shop once, and I got on the--. We take the bus back to the school, and I jumped on. I saw a seat and I just plopped straight down in it, you know. And I wasn't there three seconds before the brakes hit and the people were falling down. And I'm saying, "what's wrong?" You know. I was looking out the window to see whether, you know, it was accident or something. And I happened to be sitting in the white section, you know, in front, right behind--. So I saw this. Saw all the blacks back there, but they were all crowded. But I saw these seats up front, and I didn't pay attention. I had jumped on, just like I would the streetcar or bus in Chicago. And I see, there's a seat right there. I jumped, sit right down on it, you know. And he says, "boy, if, you know, you want to be a troublemaker? There are the police here. I'll call the police in a minute. You'd better get your butt back in the back." And then I remembered, then it occurred to me where I was on the way back. And the thing that bothered me most about it. There was two black ladies sitting back there. And they said, "these youngsters don't want to do anything but make trouble". And I just, you know, that was, why would they, you know, accept this? But then it occurred to me, I was--. We weren't in the third ward, we were downtown, you know. So I got on back there, and it bothered me most about their attitude than it was about the bus driver's. And so I--that I do remember. Story_ID: 4452 Speaker 1: Oh, I remember a lot, you know, I went back [to Texas Southern University, Houston Texas] after, you know, I had developed my career, and went back. And they had--. They, they recognized me and at graduation I did the commencement exercise speech. And, and they really, gave me the keys to the city, you know. But this was twenty five years later, you know. When I went back there--it used to be on the outskirts--the school was in, like in, in the boonies. When I went back to Houston [Texas], you know, twenty five years later, maybe thirty years later, when I became the President of the Finance Officers Association, I spoke to the--. I knew at the commencement, I spoke to the graduating class, the graduate school graduating class. And they gave a reception for me in my honor at the then president's house, which was quite nice. But then--and where I was expecting to be in the boonies--it was in, it was in the inner-city. The city had just grown that much, right across the street from the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] by the way. It used to be down, you know, a quarter of a mile away. But this--. Both schools grew so fast, they're right across, they ended up right across the street from one another. And that was a--. It was, it was nice that they could, they would remember, you know, my being there. And I, I did receive a lot of award, awards. I--. The one that--I'm not sure whether I brought the picture--where the then Governor gave out three Recognition Awards at a commencement, at the commencement exercises. And I was the first and only African-American to have received that, such award. There was three of them given out. One was SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas], another one was in the University of Texas, I guess it was. And then they gave one to the, to the--to me which is from a African American school. And I was the first one up. I imagine they continued. I'm not sure. But it was such a, it was groundbreaking news because they'd never--. No athlete from a historically black university was, had ever received it. And there was a number of them in, in Texas, Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas] and--I can't even think of the name--but anyway, there was bunch of them, you know, either state schools or, or religious schools. You know, the, the Baptist had a school, the Methodist had a school and, and they're--as a matter of fact there's more of those than there were state schools in the South. I just can't think of the names of them because I guess that was fifty years ago. So that's the reason. You can, you can excuse me for not remembering. But they were all there and some of them are still there. Bishop College [Marshall, Texas, closed in 1988] was there, San Antonio State [University of Texas, San Antonio] or something like that was there, and, you know, we--. I knew them all because we played football with them. And I only stayed there two years and came back up here and finished, and then did my graduate work up here. Story_ID: 4453 Speaker 1: Now, what happened down there? Why did you only stay for two years? Speaker 2: Well, all the fellows I went down there with only stayed a year. And they weren't interested in college. They were there to play football or basketball, you know. Well, I wanted an education because that's been--that was my, my orientation. And so after the second year, there was nobody from Chicago [Illinois] there, you know. And I got, and I got an opportunity to come up here. And I also go, I got a scholastic scholarship at Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]. So, and, and--. So, then I, my brother [Lamar Burrus] had--. (unrelated comment) My brother, he, my brother and his wife then decided--you know, it was clear they were not going to go to school-- he was not going to go to school. He was just gonna work. So I said, well, I'd better take this more, more serious. I'm going to go to a better school so I can really be challenged. Because down there, you know, I, I was studying things there that I learned up here in high school. So, so I didn't go back, just didn't. I came here, and I went to Roosevelt and stayed there and, you know, did, did well. I always did well in school when I grad--. I graduated with honors from graduate school. And my brother could have done it, but with half the effort. Speaker 1: Now, what did you major in? Speaker 2: Accounting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I made it through school. And by this time, my mother [Mattie Hall Burrus] was always able to take care of us. But that means--you know, because the house was paid for. And she got rent from the, the apartments that she, that she was not living in. One was to my brother. He moved out from home. He was really a homebody. He moved all the away from the second floor to the first floor, he and his wife. And we rented out the basement apartment. But she couldn't help me in school, you know, she didn't have that kind of money. So I was determined to finish. So what I did, I worked full time. You know, I was putting in forty hours a week, went to school full time. And that was a struggle. And I would just--because I just--you know, I was getting up in age then, you know. I had to be responsible and I wasn't thinking about marriage or starting a family. But I did it. And, you know, over the course of it I had--wore the same clothes for three years, two and a half years, you know, because I couldn't afford to buy any. But my wife--. My mother really understood that so she, she scrimped, you know, and ate the cheaper foods so my brother and I--so I could have, you know, a full, full meal. I didn't realize it at the time because I was coming home. I had to study and, you know, to study, go take a full load and work, you know, eight hours a days was, was a stretch, you know. But I had tons of energy. So, and I, and, you know, and desire and determination to do it, and I did it. And I finished and I got good grades. And one way that, that augmented my income was I, I mentored other college students because I was good with the numbers. And I would--I call it mentoring--what I did was their homework (laughter) you know, and they would pay me. And the irony of it was, it was just disheartening. When we graduated, they were turning down job offers that I couldn't get an interview for. But then, but these are all the white students. And I got two offers when I graduated. One was from the Internal Revenue Service. You know, they wanted me to come with the, with them. And they wanted--. I went through all the interviews and everything. And they told me I could be--I was gonna be assigned as a special agent for tax fraud and something else. Okay, I says, "where is that?" And they says, "well, the opening is in Albuquerque, New Mexico." I said, "that sounds like that would be suburb a Brazil or somewhere," Albuquerque, you know. But I said, okay. He says, you know, there was this opportunity to move, move up there, in career. And I said, "well, tax fraud," and the other, other term, the part of the title was frightening. I says, "do I have to carry a gun?" "Oh, absolutely, absolutely because, you know--." Okay, well. I thought about it. Well, there were two bad things about that. One is if I carry a gun, I might have to shoot somebody. That was the second worse thing. The worse thing is they might shoot back. I said, I'm, I mean I didn't, you know, lose sleep and wear a pair of shoes for two years and put cardboard in the sole when I had holes in the shoes to, you know, to carry a gun. I could have done that, you know, half way through high school. Now, the other job offers were in the city, which is what I took. Story_ID: 4454 Speaker 1: You're at Roosevelt [University, Chicago Illinois, formerly Thomas Jefferson College, later Roosevelt College], majoring in accounting. You got out. You got two job offers. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The offer you said you took was one from the City [City of Chicago]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I applied for it in the summertime because I thought, you know, you go down there and get a job and work, and work for the summer, you know, and make, make some money so when I went back to school, I could, you know, have a little something saved up. And I didn't realize, you know, you took, you took an examination and you were considered four or five months later. Then, and if you were on the preference list, then you may get a job six months later. I thought I was gonna take the exam on Thursday and get hired and start work the following Monday. So I took the exam and--for Auditor, Internal Auditor--and creamed it, you know. But then it was nothing but a watered-down version of my final exam, you know, at school. And I didn't think about it. When I graduated, it was in February, I had these two offers, you know. And I had no intention of going to Albuquerque [New Mexico]. So I went on to the City and which I figured I'd work for, you know, six months until I sort of got my sea legs together and see what opportunities are out there. And I wanted a job in accounting because, you know, the folks I was--the students I was--I mentored were getting jobs in the big, you know, the, what they call the Big Eight accounting firms, You know, the Arthur Andersen [Arthur Anderson & Co., Chicago, Illinois], Deloitte [Deloitte & Touche, Chicago, Illinois], and Arthur Young [Arthur Young & Company, later Ernst & Young, Chicago, Illinois] and so forth. And I couldn't get past the receptionist. So that's why I took the job at the, at the City so I could have some income coming in while I, you know, reviewed the--surveyed the, the job market. And I went around to all of the schools. I had, you know, my credentials, my little grades, and I was very attractive and, you know, and I understood it. And I studied hard. And I couldn't in the door. So I went to some of black accounting firms. And I went to one who was very prominent, by the way, in Chicago [Illinois]. And he told me, he says, "well, I came up the hard way. And I got it on my own. Why should I give you a job? You got to do what I did." And I walked there, and I said to myself, I hope nobody ever thinks about me the way I think about him, you know. And it shows how chickens come home to roost. Pushing back, push forward for twenty years or so when I became the CEO [Cheif Executive Officer], the CFO [Chief Financial Officer] and Comptroller for the City. It was after, you know, years. The same fellow came in and I can't tell you exactly who it was because I don't want to identify him. He was very prominent. He came to me and says he was then in this business and a few other businesses. And he was having a hard time, especially with cash flow. And he had a contract with the City. And he came in, says, you know, "we all got to stick together and--because if we don't help one another, then how we ever move up as a class." And I'm saying, well, you know, I'll die now remembering my first encounter with him. And I says, now it's time to get, you know, payback time. And I think, I finally, that's when I finally began to recognize I had grew up. I was, you know, I was mature. I says well, if I do to him what he did to me, then I'm no different than he is, you know. And I says, well, at the very least what I'm gonna do is remem--have him remember how he treated me. But I says, you know, that's, that's also childish. Move forward. I helped him out then. I saved his, his business because he couldn't make payroll. And all I had to do is write 'E', capital E, check (motions making a check sign), and put my initials on it. And what normally would take, you know, for the, a payment to go through, you know, sixty or ninety days, got through in five or six minutes, right. Just got right to the top. And I got it to him. And he says, you know, I've always been a fan of yours, you know, I just wished I knew you when I was--when you were coming up so I could of given you a helping hand like you've given me. I mean I had to bite my lip, but I, you know, I says, I knew you would, you would do that. And, you know, up until he died, which is not too many years ago, we belonged to a number of clubs together, and, you know, and I've never, never once mentioned it to him. And I won't tell you his name now because if I didn't do it while he was living, I'm certainly not gonna do it now that he's dead. But, and I made, made a promise to myself. Story_ID: 4455 Speaker 1: And there was another fellow, another black Ph.D. type who was in the City [City of Chicago] government. And I looked at how he ran his organization. If you think of a pyramid, you had this one speck of pepper on the top, the rest of pyramid was solid white until you got down near the bottom. Then it became gray. When you got to the bottom, it was solid black. And I said to myself, there's been no structural, lasting institutional change with him being there. Because once he leaves there, then it's right back, you can, not unlike it was a hundred years ago. And I says, you know, if I ever have an opportunity to move up in my career, I'm gonna make structural changes that will be, that will last. And I did it. And what I said to myself was that every time I would move up, I would do two things. One, my replacement would be African-American. Secondly, he had to have the same thought pattern that I had, that is, that you've got to believe in this movement that I'm trying to articulate now. And you've got to make sure that the persons that you move up are both black and qualified. If not, then it's a design, it's designed to fail. To put someone in the position that they're not qualified for. So the way the qualify them, as you move up, you put people in right beneath them and then you can see to it that they're prepared to move up when you move up. And as you go up, then all of this--see your salt turns to--the gray gets higher and you get blacks up near the top. And it works. I stayed with the City for twenty six years. And when I was being interviewed I was--. I came up through something called Civil Service, you know, where you took exams. That's how you got promoted. So, and I never got a double jump. Blacks didn't do, get that, you know. I went from, if I can recall, Internal Auditor to Field Auditor to Supervising the Field Auditors to the Account I, Account II, Account III, Account IV. That's as high as you can go in Civil Service. Then I got departmental appointments as a, first as Assistant Director of Finance at Urban Renewal. And then as a Director of Accounting and moved over to Assistant Comptroller, which that meant that appointment came from the Mayor. All the way to where it became CFO [Chief Financial Officer]--Comptroller and CFO--which meant, you had to have that confirm--that position confirmed by the City Council. And I was--. When I, when I left Accountant IV, I got my promotion. Every job I had after that, I was the first black, and including the CFO position. And it's a shame because the CFO position, I was the first and it's embarrassing to say, but I'm the first and only, you know, because everyone since then have been non-African Americans. There's been a number of Comptrollers, but no CFO's. Story_ID: 4456 Speaker 1: What does CFO stand for again? Speaker 2: Chief Finance Officer, which the, the Comptroller was more of Chief Accountant. CFO took care of, you know, had a lot of other responsibilities, including the debt financing, issuing the bonds, investment financing, the investment management, which is how you invest your funds, real estate, insurance, data processing. The Treasurer's Office reported up to the, up to the CFO. The City Collector which is the revenue arm of the City [City of Chicago] reported to the Comptroller. So it was a large department where the Comptroller ran the largest department, reporting to the CFO, but the CFO had all these other departments, other activities reporting up to him. That job has not been filled by a minority since then. But, you know, my plan did work. When I walked in there, the only thing black--the only two things black in that office was my face and the white man's shoes. When I left, they were all the way up at, you know, First--all the way up to the First Deputy Comptroller. When I left, they wouldn't make her the--it was a female by the way--wouldn't make her the Comptroller, you know, Comptroller and CFO. After that, you know, for I guess maybe fifteen, twenty years, they, those officers were separated. You had the Comptroller, and then you had a couple of black Comptrollers, but no--. They had another title, you know, of CFO, which was different. You know, the CFO ran all the things that I just mentioned. The Comptroller ran the Accounting and Financial Report preparation and auditing. That's all. There was, the (unclear) Comptrollers that--all the other things, the data processing, the revenue collections, the Treasurer's Office and so forth, real estate, insurance, debt management. All of that was under the CFO. Speaker 1: Now, you worked for the City under the Richard J. Daley administration? Speaker 2: I worked in the City under all of them. I went with the least. I started under Martin Kennelly [former Chicago, Illinois mayor]. And when I left, I was the only one of two, cabinet-level officials who preceded [Richard M.] Daley [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] . I worked all through Daley's administration and worked through [Michael] Bilandic's [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] administration. And when Jane Byrne [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] came in is when I left. Then I spent the next twenty two years in the banking business. So I worked a long time. Folks retire now, early to mid fifties, you know. And I didn't retire until--I was determined I wasn't gonna--I was determined I was not gonna work when I was seventy years old. So I retired three months before my seventieth birthday, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what position did you hold in the Bilandic administration just before Jane Byrne came in? Speaker 2: Oh, I was CFO. But I was CFO, Comptroller and CFO. Those were joint titles. When I left, they separated the titles because the fellow who became CFO couldn't, didn't have the accounting background so they had a Comptroller and a CFO. The Comptroller reported to the CFO, all right. But I had, I have held both jobs, both titles. I held both titles. Story_ID: 4457 Speaker 1: Did you work for the City [City of Chicago] into the [Mayor Harold] Washington administration at all? Speaker 2: No, I was gone, but I worked with the Washington administration as an aside. When I left city government, I became an expert in analyzing governments, analyzing the finances of governments and forming new governments. I had chaired, co-chaired every transition committee since the Old Man [Mayor Richard J. Daley]. It's [Michael] Bilandic [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] when I did that when I was working for him. Jane Byrne [former Chicago, Illinois mayor], that was my gift to her. Harold Washington. I did Harold Washington's update. I did Eugene Sawyer's [former Chicago, Illinois mayor]. When Richie [Richard M. Daley] came in, I did his. [President, Cook County Board of Commissioners John H.] Stroger, when he came in, I did his. I did a number of--. I've done every state treasurer's transition and government formation since, I guess, the last twenty five years. So the good news is I'm an expert without peers. The bad news is I only get the job once every four years and even then it don't pay. (laughter). Speaker 1: It doesn't pay you to do that? Speaker 2: No, they don't pay. Oh, but when, you know, but then when I was a banker, those were all, all potential customers of mine. So they didn't pay me for being the transition chair, but they all gave me tons of banking business which is the way I got paid. That's what I told Harold Washington. He says, you know. He was coming in because, you know--that was a major transition there--for the first black mayor of the city. And when--. He didn't really understand the, the government itself because he, his whole career had been in the--other than practicing law--had been in the legislative arm. Now, he's coming into the executive arm, first time he'd did it, he had had any experience in it. And I told him that, you know, I would cha--. He asked me to chair his finance committee and to co-chair his transition committee because he was just trying, you know, bring them up to speed. And it was a, it was really a risky business because to be able to take you through the process, in Chicago [Illinois], you know, if you're a Democrat and you win the primary, then, you know, you're probably a shoe-in for the general election, you know. So you have--. You can't start until after the Primary to make sure you win, you won because, you know, when he first ran, he was running, running against two strong opponents, one was Jane Byrne, who was the incumbent. The other was Richie Daley who was the Daley name and was State's Attorney. Then you had Harold Washington who was a state legislator, a state senator. Well, when he wo--he didn't know he was gonna win, but when he won it, then he had to convene this transition committee. And I'm just, I'm telling you all of this. You had to convene the transition committee. You've got to be like Caesar's wife and you've got to do this before the general election. So you've got this window of opportunity and you, you've got to be--. Whatever you come up with--if it's gonna be a fair statement, a fair analysis, I should say--then it's gonna be scrutinized because you'll be, you're challenging all of the, the established institutions. Not only the, the current staff of the, the City, the finance staff of the City which it'll be, you'll criticize them because you're saying here are all the things you have missed. But don't forget it's also all the debt holders, you know, the portfolio managers, the trust officers in the various banks around the country and offshore. But most important, the rating agencies, the Moody's [Investors Service], the Standard & Poors [financial index] and those people because you're saying, here's where it should have been. You've been looking at all this stuff all these years, and you didn't catch it. And they've got to come in to protect their own reputation, not just so much to challenge me, you know, to, to find flaws in your analysis, so you can say that, yes, I was right. That's what they wanted to do. And they came in. And then they went through it, you know, with a toothbrush through the, the wood works. Didn't change a number, didn't change a number. Story_ID: 4458 Speaker 1: But what I did was surround myself with the best and the brightest [for Harold Washington's mayoral transition team]. Nothing ecumenical about this committee I had. I had the best folks that, that, that were in the business. Didn't care whether they were white or black, I didn't care whether republican or democrat. I didn't care whether they were Chicagoans, suburbanites. And we did it. And, and we got it from academia, from the law firms, from the investment bankers, from the commercial bankers. Basically, the general consulting fields, folks who really understood the dynamics of local government, and we put the, put 'em together. And they had this great big, you know, Harold Washington [former Chicago, Illinois mayor], he had a couple hundred people doing something. I took one look at that, and I says--I took my group aside, says, you know, I'm not reporting up to any steering committee, which is a committee I was on. And I was vice, vice-chairman, I mean co-chairman of it. And I met Ed Berry [Edwin C. Berry] from the [Chicago] Urban League. I said, well, I'm not, I'm not gonna be--you know, my effort is gonna be subjected to all this scrutiny and I don't want to be encumbered by any of the, the issues that Ed Berry and his group were looking at. And we published this report. And they came in, and they came from all around the country looking at the, this report. And we sent them out of town with their tails between their legs. I was very proud of that. Harold Washington says, you know, Clark, please, come work for me. I'll give you whatever job you want, because I need somebody to help me form this government and administer this--the dynamics of this, this organization. And I told him in all sincerity, which I hadn't planned on saying, because I didn't think he was gonna be serious about offering me the job. But at this time, I'm at the bank. I'm making three times what, you know, I was making when I was CFO [Chief Financial Officer] or more, and not including bonuses. And I told him, I says, you know, Mayor, I'm so proud of you. And I knew him, you know, back when he was a state legislator and a congressman. I says, I'm so proud of what you've done, but you need to understand, you simply can't afford me, you know. I'm too much money. But what you can't afford to pay for, I'll give to you, free. And I was in his office and I--. The initial ninety days, I practically ran the government. But don't forget, I've got twenty five years of experience to draw on. And so I did, you know, and I loved every moment of it, you know. And, matter of fact, I had a meeting with him, scheduled with him, seven minutes before he--after he died. And he died and I was on my way over there, and I got the word that he had died. And--Chicago will never forgive you for doing this, Harold, you know. And I was so, I was very proud of him, you know. Story_ID: 4459 Speaker 1: And then, you know, we went through the whole [Eugene] Gene Sawyer [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] thing which was a travesty, and did essentially the same thing for him. I did the--well, first I did the update for Harold Washington [former Chicago, Illinois mayor]. Because don't forget, there was, those were essentially two separate administrations. One we had this twenty-nine--twenty-one, I guess it would be--twenty-nine and twenty-one, yeah, fiasco where the whites have formed this coalition that blocked everything he wanted. Then he took them to court and won in court, had the, the ward lines re-districted--redrawn I should say. Where it gave him a majority, bought in a couple of more blacks and two or three Hispanics, where he got--it was twenty five, twenty five--and he was, being president of the, of the [Chicago] City Council, he had the tying vote, which gave him the, the majority for the first time. And then when, when Gene Sawyer came in after he died, I did essentially the same thing for him. I did the transition committee report for Harold Washington and recommended strongly that he never publish it because it--that report showed the dirty laundry that was, that existed in the Harold Washington administration. And, you know, the--it wasn't worth publishing that report that tarnished the image of the first black and the, one of the greatest mayors this city has ever had. And he agreed with me. And to this day, you know, there's only been a handful of eyes that have been that report, in addition to the, all the folks that worked on it. And then when Richie [Richard M. Daley, Chicago mayor] beat him out, the first thing he did was ask me to do his transition report, which I did. And I got essentially the group because of fellows--same type of people to work with me. It's about thirty, thirty-five people because you've got to--you've got a window from the primary to the general. For him to hit the ground running on the day of his election, the day after he was elected, then you've got to move. Because it's a truism. If you, if you're elected and you go into major problems, the longer you take to publish those problems, the more those problems become yours. And if you don't do it at all, then you not only are being blamed for not solving the problems, you are the cause of the problems. That's why you've got to come straight out and here's this laundry--Chinese menu of things that are wrong. Here's a laundry list of things you need to do, all of which are--create a lot of drama. You know, you go into office raising taxes, firing a bunch of people, but if you don't do that, you've got to balance your books. You know, and you've got to understand that. And be ready to move. You've got to move and you've got to move with dispatch. If you don't do it, if you have problems that you didn't solve, and you still take longer, then it's your problems that you've created. Story_ID: 4460 Speaker 1: I also chaired--co-chaired--Dorothy Brown's [Clerk, Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois] transition team, which was--she just got elected to the County Clerk's position as you know. She worked--you know, I told you I was the, I mentored virtually all the young blacks that came through the bank. And she, she came through as an auditor, and she got her CPA [Certified Public Accountant], and I mentored her. And she wanted to get into public life. I said, "you're not gonna make any money that way". She says, "well, but I want it." You know, she tasted, she was--her whole career as a young, young lady was limited just to auditing in the bank and with a CPA firm. I says, well, you need something--accounting is based on logic and you can transition that more than any profession except one. That's being a lawyer. And if you really want to get into public service, then you want to get to be a lawyer. Then you learn the logic and you also understand the dynamics of, not only what's happening, but why those things are happening. And she went on back to law school. So she-- when I moved to the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], never my daytime job. I was there as a chairman, I brought her over and put her in charge of the auditing group. And she was going to law school and I did what I saw so many of my white collars doing. They got their young mentees and, you know, they would help them. Well, I helped her by, you know, letting her do a lot of work on her own at my time. I guess I really oughtn't say that. But she always made up for it. But when exams times coming around, you know, I told her, you work half time and you study the rest of the day so you can get through the, the law exams. And she'll--you'll make it up after the exams are over with, you know, after you finish the exams. And she was fortunate enough to pass it the very first time, and so she became a lawyer and a CPA. And, and changed her title and gave her another promotion over at the CTA. And she told me she wanted to run. She ran for treasurer, and almost won--beat Miriam Santos [former City of Chicago Treasurer]. Lost that, but stayed, you know, stayed in the, the environment and ran for county clerk and won. So I did her transition committee. And I mention all this because hers was different than any other ones that I've ever done. And I announced to the public when I was describing this in the report. The report--all the previous reports I've done, and all the others that I know of, talk about, here are the problems you have inherited and here's what you've got to do to clean up those problems after you blame your predecessor for causing all these problems. And, and here's this laundry list that, that essentially balances your books. She didn't do any of that. What she--what we developed for her, at her assistance, with a lot of risks, was not to do a transition report, but to do a strategic plan. And she did--there's nothing in that plan that blamed her predecessor. There was not an awful lot in that plan that talked about the problems she inherited. She's saying wherever it, where we are now, that's where we are. And the, everything that came before is history and looking forward. I says, "you know, Dorothy, you understand the risks you are taking, because if there are some skeletons that are gonna crop out of that closet, you know, you're gonna be blamed for them, not only for not solving them, but you'll be the cause of the problem." She says, "I understand that, but I want to move this department, this office, and I've got to do it with, with an eye towards the future." And what she did--and you look at that report--it's different from all the others I've ever done, which talks about strategies for the future. And here is, here are the, the objectives. Here is--these are the tactical action plans. Here's how I'm going to get from where I am now to where I intend to be at the end of this administration. And we will roll it every year. That is, you know, it's a five year plan, end of the first year, you put another year onto it because there always the five years out there. And she's done it and apparently she's winning it. So I, I admire her. She's got more gumption than I have. Story_ID: 4461 Speaker 1: Sir, I wanted to ask you about--well, I was thinking as you were explaining your transition team involved with the--and it seems to transcend politics in a sense that you--. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, you're available during those transition teams as leader of those teams to give information on all of these politicians (unclear). And you said, you were telling me off-camera, that wasn't really legal until after [Richard J.] Daley [former Chicago mayor] died. He'd been mayor so long-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --there was nobody thinking about transition, and here you are--. Speaker 2: And don't forget, before him it was the same thing. You had [Anton J.] Cermak [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] and then the Kelly-Nash machine [Edward J. Kelly, former Chicago mayor and Patrick A. Nash, a Chicago politician], then Martin Kennelly [former Chicago mayor] whom I started under. There was nothing to transition in those days, you know, because nobody really cared too much about finance, financing local government. And the statutes and the Constitution and the various laws that came out of Springfield were so restrictive that you couldn't do too much right, and you couldn't do too much wrong because you were just constrained to, the options you had. It started opening up during, maybe halfway through the Daley administration where you had people who were non-traditional politicians taking over. You know, really, [Mayor] Harold Washington and [Mayor] Jane Byrne never came up through politics. The--[Mayor] Richard M. Daley never--he never worked in local politics, in local government, I'm sorry, before he became mayor. Unless you want to call the States Attorneys' office local politics. Before that he was in Springfield [Illinois]. So you had people coming taking over the office who didn't know very much about local government. And the same thing is true at the county. The first transition committee that they ever had, transition effort, that they ever had was the one that I did for Stroger. Before him, it was John Stroger [former President, Cook County Board]-- I mean George Dunne [former President, Cook County Board, Illinois] and before him was, not [P. J.] 'Parky' Cullerton [Chicago politician], but whomever. Speaker 1: And George Dunne lasted-- Speaker 2: And he was there forever. Speaker 1: He went back to the old Daley term. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, he was there forever. So it was nothing really, in fact, to transition. It was only been the dynamics that came into being in the '70s [1970s] that, you know, we were talking about changing governments, you know, forming governments. This was never done before. And the only reason you needed for, Stroger, 'cause he was an old-line politician, but he was black, you know. So he had to make sure he understood exactly what he was inheriting. And that was another labor of love of mine because he's a personal friend of mine. And a dynamic person. Story_ID: 4462 Speaker 1: Now, so what we're saying here is that your expertise and longevity in city government, you know, put you in position to actually transcend a lot of the political personalities that you assisted. But you said a couple of things I wanted to backtrack on. I wanted to ask you about Jane Byrne [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] because you said you, you got out of city government, you know, when--and you were not part of the transition ream of Jane Byrne. Speaker 2: Oh, I did hers. Speaker 1: You did, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I did hers. Um-hum. Speaker 1: But then you left government afterwards. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you were part of the transition team for Jane Byrne. Speaker 2: Well, but hers was informal, but I was, I was the transition team. I did it all on my own. Those of you who, we can recall the history. She came in--it was something about $150 million deficit. And it was all in something called the 'revolving funds.' Well, that was all part of my report. She just misinterpreted the report. Speaker 1: Deliberately, or--? Speaker 2: It was a matter of judgment, whether it was deliberate or not. And that's the one that I, I regret to some extent. I regret that--she was saying it was $150 million deficit. And I'm saying that the $150 million was interfund transactions. That is, if you put all of the city's activities, financial activities together, it was clearly a surplus. But you had a big surplus here and deficits over here, but the surpluses always more than offset the deficits. And it had been going, going along that way for a number of years, and my report essentially says, you've got one more year before the deficits exceed the surpluses. Then the City [of Chicago] would have been essentially in default. And she didn't understand it. She just looked at the negative part because she had this problem with [Michael A.] Bilandic [former Chicago mayor]. She and Bilandic didn't get along. So she wanted to blame everything on him. Which is the proper thing to do, except that you don't make up stories to blame on your predecessors, you know. You blame with faults. And we went through that and went on television. And I gave the report, you know, to the cameras. And after I did that, she walked up to the camera and said, well, it sounds like a deficit to me. So I just left it alone. Well, fine, you know, I'm leaving anyway. But I didn't, I did not do what all of my colleagues did. She was the first non-politician to win office, right. And so the, the, the managers of government up until she came in were the same ones that were with Bilandic who in turn were the same ones with, with Old Man [Richard J.] Daley [former Chicago mayor]. Who were the same ones, that were old enough like me, they were the same ones under Martin Kennelly [former Chicago mayor]. It all changed, you know, when she came in. And they all left. And then see, every cabinet-level person left right after the primary, didn't even stay for the general. Except one, me. Because my job was more institutional than personal. I mean and my instructions came from the statutes, and those were the rules that I had to follow. And I sincerely believed--and I was never a major fan of hers--but I believed that it was my responsibility to see to it that, at least my part of the overall government transitioned smoothly. So I did the banks, and then I still stayed on and told her that I would help find my replacement because I, I had agreed to--with the banks, several years earlier to go with First National Bank. And I was asked to stay on until after Bilandic got re-elected, which he did -- which didn't happen, but I did stay on. And so when everybody left, I said, somebody's got to help the lady, you know, establish this government. And so I did, I did, I stayed--I did the transition report. And then I stayed on with her for, oh, maybe six months. But I had to leave because the bank was saying, you know, we, we hired you three years--two and a half years ago. And you still haven't come over. You know, you've got to make up your mind. You've got to move. And so I did. Plus, as a--just as an aside, in those days--this is back in the late '70s [1970s]. The bank, all banks had this rule that you cannot work at the bank after sixty five. Secondly, to get fully vested--this is before new federal law, to get fully vested, you had to be work for fifteen--you had to be at the job, on the job for fifteen years, minimal, minimally. Which meant that for me to get full, fully vested, I had to be on, start working there and getting pension credits when I was fifty years old, which was November the fifth. I started at the bank October twenty ninth (laughter) when I had to. Story_ID: 4463 Speaker 1: I had promised them that I would leave and that I would--I promised them I would leave the City [of Chicago, Illinois], promised the bank I would leave the City when, well--or actually before [Richard J.] Daley [former Chicago mayor] died. Then when he died, they says, well, you know, the, the, [Michael A.] Bilandic [former Chicago mayor] and his people went to the bank and said, "look, we, we're starting off new, you know, nobody had planned this." You know, because nobody knew the mayor was that sick and was gonna die. " I'd like to keep my, keep the team in place. Could you let Burrus stay for a little bit?" They said, "fine." So I was thinking, the bank was thinking and I too was thinking about like six months. But two years later, and I was still there and, to get Bilandic re-elected. See he was never elected the first time. He was not really elected. He was chosen by the, or elected by the city council to finish Daley's term. And then he was gonna be elected by the general public, public for a four year term, you know, two years later. Speaker 2: How did you feel about that? Because there was a controversy around that. I was new in the city at the time, but Wilson Frost [Chicago politician] should have been the mayor according to city law. I guess the way they -- Speaker 1: No, that's not true. Speaker 2: That's not true? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Wilson Frost was the president pro tem or something -- Speaker 1: President pro tem of the City Council. Michael Bilandic was the chairman of the finance committee. And the statutes, neither the statutes nor the city charter dictates how you replace a sitting mayor. There'd never been one, you know, except when [Anton J.] Cermak [former Chicago mayor] died, when Cermak was shot back in '32 [1932] or something like that. And, but there's consensus, whoever--I guess it was [Edward J.] Kelly [former Chicago mayor] who came in after that. And I guess it was consensus, you know, so there was never an issue. There was never a challenge. When, when the mayor died, there was a question of whether Wilson Frost believed that he ought to have been named the mayor. And the powers that be, thought it ought to be somebody white, probably from the white infrastructure. And the logical choice would have been Michael Bilandic who was chairman of the finance committee. Also, don't forget, I guess for fifty years or longer, no mayor had--no person whoever became that came from any place other than the Eleventh Ward. And so--which is where Bilandic was from. So he had all the history precedence behind him, but there was, it was unclear. If you look at the statutes, the statutes, the Constitution or the, the rules of the City of Chicago which is the charter, it's really ambivalent. You know, so Frost says he was the mayor because of--the same logic you're using. He was the mayor pro tem. Story_ID: 4464 Speaker 1: Wasn't he locked--is it true that he [Wilson Frost, Chicago, Illinois mayoral candidate] was locked out of the fifth floor office? Speaker 2: Locked out. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the story all the papers-- Speaker 2: [simultaneouly] The, the--no, I was, believe me, my office was right next door. It was not that he was locked out. It was just that it was occupied. See, where they, you know, the, the powers that be--. There was three people, a handful people who really ran city government because the mayor [Richard J. Daley]--I guess it can be told now--the mayor never really recovered from that first aneurysm that he had. When he came back to work, you know, he was half the man that he was before he got sick. And there was the deputy mayor who was Tom Donovan. There was Ed (unclear) who was the budget director and there was Clark Burrus. Don't forget that no major decisions can go through any organization, you know, whether it's government or not-for-profit or for profit. It does have some kind of financial implications. So I was, by virtue of the office I was in, I was involved in all of the, all of the major decisions. So we sort of ran the government for those months that he lived after he had his initial attack. And so when he died, it was primarily Tom Donovan getting the, the leadership out of the [City] Council to say we've got form this government and do it, do it immediately. And they said, well, who can we get. And so the two choices, either Wilson Frost or [Michael A.] Mike Bilandic [former Chicago mayor] . They chose Wilson. They didn't lock him out of the mayor's office. They just occupied it (laughter), you know. They made that decision, you know. And they went through, you know, the, the law says you've got, you've got to, you have to--city council has to choose before there's another election. And they did, and they chose Wilson Frost. Well, this became a major uproar in the minority community, primarily the black community because Wilson Frost (unclear) ought to be mayor. But there's nothing--. Speaker 1: So city council chose Bilandic. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But there's nothing, I mean there's in the law, any of those laws at the local, state or constitution that says this is the order of succession. The same thing, the same things true of the federal government. The vice president takes over for the president if the president dies. But when the president becomes incapacitated, there is nothing in the constitution that says who takes over. The line of succession is there, but you've got a president that's incapable of serving, but whose still alive. So there's nothing in there that allows it. The same thing is true with the State of, the State of Illinois, I suspect, the majority if not all of the other states because how do you--see if you write it in, then somebody's likely to say, well, how do you determine whether a person's incapacitated or not? You know, so Chicago doesn't have any of this body of rules. A defined succession program. See, it wasn't that they locked out Wilson Frost, they just occupied the office (laughter). Story_ID: 4465 Speaker 1: Now, tell me, I want to ask you a question now that interests me. I mean did you consider yourself at the time powerful? Do you think you really had power? I know that you really, and I know that you--. Speaker 2: When? Speaker 1: In city government. Speaker 2: Well, I would--in city government when--who was mayor? Speaker 1: Well, when [Richard J.] Daley was mayor [of Chicago, Illinois]. I mean were you--? Speaker 2: Well, when Daley was mayor did I have power? Understand, when he was mayor, he had an organizational chart. He had here's Daley and a line coming down, and then a broad line. Everything from the police commissioner down to the janitor reported up to him. There were six senior cabinet-level officials. Police, fire, something called public works, all the construction stuff, streets and san [sanitation], that's a huge operation, and the comptroller. Did I say law? Yeah, and law. That's six of us. We were considered the senior cabinet level officials. Did I consider myself powerful? Probably yes. Understand when Daley ran, ran the shop, everything went through him. But it's the people who he could--who could get to his ear and could influence his thinking are the ones you would consider powerful. And don't forget finance crosses all boundaries. Where there's a traditional organizational charts, you have staff departments and line departments. No matter which one they were, they had to come through finance, right. So, yeah, powerful, that's a relative term and I can't think of anyone other than the chief of staff who had more power. But under Daley even that limited. When [Michael A.] Bilandic [former Chicago mayor] came in, it was just, you know, it was just three of us that ran it. The chief of staff, budget and me, we ran the government. But--it was without question, we ran it. Story_ID: 4466 Speaker 1: So you felt more powerful, I guess, under [Michael A.] Bilandic [former Chicago, Illinois mayor] than [Richard J.] Daley [former Chicago mayor]? Speaker 2: Well, you could work, you could decide independently to execute without going through Bilandic. You couldn't do that with Daley. I don't ever remember Daley, you know, saying, well, you can't do--you recommend something to him and he says, no, because I said so without explanation. No, that never happened. If I went to him, certain conditions had to exist. Here's a problem and this is just letting you know, Mayor, that I've solved this problem here. I solved it. Or here's a problems that I've done everything I can technically. It needs some input from political, you know-- an infusion or external to the local government infusion. Maybe it's the state government or you need to go to Washington, D.C. or something like that. But every, every time he went to the editorial boards, I was the one that had to go with him. If there was a police scandal, it would be the police superintendent and me. If there was, you know, a few other scandals. One was the building department, the building inspectors and other inspectors taking money--electrical inspectors, I guess it was. And if there's a big scandal, well, we had to go, you know, out to the public and explain what was going on. And we had to go--and primarily to editorial boards--both electronic and print. And I was always, had to be there, you know. And I was always the one who was giving, you know, the financial implications or descriptions or implications. I mean I'm not sure how you, how you define power. And not nearly the kind of power I had when Bilandic was mayor because you didn't have a strong leader, you know. Or even Jane Byrne [former Chicago mayor], because she, you know, she didn't realize how much she didn't understand. She would bluff her way through, but then when it got, when the pressure got on her, she'd have to come back. And I wasn't even with the, the government. And she would call me over from the City [of Chicago]--over to the City from the bank. And, you know, so, so let's brainstorm and see how we can get out of this mess. Mostly, it was this mess that existed, regardless of where the cause came from. So I'm not sure how you define power. In relative, in relative terms I had tremendous power because there was only two or three of us, well there were five who had a level spot. I was one of the few that--me and the, and the corporation counsel, had to be involved in all of them. Ask them if we can afford to do it and the corporation counsel says, it's not legal. Let's make it legal, all right. That was part of all significant decisions, yes. So I'm not sure what power, power is, you know. Well, I probably had more power relative, in broad relative terms under Harold Washington [former Chicago mayor] than I did under Bilandic or, or, or Daley. And eventually--. Speaker 1: And you didn't even work for government then, right? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. You know, except that, don't forget what I told Harold Washington, I, I meant. What he couldn't afford to pay for, I'd give it to him free. So I was over there on a regular basis, you know. And most people didn't know that I wasn't--or knew that I wasn't working there, but they--I didn't work there because, you know, I was full time at the bank because I had major responsibilities at the bank, which we've got to get to, you know, before this, this conversation ends. But, yeah, I was apolitical. See, the major disctinction in me from all the rest of them. I was as comfortable. I'd go to Springfield [Illinois]. I was just as comfortable walking on the republican side as I was on the democratic side. Not because republicans thought I was a republican, but they viewed me in the way I wanted them to view me, which is as a professional, representing Chicago. So there was no--politics was not part of jargon. And I worked hard to keep it that way. When I went to New York, which I did three, four times a year, to rating agencies, they knew I came there as a professional manager of government, not representing the political infrastructure of government. Story_ID: 4467 Speaker 1: Tell me this. Do you think that because of the intense kind of racial discrimination in the private sector that a lot of very, very talented black professionals end up working in the public sector? And when you--? Speaker 2: That's not a thought. It's not that I think it. It's a fact. I know it, you know. Not just for me, because of my experience of going, you know, carrying a gun down in Albuquerque [New Mexico]. But you didn't, you didn't have opportunities to, to work in the private sector at, at significantly high levels of position. Let me, let me explain that to you. At the bank, you know, I was a manager, and I was a senior-level manager. And I mentored a lot of my minorities. And we have something called the First Scholar Program where we bring the real bright kids, youngsters in from the better schools. And we call them First Scholars. 'First' for the First National Bank and 'Scholars' because of their achievement at a young, young age. And we had, I remember we had two, an Irish kid from Chicago [Illinois] suburbs who went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] graduate school, doing extremely well. We had a young African American, same age, who went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], was at Harvard doing graduate, doing graduate--no, undergraduate work and going into Harvard for his combination law and MBA [Masters of Business Administration]. And after, you know, four, five--four, five, six months, I had to bring--I was very disappointed in the young African American. I brought him in and told him that, you know, we brought the two of you in. You're both really on a fast track, and here is Vince, who was the young white, white youngster who was just, you know, taking chances and making recommendations and going all over the place, you know. And here's this little African American who said that, who was doing well, but moving at a snails pace compared to the horse race rate that Vince Kelly was--excuse, take the names out--the young white, white youngster was doing. And I explained to him, how disappointed I was, and told him, "you have to--if you want to go into, to move up, you've got to assume risks, you know, and take a chance, you know, and, and move on, you know, because you've got to catch up with these other fastrackers," you know, according to the young man to the young man that is peer of the young white fellow. And he listened very intelligently, and articulate. When I finished, I says, "now you go out there, you know, and full speed ahead." And he says, "Mr. Burrus, may I say something." And I said, "of course." "You need to understand, sir,"his words to me, "that when Vince takes a chance and he's wrong, it's chalked up as a learning experience." And I says, "that's absolutely, you're correct. That's right." He said, "when I take it, it's career threatening. I can't, I don't--. I have a chance to succeed just as much as Vince does. I don't have a chance to fail and survive." I fumbled around a few words and dismissed him because--and I thought about it. I mean he's absolutely right. You know, even in, you know, over the past century, the century before the past century, blacks had opportunities to succeed because you can look at the George Washington Carvers and, you know, Booker T. Washingtons and so forth. You can look at World War II, you had Jews who survived and prospered. Jewish scientist who was trying to a-bomb. What we don't have and what we need in terms of achieving parity and equality is opportunity, not to succeed, but opportunities to fail and survive. That we don't have. And you're absolutely correct. And, and it's more so in the private sector, even as we speak, than in the public sector, although it exists in the public sector also now. Story_ID: 4468 Speaker 1: [As you recall, I mentioned earlier that I was approached back in the] mid '70s [1970s] when Richard J. Daley [former Chicago mayor] was living. And this was by the banking community, you know, banking community, including the commercial banks in Chicago, [Illinois] and a few in New York [New York], and most of the investment banks, the Merrill Lynches and the Smith Barneys and so forth, because of two things. One, and probably the most important one is that I knew the business--government finance--because I had spent the last twenty-five plus years working in it. And secondly, because I had been the only black, I was very visible. So and don't forget, I wanted to be professional, not political. So I had access. I could provide access. And I knew the banking community and I knew the government community. And so I was an obvious choice, and I guess thoroughly the times were right for, you know, you got to start doing something. Because there was not, not one senior African American officer in any mid to large banks in metropolitan Chicago. And I'm sure it's, it's probably, undoubtedly true in the whole state of Illinois, you know. But I just, but I know it was metropolitan Chicago. So that was, there's a, there's an interesting story, and let me see if I can get through it briefly. When I was thinking about moving, I was approached by two banks in Chicago, one was First National Bank [of Chicago]. The other one was Continental Bank. That's now Bank of America. And I was also approached by a number of the investment banks. Specifically Bear Stearns [Securities Corporation], Blythe Eastman, which is no longer around. I'll think of it in a minute. I'm just, just--. But they were all vying and when I was thinking about a career change, you know, I went through the exercise, you know, and I hadn't talked about it. But I taught it a good number of years at the college level. Now, it's a day job. And what we teach is something called decision trees, which is, you know, you, you start off with a fundamental question and the answer is yes or no, cause no, you stop; yes, you're going to--more branches, branches. So you never end up with the answer, but you end up with all your options. So I went through this, this exercise. And I, you know, I said, well, do I, I want to leave---do I want to leave the government, yes or no? The answer was yes. So then I took that branch on up. And then, you know, what options are available to me? The people have talked to me. There's the private sector, non-financial institution, I mentioned--I won't mention names, but I--I don't know whether it makes a lot of sense to do that. And there was the investment banking community and there was a, a commercial banking industry. For a whole host of reasons, not the least of which was my age, I decided against the investment bankers and went with commercial bankers. If I had been twenty, twenty-five years younger, I would have gone with the investment banking community because the, the compensation--the risks are greater, but the compensation is significantly higher. So I went down to the local bank, the banking community. And I says if I'm gonna go to the banking community, I'll stay where I am. I could have gone to the Harris [Bank] or Northern Trust [Company]. But the two big banks were First and Continental. And I made the right decision for all the wrong reasons. Story_ID: 4469 Speaker 1: And I went to--I chose--. What I did--the two heads of the--heads of the two banks. (name?) at First Chicago [First National Bank of Chicago] and John Perkins at Continental [Bank] were both vying for me. So what I was doing, playing ping pong. One would make me an offer, and I ran over to the other one and says this is what they offered me, up the ante, until, you know, one of them--two of them who were, who will remain nameless said, "well, this is my last offer." So I went back to the other one and says, well, "this is gonna be my last offer." So I chose First Chicago because at that time the biggest, most respected bank, commercial bank in the domestic marketplace in this country was Continental. Which makes, in a sense, makes that very attractive, except that at Continental, you know, you didn't move up until somebody either died, had a stroke or retired. The turnover was very slow. And well normally that wouldn't bother me, but I'm fifty years old, I'm--will be fifty in, you know, a year or so. So I looked at First Chicago and they had this horse race, which I won't take you through, but it was nothing but turmoil there. And a lot of people left because they didn't the, won the internal battle. And so there were a lot of holes. Well, I, if I wanted to move and move fast, I had to go where there was the opportunities. So I went over to, I ended up going to First Chicago as opposed to Continental for all the wrong reasons because the, you know, less than a year later, the bottom fell out of Continental and they no longer exist. So I was just lucky, not smart. And I went to Continental--I went to First National for all the reasons that really existed at Continental that I didn't know, nor did anyone else. So that's how, that's how I started there. And I started as a senior officer in something called Asset Management Liability Committee. And that was in funding the banks. I went there as a funder, that is, I was working the liability side of the--gonna work on the liability side of the balance sheet and how do you fund the bank. And I was going to move to London [England] and bounce around the continent in, with the funding the bank through the jumbo CD's [certificates of deposit] and other kinds of securities that you use to provide for all of the assets. That never, that never, that never happened because, a lot of dynam--internal dynamics that really had nothing to do with me. Story_ID: 4470 Speaker 1: I was on my, on my way to London and, and talked the folks into letting me stay over to--in December of '79 [1979], let me stay over in New York [New York], work on the, something called, in the (adjunct?) office so I could understand the international financing construct. So when I moved to London [England], I would be fairly well, you know, exposed to their business. That was the stated reason. It hit me, is that, who wants to go to a foreign country two weeks before Christmas and you don't know anybody. So I thought--I talked myself into, talking them into letting me wait until the spring. And so I went to New York, and I lived in New York for, oh, four or five months. But I would come back to, to Chicago [Illinois] on the weekends because I didn't want moved my family. And the problem that existed then was that the--there was a lot of trauma which turned into a conspiracy to get rid of the current administration in, at First Chicago [First National Bank of Chicago]. And so I had understood this because when I would come to Chicago--I returned to Chicago from New York on Friday, figuring I'd stay. I wouldn't go back Sunday night. I'll stay over and, and come to various meet--Monday morning meetings. And this is where I'm hearing all of this. And so everybody was moaning and groaning because they had went through this maybe fifteen years earlier where, you know, it's really, it's really a blood bath because if you're a senior officer, if you're a high middle level, up to a senior officer, you've got to choose sides. And if you choose the right side, then everything is rosy. If you choose the wrong side, you'll find your career somewhere else. You'll continue your career somewhere else. And people were saying now, look, especially the old timers, the senior folks that'd been around there fifteen, twenty, thirty years, they didn't want to go out and try to find another job. And how do you know who was gonna win. So I'm listening to this, and I says, you know, I ought to moan and groan too since that's what everybody else is doing. I'm trying to be a part of club. So I'm thinking about it. The incumbent, the one who recruited me and the fellow whose coming in, who came in as the vice chairman, I was closer to than I was to the chairman. And I said to myself, I really don't care who wins this, you know (laughter) because it doesn't affect me. But I had the play the part, so I acted like I was moaning and groaning. But as soon as I got on the plane to go back to New York, I just, you know, I was just as comfortable as I could be. Except that, you know, there was one scenario that no one thought was possible. And that was that the board decided that they could not tolerate another blood bath like they had ten, fifteen years before then and decided to get rid of both the chairman and the vice chairman. Which produced a collective sigh of relief throughout the organization, except with me. I'm not (unclear) I'm this one speck of pepper in this whole sea above, on either side, on--and really below me, all salt. What do I do now? And if I've ever done anything appropriate, right, appropriately correct, is my actions in the next, you know, forty-five to sixty days. You know, I'm sitting here and then there's just an awful lot of these white peers of mine and some superiors, all the executive VP levels, it's got a half, you got a half dozen folks who are above me. Executive VP [vice president], president, vice chairman, chairman. I says, you know, what do I do? Story_ID: 4471 Speaker 1: So I--instead of going to London [England], I talked my way into coming back to Chicago [Illinois] because I didn't want that to be a one-way ticket going to London. I, I knew very few people in Chicago. I knew nobody in London. So I them into it, and I came back and started working in something called strategic planning. But my, my plan was--forty percent was for the bank's strategic plan and the other sixty percent was my personal strategic plan. And what I did was--I won't take you through all of it, but I found out who was gonna be the next chairman. Don't forget, they fired both the chairman and the vice chairman. The vice chairman left immediately, the chairman, they gave him six months until, you know, they went through this transition period. And I found who this person was, and Barry [Sullivan] was pretty hot, everybody knew him, from Chase Manhattan [Bank], out in New York. So I knew all of the accounting firms, posts from accounting firms. So what I did was to contact, find out who were the auditors for Chase. And I found out who that was, and said, who do I know in Chicago? And I found, a friend of mine was, was an auditor, was from a firm that audited Chase Manhattan. I says, who is in charge of auditing First--Chase Manhattan. He told me who, who this person was. It was a young lady, not, not too young, not too young a lady. And I says, well, what is that she needs out of Chicago? Well, that firm--I guess I can give the names since they're no longer--it was Arthur Young [& Company]. The lady was trying to get in, get a foothold in Chicago. All of the banking relationships of Chicago was controlled by a firm called Arthur Anderson [& Co.] because they're domiciled here. But don't forget, you know, the large banks are international operations. And what they wanted was an expatriate audit of the bank--that is, all of the folks who were from Chicago, who lived in the domestic United States--were working offshore, whether it's a specific base in Europe, Asia and Africa or wherever. And so, and they wanted to see if they could get that business, getting their foothold into it. So, okay, let me see what can I do. Now, after she came to Chicago, I says, well, I know the people who are in the comptroller's office, the finance department, which is what you need. Let me see what I can do to get you some of this expatriate business. What can you do to get this fellow named Barry Sullivan, who is the fellow who is rumored to be taking over, to know who I am and get word about me with him? She says, well, let me see what I can do. So, this is over the next, you know, sixty days--forty-five to sixty days. We had constant contact. But I got her this expatriate audit business. And I says, you know, "this is two-way street and so far traffic is just going in one direction." She says, "I'm doing what I can. I'm doing everything I can." That's all the far she would go so I became sort of suspect. Story_ID: 4472 Speaker 1: Anyway, Barry Sullivan's named [chairman of First National Bank of Chicago] in this big thing, and he does this big show. I'm doing strategic planning. So, me and another fellow who was at my level presented him the strategic plan for the whole institution. I mean that's the whole international operation included. And it's a couple of volumes like this, and my labor of love too. I, I really enjoyed doing that. So I'm presenting him the plan--and when he came on board, you know--he had this big massive meeting. He would just, you know, show and tell, sort of thing. Then he brought the senior officers. And you're going around the table identifying yourself and who and what you do with the bank. When he got to me, I says, "I'm Clark Burrus, and I'm in charge of--." And he says, "I know all about you. Next." I said to myself, she did her job (laughter). And so when we did the strategic plan--. Let me do this fast because this is interesting to me, not very exciting. But I had some very strong views on how the structure of the bank ought to get out of the eighteeth century and come up to modern times because you're going through deregulation, right? Now, this--in the jargon of the yester-year--there's the bond department, the treasury department, the research department, and all that sort of stuff. I said, that's garbage. We've got to move over, and we've got to take a page from the investment banks. And we have got to have a capital markets group. And I was saying that the public funds group, the group that marketed against governments, ought to be not unlike what they do in the private sector--that is, they ought to be geared to people who issue debt, not to people who purchase debt, all right? The seller, not the buyer. And the reason for that is, is that over on the distribution side, that is where you sell the bonds that you underwrite, that's a commodity and what they're looking for is price, tenure. That is when the bonds mature. 'Cause they've all got portfolios they're trying to fit in, whether it's a money manager or whether it's managing pension funds, whether it's an insurance agent, a company or not, whatever, you know, whoever. The people that universally buys bonds, they're looking to fit their own portfolio. So it's all commodities. The people who issue the bonds are the people you need to face off against because then you can bring some value other than price, price and maturity. Bring some value, it was a great job without a change. Story_ID: 4473 Speaker 1: And I'm making this presentation to the senior officers, and I'm going off a stack something like this (motions with hands). I'm making this big presentation and Barry Sullivan [Chariman, First National Bank of Chicago] says--now, he's been an old time banker, he says--started pulling his ear. I also got to cool it, when he started pulling his ear, he's getting irritated. So I--he started pulling his ear, and I kind of backed up. And he says, "don't you understand, young man? We have fourteen thousand banks in this country. Most of them have been in business for a hundred, a hundred and fifty years. All of them are structured the way we're structured here. If some, if this were, if this garbage you're talking about had any merit, somebody would have thought about it. Don't you understand that?" And I said, well, Burrus, maybe you need to be in the post office anyway. And so I says, well, I really didn't think that--I just, you know, I, I says, "Mr. Chairman, it might be a whole host of reasons that my suggestions won't work. And the strategy could be flawed, but let me tell you, because nobody's ever thought about it before, is not one of them." He looked at me. He said, "this meeting's over." He, I mean, you could see, he was pulling both ears by then. "This meeting's over with." So I went down, and said, let me get my resume and dust this thing off. He called a mass meeting, two or three weeks later. And it was, he it was a mass meeting so we had to go get the Chicago Theater [Chicago, Illinois] because it had to hold, you know, all hands. And he's sitting there, and he went through his spiel. You know, he was a very articulate kind of guy, and he loved--the type that gets hypnotized by his voice. Then he showed this big thing with the, the organizational chart, you know, the chairman and all this stuff down here. I'm looking at it, fine. It's got names and so forth, because he was trying to convince folks this was not gonna be Chase Manhattan West [Bank]. You know, it was gonna be, you know, stand on its own. And all of sudden, people said, "look, Clark, look." Everything I had recommended, he created. He says, came to me and says, "you felt so strongly about it. I think you're dead wrong, but you're gonna prove it, one way or another. You're in charge of it." That's how I moved from the liability side over to the asset side and became a lender. And the rest is history. And it all from--it just occurred to me that they were structured improperly. They were still making a lot of money, and if we can do this without trying, what can we do if we put our mind to it. Went off the charts, you know. I became in three and a half, four years, I was the second highest producer in the bank. Story_ID: 4474 Speaker 1: And that's when Harold Washington [former Chicago mayor] came in. He says, you know, "Clark, the problem with you"--I never will forget this conversation--"the problem with you is that, as successful as you have been, you are better known on LaSalle Street in Chicago [Illinois] and Wall Street in New York [New York] than you are on Forty-Seventh Street on the South, South side." He says, you know, "I'm want to put you out there." I says, "no, I have no interest in that." I'm, no, that's not, that's not my style. He said, "people want to know you." And I said, and my response to him--and appropriately, by the way--was that, "people who need to know, know." That was not good enough for him. And I think he was probably right, but I have never been one to, you know, fan my own flames. And he did it, and, you know, so I started getting a lot of these recognitions. And I was on, I'm on a thousand boards as you were noticing. I was, I've always been taught to be a joiner. My parents told me that, taught me that because no matter where you go, you never close the door behind you because you never know when you have to go back through that door. And if you want to grow, grow on a solid foundation, not on a foundation of smoke and mirrors. And so what you need to know is, what you need to do is make sure the people who have--who are decision makers, know that you are making this contribution. It never occurred to me that, you know, there were folks on Forty-Seventh Street were, I could be a role model. I intended for that to be. I never ran for public office. Old Man [Richard J.] Daley [former Chicago mayor] told me I could run, you know, "you name it, Burrus. We need you out there." I had no interest in doing that, and I never did. You know, I probably would, you know, kind of like with the fellows I came up with, Wilson Frost and, and the like, you know. There was a handful of us who sort of grew up as minorities in local government. Roland Burris is another one. But, you know, that wasn't my style. And I never really did it to, to the extent that I should have because I was making all public statements, presentations, but they were always about something very technical, you know, which is my orientation. And I never would go out there and talk about the goodwill issues. And I would talk about strategies for issuing revenue bonds, you know. Me and microphone were about the only people interested in listening to it, you know. But that's, that's what I wanted to talk about, and that's what I wanted to be known about by people who were interested in revenue bonds, you know--which is kind of a backward way of thinking about it. So at the bank, I moved up, but I also had access--the reason I could make so much money is because I knew all the people, including the people who, who like me, who was on the other side of the desk, doing what I did for twenty-five years. We're issuers. Now, I was no longer an issuer. I was an underwriter. I was a placement agent. I was a financial advisor, but it's off of the same deal. So I just--I knew the deals and I'm just now doing the other side of the transaction. So we did tons of business, tons of business. And you do, the business the way you--you do what's necessary to, to do to get the business. Story_ID: 4475 Speaker 1: Another illustration. In New England, the Ivy League banks and the universities and healthcare providers, which helped the business I was in, believe that there's nothing in those industries that the New York providers--I mean that the New England providers couldn't provide. As a matter of fact, a guy told me, he says, "my god, you know, you're the first person I've--I always thought everything west of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was nothing but a vast wasteland." You know, because they're looking down on us. And he said, "we've got to-" Because that's where tons of money is, you know. You've got all these Ivy League schools. Harvard [University, Cambridge Massachusetts] has over $6 million in endowments. My god, that's more than some of the states' (laughter) budgets you know. And they're, they're just--and, and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and right on down the line, who are equally as rich, not equally, but in the same tier. So we said, if you want to do business, you got to go there, but all that business is being done out of, either of Boston [Massachusetts] and New York [New York]. I got some products, and I won't take you through the product development part of my, my former life. But we do have some products that were just super. So, the question is how you get there? We went through the front door, and then, you know--they essentially told us they don't talk to peddlers, you know. That might be okay, fine. But there's got to be, there's another way. And we got in. Thank goodness for Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts], Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], Massachusetts General [Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], the hospital and one of the museums. I can't remember which, now wait--. Speaker 2: Not the Museum of Fine Arts? Speaker 1: No, this is more a Museum of Natural History. Well, anyway, right. It was the Museum of Fine Arts [Boston, Massachusetts]. I'm thinking about another town. So we said, we've got to get there. How do you get there? Well, they told us that anything you're doing in banking, the Boston banks can do it. So I stuck my tail between my legs, and we came back to Chicago [Illinois] and thought about it. Said, is that right? Well, who can talk to the Boston banks? Well, I had one fellow was a Ph.D.--worked for--he was a Ph.D. from Princeton. English, English Lit., but he got tired of teaching and so he went and got his MBA from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and so he was in our shop. But, okay, you're a Ph.D. from Princeton? You know, [RR] Donnelly Printing Company? Run by Robert Donnelly who was Harvard, I guess. But they're part of that old, you know, old boy's network. I said, well, you know, we gonna give you credentials. And you can't get to the universities or the healthcare providers or the, or the cultural institutions, but you can get to the Boston banks. Yeah, they're subscribers. So I went out with them (unclear). A major bank in Boston, right. This is a very sophisticated product we have. It's gonna wrap around a CD [certificate of deposit]. And they never really understood it. And I could see them, you know, eyes kind of glazing over as we were going through the technical description. So I'm--I cut that off as practically as I could, started talking about fees. They didn't understand the product, but he understood those fees we were gonna give them. All they had to do was just open the door for us. We did the rest. They sent it through their law departments, and to make sure there was, this wasn't a scam. And I became the biggest provider of financial products to, to the Ivy League schools, Ivy League institutions, in a non New England bank. I still do it. Story_ID: 4476 Speaker 1: So, what do you consider the highlight of your career at the bank? Speaker 2: Well, the high--highlight, was not an event, but a series of processes, which was really moving this thing from this sleepy little cash cow up into a major, major revenue producer, without any more expenses, you know, without any more costs. When I went to the bank, and this is--I'll try to get through this quickly. You can take any organization, HistoryMakers, federal government, international conglomerate, especially those that are in the private sector, you can break it down into two broadly described generic categories. One are cost centers, other is something they call a profit center. And these are all separate, little businesses from an accounting, accounting standpoint, separate little businesses that collectively, they make this company, institution. When I went to the bank, I had some very strong views on what kind of role I wanted to play. And I told the then chairman that, if I come here, I will not be the assistant to anybody. Even the executive assistant to the chairman, which carries a very senior title. I have to be, insist on being, in charge of a profit center, a series of profit centers, not a cost center. And the difference is that--when you look at government, they're all essentially, ninety-nine percent of them--ninety-nine percent of the operation of any government, they're a bunch of cost centers. Because there's no correlation where the money comes from and where it goes. Get the money from real estate taxes on--how they value real estate properties--and you give it to the police who service it over to the poor communities where they have most of the crime is. No correlation. And they violate something called the matching concept which is essentially that all costs, all expenditures, all disbursements, directly or indirectly, are incurred, produce revenue. Then you match, the revenue you brought in, the costs it took to produce that revenue, match those two together and either it comes out black, then you've got a profit, or it comes out red, you've got a loss. No controversy, you know, it's factual. Different in the cost center. Cost centers are units of an entity that incurs costs, produces zero revenue. And it's meaningful, you've got have them. You got to have a law department, you have the bookkeepers, you've got to have the payroll folks and so forth. So to adjudge their contribution to the organization, it's all subjective. It's what your boss's opinion if you're doing a good job. In a profit center, you do a rotten job, I don't care how articulate you are, you're (laughter) still, you're losing money. And no, and no explanation needed, if you're making a ton of money. Says, tell me about your good job. I don't have to tell you about a thing, look at, look at that bottom line. That's all you need to see. And I was determined, you know, that I, I was not gonna be anybody's cost center manager. I don't care what the title was, how much it paid, and where in the hierarchy I would assist in. And that's why they gave me this, you know, this, this unit that Barry Sullivan [Chairman, First National Bank of Chicago] carved out for me. This--these are a series of profit centers, both in the commercial and investment banking business. This is all before they changed the federal law, law in 1986, which had put essentially a Chinese wall in between commercial banking and investment banking for a whole hosts of reasons that I'm not sure you'd be interested in. And I was in Washington [D.C.] representing the bank, weekly, lobbying against it, but they passed the law anyway. In any event, as head of these profit centers--and I could see where each one of those centers were--you know, what, what they were doing. And I could concentrate on the ones that were, were doing less well as some of the others. And we concentrated on them and, and we were sort of at the power point in the industry because of some of the products that we used. That's why we could convince those bankers in Boston [Massachusetts] to, to joint venture with us. They didn't have to under had to understand the products, didn't have to understand what we did. Just understand those fees we were giving you with this--and they're risk free because they took risk. All they did was provide access, you know. We know that, HistoryMakers, we know the Boston, they're big users. Just introduce me. We'll do the rest. Because we go there and tell them how they could prosper using these banking products. Less costs, less risks, higher return. Well, it don't take a rocket scientist to figure that's a pretty good deal. And that's what we did, you know. And we just sort of moved, you know, grew off the map over years. And then when they changed it. At this time, see I was in charge of this group of units. And so then I had to make a decision, was I--cause they changed the law--was I gonna be an investment banker or a commercial banker. I moved over to the commercial--the, the investment banking side of it. But I could still market the commercial banking. But the unique product delivery system was in the investment banking side, not the commercial banking side. That's why I sided with them, but I could still market the bank products, the, the loans and so forth, what you call leveraging the balance sheet. Story_ID: 4477 Speaker 1: But the thrill was doing the, the investment banking. The bad thing about the investment banking, you do a good job as to a big project, have a billion dollar project and you make a ton of money. The very next day, you start out with zero. You know, so there's always someone, you know, what have you done for me lately? But the commercial banking side, you had these annuities, you know, give you a letter of credit for ten years. Well, I've got income coming in for ten years. All I've got to do is service it, you know. So it's volatility in the investment banking, big high's, low low's. Commercial banking, you know, a little volatility and if you do a good job, you just grow. You grow at a slower pace. The ideal thing is to be both, you know, because you can benefit from highs and you can offset these, the, the low's with the commercial banking income, which is pretty steady. And when you put those two together, we just, you know, we were willing to take a lot of risks because we always had the letters of credits and of those sort of things, the loans to, to guard against and help cushion the lows in the investment banking side. So when we ended up doing is, you know, we just sort of grew, not because we were so brilliant, but because we had this untapped market that nobody recognized--realized that existed and recognized how do you get to it. Story_ID: 4478 Speaker 1: And so we just, we just--the other thing that we did was, which was really unique. There's something called a letter of credit that has certain inherent risks associated with it, that commer--domestic banks recognize that no foreign bank recognizes, all right. So the question was how do we do all this investment banking business when it's required, a required letter of credit that is a, is limited, has limited access, accessibility because of the, of the federal government's imposition of restrictions. Well, we've got all of this business out here and all this potential business, but we can't take advantage of it unless we can figure how to get around the letter of credit. And we did this, we, you know, it was almost a night and a weekend. We were just beating our brains out--how do you do it? And the answers, of course, are very simple--always is, once somebody else thinks of it. Since it's a restricted asset on commercial bank--on domestic banks and nothing but free spending for offshore banks. We took our line of credit and wrapped it around the Japanese banks' letter of credit, which they look at it, we took seven-eigths of the fees, they took one-eigth. Well, you say, are we taking advantage of them? Of course not, because all they're doing is, all they're doing is signing that piece of paper, taking--their risks they're taking is our bank's risks. Well, the First National Bank [First National Bank of Chicago] has been there for one hundred-fifty years and it'll be here for another one hundred-fifty years. And they're taking the risk of their underwriter, you know, which is the government. Well, you take the federal government or state government that's underwriting this business, that's guaranteeing, you know, the, the letter of credit. Well if the State of Illinois goes under, you might as well--if the dollar goes under, the country goes under, and we might as well turn the country over to Saddam Huss--no I didn't say that. But it's, you know, clearly, they cannot go under. So and, and the Japanese recognize this, and says, we'll take the, the state's risks and we'll take the bank's risks. And you take the underlying credits risks. Well, we understand the credit. We got people who know more about the credit than the people who own these businesses, you know, the hospitals and the accounting firms and the, the local governments and so forth. People who, you know, our market, target market. And we created something called the pool financing, which I won't you through, but which required this, these massive, you know, hundred of millions, billions of dollars of letters of credit. Wrapped it right around the Japanese banks. They got a eigth of the income, and they are just happy as they could be. And we're taking all the risks, but we understand the risks and we could evaluate the risks. So we don't have to really worry about it if we're as good as we think we are. We made a ton of money. And the only thing stopped it was the federal government sitting up, you know, this bank out there is doing all this business and there's no risk to the user of the letter of credit, no risk to the bank, no risk to the foreign bank. How are they making all this money? And after about five or six years, they figured out the ones whose losing all the money--or is taking a majority of the risks, is the federal government itself, through income tax denial. Boy they worked like the--and I was there regularly fighting against it, but they won the day eventually. Says, you can't do this, you know, (laughter) , we get none of the profits, we're taking all the risks, which was true. That's what we figured when we were trying to work all night. And none of the other banks did. And so--but those, those pool credits were evergreen. You know, they still exists today. We just can't put any new ones on, you know. And the way it simply works is that we provide a large pool of money, hundred million dollars. A hospital, for instance, wants to have a--wants to borrow money--they'll go into this pool and ask for a, for a loan. And this is all tax-free money, now, right, cause it's issued by the government. We go through our analysis process. It's, it's pure insulation against the Japanese banks, and they're--because the other banks, the other foreign banks found out about it so we got some--put a couple of them with Australian banks. And then the European banks, they says, you know, we got to have part of this. Fine, you know, these are our terms. And they jumped into it. So we've got, got billions of dollars outstanding with it. And it worked as long as we could understand the credit, the underlying credit. You know, HistoryMakers Hospital wanted to have, wanted to borrow five million dollars, you know, to renovate their, one of the wings, hospital wings. We'll take it through, go through the whole analysis process because that's our risk, right. If you pass it. Fine, we--you'll get it. The question is, in terms of public purpose, what happens if you don't make, if, if you can't pass the credit screens? Well, we, you know, we've got to do something with you. So what we do is tell you to go to your bank and get them to issue a letter of credit. Give that us, and then we don't have to worry about your credit. We'll just worry about the bank's credit so we'll take it, send it over to our banking group. They'll analyze your, your personal bank. If they pass the test, we give the money to you because if you fail to pay, we don't bother to go back to you. If you fail to pay, we go to your bank, right? So, we've had twenty-one years, we had one failure. And we moved that to cash, then they finally paid out. So we never lost a quarter. That's how we could just go past anyone else, not because we were genius. It was because nobody else thought about it, right. When we did that, that's what the kind of things that Harold Washington [former Chicago mayor] said, you need to go public with. We don't need to go public with this. Nobody's gonna--whose gonna, whose--first of all, whose gonna be interested in it. And more important, who could really understand it? You know, because I'd have to give a lot more discussions than I'm giving you -- descriptions I'm giving you now, and let's say, if they did understand, what--how's that gonna benefit any of them unless own a university or hospital or, you know, a 501(c)(3) [tax exempt charitable organization], anything that has that one common thread to it called exempt from federal income tax. I did all of those. And we just made a ton of money, you know, a ton of money. And we still are, you know, except that they changed the federal law so (laughter), we can't do, we can't do any more, you know. Story_ID: 4479 Speaker 1: You were the first black person really to become a head of--what do they call it? Speaker 2: The profit centers? Speaker 1: Yeah, the profit centers. Speaker 2: Well, the first one that I know of, certainly, the first one in Chicago [Illinois], you know. But, you know, we had progressive banks in New York [New York]. Yeah, I--I don't really know. And they had some--oh, yeah, that, this was back in the '70s [1970s]. You know, now, you've got a number of, you know, this--I was sort of the, part of the trailblazing effort, but now you've got a number of them, you know, except that they've never had a black that has my job, you know, in the commercial banks. Now, they've got some progressive guys in the, in the investment banks, which is (unclear), well, I won't give you names, but one heads up Merrill Lynch. Another fellow's doing the investment banking side of the--scratch that, the commercial banking side of the business for, in Chicago, for Citicorp, you know. They've gotten there. They're moving up now, you know. There's a good number of them. Before it was, you know, when I started out, you know--. Speaker 1: Now, there's been a--when I came to Chicago, we had Independence Bank. Speaker 2: I sat on the board, you know, I served on it's board. Speaker 1: Now, it's defunct. It's now--South Shore Bank has taken over. Speaker 2: It was absorbed by South Shore. It was absorbed by Shore Bank. Speaker 1: Shore Bank, right. And we had Seaway and Drexel Bank. I think those are all black banks. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Independence bought Drexel. Drexel became part of City -- Independence. Independence was absorbed by Shore Bank. So it don't exist. The only one that exists now is at, there are two commercial banks currently existing. One is Seaway and the other Community Bank of Lawndale. There's a savings -- a major savings and loan, the merger of Illinois Federal and Service Federal. Now, it's call Illinois Service Federal. But that's a savings and loan out on Eigty-seventh and--. Speaker 1: [Dr. Martin Luther] King Drive? Speaker 2: Next door to King Drive, Calumet. King Drive, right. Story_ID: 4480 Speaker 1: Can you give me maybe some kind of quick analysis of what some of the problems are with the black banks? I've heard people complain, you know, in the community about the black banks. They want to be--they want to support the black banks with their money. But they want to be, they want, you know, services too. And it seems as though there's always a rife of complaints about becoming a power, I guess, of the black banks to do certain things for the individual that owns a home or (unclear) a small business? Speaker 2: Bankers, by definition, are a conservative group, and I don't mean social conservatism--I mean fiscal conservatives. And you, you, you're successful in banks--now that you have deregulation. Don't forget, when I went into banking, it was highly regulated. So you made money, not because of what you did. You made money in spite of what you did. It was almost impossible to lose money. They had something called the '333' rule. You paid three percent on your deposits, you add three percent to make a loan and you were at the golf course by three o'clock, you know. And it was just--and it's sort of a joke, but it's, there's a lot of truth in that jest. You, you know, almost couldn't lose money. If you were just reasonably prudent. Now, under deregulation, you know, you're out there and the protection is gone. And so there's free space for you to sink or swim based on your own merits. The construct of this country, period, is that the minorities are the last hired, first fired. You know, they--the law of supply and demand comes into play when you--in housing. The only way you can get a house, you've got to pay a premium because you don't have the liberty to move to where your white counterpart can go to buy a home, you know, in the suburbs because it's restricted. Who--with that as a background--who are the black banks to lend to? They lend to people, you know, as, as a commercial loan--I mean as a consumer loan. That loan is not as strong as a white counterpart, not because the black is any less willing to pay off his debts. Times get hard, massive layoffs and they're also gonna come--go to the minority and not to the non-minority. So there's an element of risk associated with it. And don't forget, you know, I'm talking about huge volume, talking about huge volume and then, you know, all you have to do is have the two percent decline in prosperity and that's gonna hit the black community fifteen, twenty percent since they only represent ten percent of the overall population. So I just don't think you need--and I'm saying all this--don't just automatically blame the black banks, you know, they--it's difficult for them to do better. Story_ID: 4481 Speaker 1: Shore Bank [South Shore Bank], Shore Bank is not a black bank. It's just, bank's in the black community. Shore Bank is owned by four major banks in Chicago [Illinois], the largest of which is First Chicago [First Chicago Bank, later Bank One]. That's how I know so much about it. Shore Bank, you know, is shored up, pardon the pun, shored up by the, many of the banks downtown, who are going saying, you go do the things that our board and our federal regulators won't allow us to do. So they put money into Shore Bank. Shore Bank is doing all the housing and the, the high risks loans and the commercial loans for the, you know, the strip shopping places. And, you know, you can consider them more of a government operation than you would a competitive private sector business because they take more risks, but then they're in the business of take, of taking more risks. And that risk is underwritten by the big banks in Chicago who are saying that, we can't do it, but you can. And we'll subsidize your losses. Independence, a board, a bank, you know, that I sat on before it was merged, acquired by Shore Bank, they said they're in the business of making money, not satisfying some social purpose. And utopia, as usual, is somewhere in between the two extremes. But they're saying, we can't loan to--we can't make loans to the black community because of the factors I just mentioned and all the ones associated with it. You know, high risks, you know, they want low returns. The volume is not there. So what they do is come to big banks and, and participate in the AAA loans, right. Or they do the fed funds thing which is, you know, essentially loan the money to the federal government and get a rate on it. And don't' forget, all they have to do is get more coming in from those type of secured investments to cover their costs, and if it does, then they made a profit. But not nearly the kind of risk that they would take, would have to take if they had loaned to you or me. Not because you're less likely--less willing to pay off your loan and I'm less willing, but because our chances of getting fired, of getting laid off, fired or reduced in the, you know, in our working environment, is greater than his (points off-camera) or a non African American. So don't just blame it on the black banks, you know. They're functioning and operating under a different set of rules. And it's a shame, because when I was a kid, we had five times as many black banks as we have now. And--. Speaker 2: In the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Yeah. In the '30s, '20s [1920s] and '30s, oh, sure, yeah, a lot more. Well, maybe the--well '20s and '30s because, you know, don't forget in '29 [1929] all the banks went kind of under. But a lot of the black banks survived, you know, particularly when I was coming up. But that's because the black community hadn't been discovered by the overall community. They didn't know there was kind of money to be made, you know. Now, they know it, you've got outposts of every bank in Chicago in the black community--in the more affluent black communities. And--. Speaker 2: The Northern Trust in Chatham. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Like the Northern Trust in Chatham. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, you have the one on Eigty-seventh, there's a--who is it? I guess that's--Citicorp is right on Eighty-seventh and Stony Island. We put the bank, our bank was--Sixty-seventh--Bank One's bank outpost was on Sixty-seventh and Stony. And we just opened another bank right there on Ninty-fifth and Jefferies, you know. So we have just, we've been discovered, you know, because we're new. We have only been here two hundred years. Now, they're discovering there's money to be made there, which is--it's embarrassing, you know. But that's, you know, what they call the black tax. See what I'm--I'm saying all this to say, you know, just don't blame it on the black banks. You know, they are functioning on a different set of rules. Speaker 2: Sure. That's a good point Speaker 1: A different set of unwritten rules. Story_ID: 4482 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the [Chicago, Illinois] School Board. Speaker 2: Okay, specifically, what would you--what, are you interested, are interested in anything specific or just in general? Speaker 1: In general. Speaker 2: Well, in the early '80s [1980s] when I was with the bank, Jane Byrne asked--the mayor--we did a, the bank did an analysis of the school board and found out that they were broke, number one. Number two, and much more central to this issue, is that the Chicago [Illinois] banks, thereby First Chicago [First National Bank of Chicago], refused to refund their short-term borrowing, which means they couldn't meet payroll and so forth. And that a technical term for that is insolvency. So as I mentioned to you earlier, I was scheduled to come to the bank, and I spent a few months in New York [New York], and then worked the liability side of the balance sheet over in London [England]. When all this happened, you know, around the time before I went to London, they went to the, the big banks went to the mayor and says, we got this major problem. We're going to it through for you, you know, and get it financed. And she was happy and they were happy and left. And then they, when they alone, they figure out, now, who in the world can they get to understand this stuff, you know. So after they kicked it around, they finally got around to me. And I said, well, you know, we'll have a try, you know, we'll see what we can do. And we went through--I won't take you through all of it because it really gets involved. But the problem was some--the magnitude of the problem was something like seven hundred--fifty, eight hundred million dollars. And we had to get a financing together for it. And, and how do you do it? Well, you could, if you tried to just loan the school system that kind of money, you know, the--and because of the public purpose, you know, the bank examiners will make you--prohibit you from executing the loan because it was just--the reward, the return would not be nearly commensurate with the major risks you're taking. So what we did was to go to, to the state government and simply says, you--we can't afford it and you can't allow us to let this whole massive school system close down because they can't pay their bills. And it'd be a black mark against, not only the City of Chicago, but the State of Illinois, something that's never happened in the country and the history of the country. So they work on something. Story_ID: 4483 Speaker 1: When I was with City [of Chicago, Illinois], I had worked on something called Big Mac [Municipal Assistance Corporation, MAC]. A similar kind of problem happened in New York [New York] back in the early '70s [1970s]. And one of the things they did was ask all the CFOs [chief financial officers] from a half dozen major cities of Chicago--of the country to come and help work it out because we all had the same general kinds of dynamics at work. So we all did. So I'm, you know, and we worked on it and we created something called Big Mac. And what it did was to authorize this new corporate authority to issue long-term debt and take the proof proceeds from that long-term debt and pay off short-term notes, all right, which allowed the City of New York to get back into the marketplace. And they could open up and they can make payroll and pay their vendors and so forth. Well, that's not too unlike what happened in Chicago [Illinois] when they had their big problem. And we created then something called the School Finance Authority. And I was familiar with it since I had worked on Big Mac in New York, you know, eight, ten years earlier--seven or eight years earlier. So we made, we structured this and created something called the School Finance Authority. And they issued the debt--as I said, Board of Education had the creditworthiness to issue it. And they took their proceeds from the, the tax levy that they're authorized to, to execute and the proceeds of that went to the school board. And then the, the legislation gave them broad oversight powers to oversee the operation, the financial operations of the school system. Obviously, they couldn't pass a budget unless it was approved by the School Finance Authority. And they couldn't do a lot of things in terms of capital improvements unless it was approved by the School Authority. And so it was really the, the--you couldn't really do anything structurally or financially at the school system unless it went through this School Finance Authority. Well, that obviously created a lot of trauma. So [Mayor] Jane Byrne was looking around for somebody for the school board because they had, you know, folks who were interested in childhood education and so forth sitting on the school board. Nobody really understood the finances. So to cut through it all, she came to me and--on the recommendation of another fellow who she, she respected, and says, "okay, Clark, you know, please come and do this." And I told her I had zero interest and she said, "okay, fine." She hung up and then called the chairman of the board, says you won't do any business with the City of Chicago if you don't put Clark on the school board. And then she, she--the chairman of the board called me and congratulated me for volunteering to go on the school board. That's how I got on the school board. And I told her okay, fine. In the morning, I will do three things for you, Mayor. I'll see to it that the schools open in time. I'll see to it that they're in financial structure. I'll see to it there'll no employee walk-out, strike. And I says, fine. So she says, great. Story_ID: 4484 Speaker 1: So I went on the [Chicago, Illinois] School Board, and I did those three things, you know, and we put the finances in some order. And I, you know, I had very little--I mean I was working full time, so I had very little time I could spend on it. So I didn't spend a lot of time doing the public hearings and visiting schools and kissing babies and cutting ribbons. I did none of that. I mean I was--reorganized it so that I was in charge of everything that was operational. They all reported to me, bypass the school board, bypass the School Finance Authority, bypass the superintendent of schools. All the business reported directly to me, the auditing, the accounting, the purchasing, the data processing, budgeting, insurance, debt, so forth. And that's the only thing I worked on. And I did that and so when we got it straight and by this time Harold Washington [former Chicago mayor] had beaten Jane Byrne [former Chicago mayor] in the election after a couple of years. So I went to Harold Washington and say, "Mayor, you know, this is what I promised. This is what I've delivered, you know, I want out. And I want to be paroled on, I want to be paroled on good behavior." He looked at me and says, "you can't hold me to somebody else's promises" (laughter). He said, "I didn't promise you that," he says, "you've got to stay with me." Cause he knew--he knew and I knew that we were gonna have--there was another major problem on the horizon. And I couldn't let him down. If I was gonna do it for her, I certainly was gonna do it for him. So I stayed on and I sat--it ended up, I was the--in the last, in the thirty-five, forty years--person who lobbied to get off the school board. And I was the only person--I lobbied to get off the school board, and I was only the person in the last thirty-five or forty years who was reappointed (laughter). As I said, I was, you know, it was a five-year term, and I replaced somebody so I had that three or four years--two or three years, something like that. Once I did that, and I delivered everything I said I was gonna deliver, then, you know, I was--let me go, you know, because it was, you know. There's nothing, nothing like, like being attacked by a room full of housewives, arguing about, you know, the welfare of their children. There's no win to that, you know. That's why I never went to any of those public hearings. There was no, it was useless meeting, but you had to do it because the law said you had to do it. I told all the other board members, you do it, I'm not gonna do it. I never did go to one. But anyways, you know, he says, "you can't hold me to somebody else's promises. I need you there. We've got, this other problem's on the horizon. You've got help me work through it." And I said, "fine." So I stayed on it and all the rest of folks were lobbying to stay on the board. And he changed it. He was changing all of it except me. Well, actually, Jane Byrne changed them all except me. Then Harold Washington changed them all except me. And then we went through that crisis. I won't take you through the--. Speaker 2: Jane Byrne got in trouble with her changes. That's how she lost the election. Speaker 1: Sure, in something called the Brogan Broads, yeah. Yeah, I, I worked with them too. And she lost, you know, she lost because, you know, she replaced two fairly high profile, active black ladies--came from Operation PUSH [later the Rainbow/PUSH coalition] too--with these two white ladies who were uncaringly referred to as the Brogan Broads. They came from the Brogan High School, which is one of the most segregated, racial, highly racial tensioned communities--. Speaker 2: On the Southwest side of the city. Speaker 1: On the Southwest side. Right. Story_ID: 4485 Speaker 1: I was also appointed to the RTA [Regional Transportaion Authority], you know, in the meantime, back in the early '80s [1980s]-- Speaker 2: The Regional Transit Authority. Speaker 1: Regional Transit, but they were changing the--they changed the legislation, they were changing the legislation, but--and they created a new board called the Interim Board to structure it, this change, you know. Which essentially shift just in the--the balance of power went from Chicago [Illinois] to the, a little bit to Suburban Cook [County, Illinois], but other surrounding counties and there was there's the Financing Department and so forth. And we--this is really--I was appointed on that by [Illinois state representative] Mike Madigan because I mean, you know, this is, it deals primarily with finance. I was appointed to it and became Vice Chair and--but it had a shelf life of just one year. It was over with so that was fine because I could get off of it. Well, at the end of the year, the new legislation says that appointments would go between the governor and the, and the mayor. And they were having major, still having some other funding problems with the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], and they had somebody look out for the interest of the CTA. So in a sense, he encouraged me to stay on, which I did do. And then when the CTA ran into some serious problems, you know, the then chairman of the RTA went to the then mayor, which was [Eugene] Gene Sawyer--this is after [Mayor] Harold Washington died, and insisted that I go over to leave the RTA, go over to CTA and be the chairman, which I did do, which meant I, I had to resign my post as an RTA board member. But as soon as I got to the CTA, I was elected chairman of the CTA, I became ex-official back on the RTA Board. So I--that transition lasted about two seconds, you know. So I was right back, so I just ended up with two jobs, you know, Chairman of the CTA and a member of the RTA Board. And I stayed there for eight years, you know, until I says I got to get off. I--by that, by this time Richard [M.] Daley is mayor. I went to him and told him, I, I've got to leave. You know, I'm just getting up to the kind of age where, you know, I don't have the--I have the will, but not the energy, you know, to do all these jobs and service my responsibilities at the bank. But, yeah, I say, I served on all of them, you know, and plenty others too, by the way. Story_ID: 4486 Speaker 1: Did you experience any crisis at CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] while you were there (unclear)? Speaker 2: Not more than two or three a day. Yeah, it was--there was this financial crisis and it was worst of all. Of all the agencies I worked with, all except one--that was, and under no circumstances would I I, would I go on the board of the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]. That was just horrible, you know. Because there was no institutional value provided by the CHA. So the infra--this power structure, the infrastructure of the City [of Chicago, Illinois] can't support CHA because you're talking about just one hundred forty or fifty thousand poor folks who are just there. They--you do a good job and the City doesn't function any better and you do a rotten job and they don't function any worse, if you think about it. Unlike the school system or the transportation system. You don't have the transit system, city comes to a grinding halt. You don't have an educational system, you know, everybody moves somewhere else. You got the C--you got the, the CHA, poor folks actually in the poor communities, which are just high-rise ghettos, who gives--who really cares? Speaker 1: I've got two questions--two, you know, financial crises, that I remember during CHA and CTA. I just wondered what you thought about them. The first one is CHA, the scandal with Charlie Swibel [real estate developer], I think, switching the bank, you know, the deposits from one bank to another and then buying Lake Point Towers [apartment complex]. That got him in trouble. Speaker 2: Lake Point Towers? No, you mean Marina City [apartment complex]. Speaker 1: Marina City, yeah, I'm sorry, Marina City. Speaker 2: What about it? Well, I'm familiar with it. What's the question? Speaker 1: I just wanted to know what you thought, you know, what your thoughts were about that. It was such a public--it dealt with public funds and manipulation of public funds to make gain and it was all in the paper--. Speaker 2: Oh, I would have talked to you at--I am familiar with it. I would have talked to you at length, if you hadn't mentioned names--. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But now that you've done that, let me just that it was improper. And if the players had been a little different without, you know, significant support, there would have been many indictments. But it wasn't. He survived. And, now, and CHA survived. What he did with the banks was just (pause) indefensible. And how, you know, that whole set of scenarios played out with nobody getting any more than a slap on the wrist is sort of beyond me. Speaker 1: It had to do with power, I suppose. Speaker 2: You got that one right. Or as some might say, the misuse of power. Story_ID: 4487 Speaker 1: Now, the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], there was a--and CTA had a barn on Seventy-ninth Street, West Seventy-ninth Street. And there was, I guess in the late '70s [1970s], there was a big scandal over how money was being processed over there. It was like a counting room with money all over the floor, and it was just, it was trailing all through the building. Do you remember that? Speaker 2: I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the first place is, what you just recited was the way the media reported it, which was simply not true. One of the board members, I guess he's no longer a board member, so I guess I can mention his name. He--who was stirring up the controversy, was a board member whose name was Howard Medley. He had very good intensions. And so I say nothing to criticize him. But the media overstated the nature of the problem. And I guess it's all past now, so let me tell you how I addressed that problem. When they were saying money was all over the floor and so forth, and it's trailing outside of the guarded room. That's simply not true. It was all over the floor, yes. And the way--what I did, and I committed the media to not reveal the source or the location. I took him to the biggest bank in the city and showed how they treated their, managed their--it was called coin and currency processing. And I took him down there. First National Bank [of Chicago], same thing. And, you know, probably the next quarter they find is missing, probably be the first one in the last twenty-five years because they've got other secured measures, certainly stronger at the bank than they had out at CTA. But, you know, because money was on the floor--you try to get out of that room with it. You know, I mean it was virtually impossible. And that's not just true with First National. That's true with all banks. You can go out, and do the same thing with Seaway, who has a large coin and currency operation, coin and currency management operation. And, you know, they're, they're, you know, this is something that's been tried and true with all the folks, all the organizations that handle coin and currency. And they've got it down to where it's difficult, if not impossible to steal any money. And CTA was no different. It's just that he went out there and saw it there. He says, oh, my goodness, look at this here. Let me get the press out here. Look what they're doing. They're just stealing money hand and fist and we're going, we're going under, and here is all this money just laying around. You know, what he didn't say was, you know, that the shoes, the, the garments that they're wearing--you'd probably have to swallow a dime to get it out of, get it out of that place without being detected. And it might even get detected then. Now, that's well intentioned, misplaced. Story_ID: 4488 Speaker 1: Okay, now there are a couple anecdotes you wanted to talk about. Do you remember what they are? Speaker 2: Well, let me see, one. Washington, D.C. The folks there, the finance people and the mayor, came to see me--this has got to be mid '80s [1980s]--early to mid' 80s, and they, they're under the gun. The federal government says we're no longer going to finance your operation in Washington, D.C. Get out to the credit markets--the capital markets and finance your own operations like all the other cities and states in this country. Okay, they're finding that they didn't, really didn't have any choice. They had to do it. They're going out, and one lawyer found a violation in their charter. In simple terms, what it said was that, if you loan the federal--the, the District of Columbia money, you cannot enforce collection. Because the fact of the matter is the District of Columbia, Columbia didn't exist, legally. And everybody's challenges, the lawyers, you know, a room full of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] lawyers got in the room and said, yeah, that's true. We've got to fix it, and they did fix it so there was no--. But in the meantime, payroll is done, was due next Friday, payroll for the police and fire and two payrolls you don't ever want to miss is the police and fire. What could they do? Well, the banks and the numbers are so large, the banks in D.C., great, big, the largest, they didn't the capacity to do it nor did they know how to do it. So it went to the, to the banks, the big banks in New York [New York]. And they, they looked at it because--the word is perfect. They couldn't perfect collections, that is, you couldn't enforce collecting because the entity that you loaned the money to didn't legally exist. So what could they do? So they heard about me, they came to me. And they says, you know, they described in more detail what I just described to you. Says, we've got to have it because we've got police and fire payroll. Plus, we've got, you know, all the other bills, all the vendors, all the other payroll folks and so forth and all the capital improvements, and, you know, we got to have some money. They needed $350 million. You know, what makes you think we're different. He says, well, you know, you have a reputation of being creative and innovative, you know. Can you see, figure out a way of getting around this? I said, explain this to me again. They explained it. He explained it. And I says, I'm deaf, explain it to me a third time. They explained it. I said to myself, something's wrong with you because the answer's real simple. I didn't understand why nobody else could figure it out. So I called my lawyer--and more of the bankers that worked on this sort of thing--called them in and says, "let me describe to you what I've just heard. And, you know, I want you to take it out in that room and think about it. You understand? No comment, no conversation, just think about it." I described it. I says, "is that correct?" And they're looking at me, my, my lawyer and my, my banker are looking. Their eyes were this big cause they saw just what I saw. I said, "well, you, you go back and I'll get in touch with you in the next day or so." They said, "we can't wait that long." I says, "I'll get in touch with you tomorrow, before the end of, end of the day tomorrow." So they, they left and they were saying please help us cause, you know, the D.C. banks couldn't do it. The New York banks wouldn't, couldn't do it, for the reason I just stated. And how could I do it? I called, called my lawyer and my other banker in. I says, "did you hear what I just heard--did you hear what I just said?" He says, "that's what we did with the RTA [Regional Transit Authority]." I says, "absolutely." But he says, "well, why didn't you tell them? You could be a hero." I said, "no, if we come in there--we give it right, give it to them right away, then they'll charge us market rates--we can charge them market rates." He said, "that's right." I said, "we work all night on it, we can charge them market, plus," you know (laughter). Oh, I shouldn't be saying this on (unclear). And so, what--I says, but how we know whether what they're saying is true. So I took both of them, and I got another lawyer who has worked on these kind of transactions. "You go to Washington, see whether this, you know--if my understanding of what they're telling me is correct and their understanding is correct on what they're telling me." They went back and they called me back. My partner says, "absolutely," you know. As a matter of fact, the lawyer who found it was a friend of mine. I won't give you his name. And so I called him and says, you know, "is this true?" He says, "yes, you can't--they can't, they can't perfect the loan, so we can't lend it, period." Okay, fine. What we did then was just, we told them, says, you work with us--I was talking to the mayor and this finance guy, work with us--and we have been trying to penetrate that market--says you do this for us Burrus, you can have anything you want. I says, we'll see if we can work it out. I think we can. He says, well, yeah, they were just, you know, they were just, they were elated. Well, all we did--because clearly, you know, if the, if the District Attorney--District of Columbia was not creditworthy, if we can get somebody else to pick up the credit, then we forget about the District Attor--District of Columbia, right? Well, whose paying the District of Columbia? Well, it's the federal government. Well, now, wait a minute, the federal government ought to be creditworthy, don't you think? You know, they print the money, you know, so they ought to be pretty creditworthy. All we did was capture the stream of revenue for--you know, they, they don't real estate taxes. What they do is provide the District of Columbia government something they call 'payment in lieu of taxes', all right. We captured that. Put it in escrow and put it in a Washington bank, took our money off the top. We didn't care whether they were creditworthy or not. We didn't care what they were, because really what we did was transpose the credit risks from the District of Columbia to Washington, D.C., very simple, right? But nobody ever thought of it, you know, it only can work once, you know, when you think about it. Everybody knows because it's no longer product, it becomes a commodity. But nobody had done it before. That's not true. We did it with the RTA. That's what rang this bell, but I--in my head when they described it because I'm saying the answer is simple--if I'm understanding this correctly. That's why I kept making them explain it to me over and over again. Then after I told them to hold on, let me get my banker and my lawyer in here because they had worked with me on the RTA. And then I said, don't say a word. Just go out and think about it cause I knew they--I assumed they were gonna see it just like I did if I (unclear). We worked every deal that Washington, D.C. has issued since. They do nothing without us, and we made, made good money off of it. But, you know, I don't back in the door when I tell this story because if it was so simple, why couldn't the D.C. banks or the New York banks do the same thing we did? Or think about it the same as we did. You couldn't, there's no way you can, you could accept the risk of D.C. So we forgot about that and transferred the risks. The IRS [Internal Revenue Service] had been trying to get them in there, perfect their charter in certain time--you can't do that. That's got to go through [U.S.] Congress, you know (laughter). They can't do anything in six months. So we forgot about them and transferred the risks over to, to the feds, and we captured this stream of revenue--see, we didn't have to perfect the collection against D.C. D.C. never got the money. It went to escrow. We took ours off the top and escrow paid D.C. what was left. And they can afford it. Story_ID: 4489 Speaker 1: Sir, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Well, the concerns I guess are that we, we haven't changed. We, we've been taught through our limited history to, not only not support, but not trust our fellow man. And we were taught this by our slave owners. And as long as we continue to have that kind of mindset, we're gonna be something less than second-class citizens. As you can see now, you know, it used to be black and white. Now, we're bringing all the Asians, folks in from the islands and so forth. And we're still on the bottom and they're propped over on top of us. And, and this is not a criticism of the, of the Latinos and the Mexicans and the people from Vietnam and from Korea, other parts of the Pacific Basin and from Northern, Northern African or Eastern Europe. It's just that they come as a group that has a culture and a history and a set of traditions. We have a slave mentality and I--if, if I have any hope, it will be that we eventually start believing in and more importantly, supporting one another. When I look at the community, you know, when I think when I was a kid back in the '30s [1930s], you know, it was a lot of the Swedes and the Nordic folks who had the stores up and down Sixty-third Street. And then a move, you know, it had the Greeks and then the Jewish folks. And now, well, we have people we didn't even know when we were kids, the people who are the brown skinners, the, the Arabians and the--not so much the Latino--but the folks from the Pacific Basin. You know, the, the Thais, Cambodian folks, Korean and to a lesser extent the Chinese and Japanese. The Chinese, of course, I guess they're moving, being more acceptable in the bigger community. And the Japanese, certainly not, because they're looking at big business. You know, they're not looking at the storefronts. But in the community that I live in, I see that the--Eighty-seventh Street is very prospering, which is good news until you look and see who owns the businesses. And they all seem to have yellow skin and slanted eyes. And that bothers me because they don't know any more about the business than our folks do, and a whole lot less about the community than our folks do. But we don't trust one another, number one, and we don't have access to capital, number two. Which is not something I fault ourselves on. But I fault the financial community. You know, it's that blacks just simply can't get financing at the same rate and the same speed that non-blacks do. So if we could break that down, and it's easy for me to sit here and say, but we could break all of that down if we just stop supporting the non-black-owned businesses. And people say there are penalties to that. And it's probably right. The price has got to go up slightly because we can't buy from the wholesaler at a price that our competition buys for the--so there's a whole area of institutional racism. But green will overpower both black and white. If we don't buy it from the ones who are there and says we will buy it from the blacks, then they've got to start selling to the blacks at the same price they sell to the non-black community. And then we, we can build capital. Story_ID: 4490 Speaker 1: You know, I have a big argument with the senior folks at the bank and they're saying, what the black community needs is are jobs. And I says, that's not true. We don't need jobs. What we need is the ability to create jobs. Then we don't have to keep coming back to you when you decide to close your, your operation down and move somewhere else or you make a lot of money and you take that capital somewhere else. As long as we have this restriction in where black folks can live--if we can get the black folks to own the stream of commerce in our community, then that's fine because then the blacks would have the black entrepreneurs who have made it big and made it big, made it very big, would set up the--that excess capital back into our own community. And we can create our own jobs. We no longer have to depend on you to go out there and tell us--and get jobs for us. Because when you look at, every industry that closes down, you see the black community going down to nothing. The steel mills on the Southwest side, they closed down, you know, because they didn't keep up with the times. We had plenty of jobs then. We don't have those jobs now. A friend of mine ran a shoe store on Fifty-first Street for a little better than twenty years for a white owner. The owner got old so he ran the store and ran, just ran it period because the white owner moved to Florida or some place. And when he came periodically, everything was intact. And the black fellow says, well, now, I've worked for you for better than twenty years. You've earned money, I've made sure, you've checked the books. Nothing was missing. You've grown, you've prospered. I want--I've saved my money. I want to buy it, buy the business. He says, no. He wouldn't sell it to him. And he gave him some reason that, you know, I can't repeat here because I don't know whether it's true or not, but wouldn't sell it to him. He says, well, there's nothing about this business I don't know. I probably know more about it than you do. And the owner says, I agree with you, but I can't sell it to you. Sold it to his, sold or gave it to his son-in-law, who came in and says, you know, I'm gonna run this business. And I've got to learn it. I'm going to make all the decisions and they were out of business in twelve, fourteen months. And my buddy's sitting there with, you know, all of his savings, can't get in the business, and was gonna pay top dollar. Story_ID: 4491 Speaker 1: Another illustration was I lived in New York [New York] when I was working the, working out of our New York office of the bank. 125th Street in Harlem [New York] is the commercial section of the community where all the local businesses are. Not one, not one is owned by a black, starting with the high-profile Apollo Theater to the shoe shine parlors. All owned by whites. And I'm saying, you know, why don't we just get there and just don't buy from them. You know, if you're gonna pay the, this excess price for your goods, why don't you just go downtown and give it to, where the one of the, you know, the big departments stores are down there. They say, well, it's too difficult to get there. Well, yeah, but it's not nearly as difficult as--you know, you're paying your money to non-community residents who are taking the capital, that is, the excess of revenues over costs, that commercial capital--they take that out of the community to wherever they live. You know, I don't know where they live, but I do know where they don't live. They don't live here in Harlem, you know. And so we've got to change our mindset. And if we do, that changes actions of the folks who sell to us because if we don't buy, they've got to sell now. Now, I'm talking about the wholesalers and the manufacturers. Their prices will, the prices will go down and the volume will increase. And the capital that's generated by definition, it's plowed right back in the same community. We just can't seem to make--because we've got that slave mentality-- we can't seem to make that transition. I call it a quantum leap to have some, you know, hardships, you know, paying a few extra dollars because, if you a black grocery store here and a white grocery store over here, then the wholesalers are gonna charge--sell it to the white grocery store a little, a little less than he's gonna sell it to the black grocery store. Given that, buy it from the black and then pretty soon that white, you know, no matter how low they're paying for it, does not sell those products, he's going out of business. Then he's got to sell at market price to some black that the community will support. As long as that community supports him at his prices that are a few pennies less than his competitor around the corner in a less attractive spot, then we'll always be having jobs, working for income, as a capital that's working for us. Story_ID: 4492 Speaker 1: How do you suppose--and this is a question I know, I've heard this discussed before (unclear)--. How do you suppose such a message could get to the black community and how do you, you know--I think that may be--. Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure. But I think, you know, what we've do is stop preaching the good, all the good we can expect in the here-and-after and start thinking about the good we can generate right here. You know, we, we do support those institutions that we believe in, primarily, the church. If the church then could--if we could have the same moral and social and, and pure support for the economic well being as opposed to the spiritual well being, then I think we could make that transition. But that's hard. I recognize it's hard because we've been taught through the last several hundred years that we've been in existence that there are some things that you, that will never change. One is the infer, inferiority of the dark skin, not only thoughtfully, but morally. I mean how many times have you seen blacks says, I ain't gonna trust him because he's black. I don't ever hear that from the Jews or the Greeks or the Chinese or any other group that's been around for generations long enough to have tradition and culture. We don't have it. When we were brought over, the people from the same tribes were split up, to make sure they can never speak anything but English. They couldn't even have the names they brought over. They gave--they were given our names, you know. You know, and so Burrus wasn't brought here from, from Africa. Burrus was, is French and something. So I don't have that identity so I don't have the, the cultural links. Like one young black activist told me, he says, you know, the reason he won't support the white administration is because they gave me their god and took away my liberty. And I think there's a lot of truth to that, you know, because we are a very religious group. And we support our church, which I think is all great. But it shouldn't be done at the expense of our well being while we're here on earth. You know, we ought to live for the benefit of ourselves before we die and then go to the here-and-after for whatever, wherever that, that is there to provide us. And I feel very strongly about that, you know. And every time I preach it, you know, folks say--I would say some similar things, you know, you want me to give up my so and so and so. Think about all of the large businesses that we've had right around this country, right around this, this community. I don't think any of them exist any more. Once they get big, they get bought up. Johnson Products [Company], Afro Sheen [hair care product], what's the one on Eighty-seventh Street? Speaker 1: Soft Sheen [hair care product]. Speaker 2: Soft Sheen, all of the banks. You know, we don't have any--we only have two banks and one savings and loan. And all of the major institutions that come out in our community--but don't forget, all the good that First--that Bank One [previously First National Bank of Chicago] is doing--my company--that's doing for the, the black community. That capital goes right back downtown to the shareholders, which I'm one of them. But ninety-nine percent of them are outside of our community. And they're the ones who are benefiting from it. And, you know, it seems to me if we could figure out some way to convert that income to capital, then you don't work for it. See, the difference between income and capital is you work for income. Capital works for you. And we've done it. But see all of the large businesses, the attractive business, the successful ones, you know, are being sold out to the large conglomerate. And it's this, which generates self--immediate self gratification. You know, got these $15 million or so. I can do all the things I want to do, which is all right except that you're--it seems to me that you ought to be doing something that can provide you the same level of return and do something that your children can benefit from. And all of, all of the large--I'm sure there's got to be some that are left over, but, around that I can't thing of offhand. Story_ID: 4493 Speaker 1: Johnson Publishing [Company] is about the only thing [large, black owned company] that's left. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--I was gonna mention that, I was getting ready to mention that one, but you named it, so I can't because it's not all gonna be kind. But it has, no, it has not been. Some of the things there, that, there's certain institutions that we have in our community that we'll always have. And that's good news. The bad news is they're always ones that are low payouts. You don't see any white owning a lounge. You see them own all the liquor stores, right. Now, there's got to be a reason for that. And the reason's pretty obvious. It is, the lounge can, in the lounge, you can high and low, there's a lot of volatility. Kenwood Liquors has been there--was there when we moved, I moved in that community which is thirty some years ago. And it's still there now, and it's growing. I don't know one lounge, and we had--I don't know the names--but I don't know one that is, that is, has survived through more than two, what's called economic cycles, you know, peaks and valleys. They don't survive because they're, you know, they're there for the hot item today, you know, and there might be somebody else move, opens one down the street or in another neighborhood that they all run to. And which is, you know, appropriate, but it seems to me what we ought to be doing is owning the liquor stores, not the liquor lounges, you know. Then we have stability and we have growth, you know, and you call that the dynamics of income acquisition. You know, and I don't want to be technical about it, but the point is it means that if we don't own it, all we get is income. If we own it, we can generate capital. Story_ID: 4494 Speaker 1: Sir, what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. I don't, I don't think about it because it's not important that people remember me--to me. It's not important that they remember me. It's important that they remember what I've said and what I've done and what I've tried to do. Emulate it, improve on it, you know, because it's Clark Burrus, not John Doe. I, I don't know. I really don't know. Some thing that I, I feel strongly about that, you know, this whole question of capital versus income. The other is when you grow up, you know, if you're going to make a major lasting institutional change, then you've got to bring folks up with you. You get on top and you stay on top for one of two reasons, only. One is that you get up there and put your foot down and let, don't let anybody else challenge you. You can stay there, right. You're locking them out, but what you're also doing is locking yourself in. The alternative is to, as you bring yourself up, build up this very strong base, so not--so you're not locking them out, but when you get ready to stumble, they're there to help you, put you back up. I think you can grow faster that way. We as a people have chose the former, not the latter. And that I, I resent it, I reject it. You know, and I'll always argue against it. And it don't have to be Clark Burrus. I'm not interested in people remembering Clark Burrus. I just hope they can benefit from the, what I've done, what I've tried to do. And, you know, people who need to know, will know. Speaker 1: Okay, well, this is slightly different. The next question is like how would like to be remembered? Speaker 2: If people could think of me as being someone who tried. Tried to--and this I've done--we haven't talked about philanthropy at all here--but I've tried to give back a little that I've earned. Something I was taught early on in my life by my folks, always try--never forget from where you're from. And whatever it is, give back, give a little of it back. Try, and I've always done that. And I don't care whether anybody remembers it or not. I just hope people who are recipients of what I tried to give back, they benefit from it. That's what important to me. Whether the remember Clark Burrus, I'm indifferent about. Story_ID: 4495 Speaker 1: I know your mother [Mattie Hall Burrus] died in the '40s [1940s], right? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Hmm? Speaker 1: While you still in college. I said, your mother, I think died when-- Speaker 2: No, my father died when I was in high school. My mother died in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: '60s, okay. Did she get a chance to see you become a successful? Speaker 2: (pause) Yes, but she saw the success of where I started to where I was when she died. But my career was more like this. She didn't see any of this. And I that really, that really bothers me. My brother [Lamar Burrus] saw some of it. He lived--he was a little older than me. He lived until 1986, '87 [1987], something like that. My father [Lemmie Burrus], of course, he died when I was in high school. And, yeah, I, I would have liked for them to, to see the product of their sacrifice, you know. Speaker 1: And in light of that in the sense that--can you maybe--? What do you think about the value of this kind of project, the oral history project? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's just absolutely super, and I'm telling you I--there's only one thing wrong with it. I didn't think of it. Other than that, I see, I see no problem. It's, you know, having any kind of archive is something that we, as a people, need. To have it audio and video is a quantum leap over anything that I ever imagined. And I just commend you and all of your colleagues for thinking of it and doing something about it. There are lot of ideas whose time hasn't come, and they sort of die on the vine. Apparently, you've hit this one to, to plant a seed and it's taking root, growing. And I'm telling you if there's anything I can do to help you, other than get out and make a, on the stump. And, yeah, I'm telling you for something like this, I might even do that, even do that. But I would, I would love to do something to help you. And it's a, it's a shame it's not better known, you know. Story_ID: 4496 Speaker 1: Well, this is a photo of me in my office at the First National Bank of Chicago. And it's a--the building in the background is the Xerox Building. And the view is facing South, South, Southeast. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus in his office at First National Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4497 Speaker 1: I was the honoree--I was honored as being the first King of the DuSable Museum Carnival. My queen was one of your HistoryMakers, Jewel Lafontante MANkarious. And the bishop there is Logan--John Logan--I think it is. No, scratch that--Al Logan. It was taken at the DuSable Museum. Speaker 2: [Al Logan, Jewel Lafontante MANkarious and Clark Burrus (right) at the DuSable Museum Carnival, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4498 Speaker 1: That's me with the entertainer, Danny Thomas, when I presented him with an award at one of the hotels downtown. And this would have to have been in the mid '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus (left) and entertainer, Danny Thomas, Chicago, Illinois, ca. mid-1980s. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4499 Speaker 1: I was either giving a speech or something or award or something. I don't remember. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus giving a speech, not dated, from the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4500 Speaker 1: This is when I was the chairman of the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] and with me in that picture is current state's attorney--what's his name? Speaker 2: Dick Devine. Speaker 1: Dick Devine and John Schmidt, the former candidate for, a former candidate for governor of the state. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus (right), Illinois State's Attorney Dick Devine (left), and John Schmidt, Chicago, Illinois, ca.1990s. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4501 Speaker 1: This is a golf outing. That's me on the far right. Next to me is Al Ronan, a former state legislator and the, now a political consultant. Next to him is [Chicago, Illinois Alderman] Ed Burke whose ward committeeman and chairman of the Finance Committee for the [Chicago] City Council. And the fellow on the far left is a name that I can't, I just can't recall right away, but he is a former head of the Department of Insurance for the State of Illinois. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus with other Chicago politicians on a golf outing; (L. to R.): Unidentified man, Chicago Alderman Ed Burke, Al Ronan, and Clark Burrus at a golf outing, not dated, from the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4502 Speaker 1: This was taken at the Westmoreland, Westmoreland Country Club. Standing on the far left is--who is head of the Krug [sic, K-Five] Construction Company, which is one of the principal investors in the original riverboat casino. Standing on the far right is [Michael] Quinlan who is a recently retired chairman, CEO [chief executive author] of McDonald's Corporation. I'm seated to the left and that's a fellow who owns a consulting firm, Tom, Thomas Riley, owns T. J. Riley & Associates. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus with other Chicago-area businessmen on a golf outing; (L. to R.): Mr. Krug, Clark Burrus, Thomas Riley and Mike Quinlan, Wilmette, Illinois, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4503 Speaker 1: That is the current Mayor, Richard M. Daley in the center, me on the right and the fellow on the left is, was the highest ranking black banker in my division, Chris Owens, Chris Owens--Christopher Owens, who I had programmed to replace me when I left the bank and they did not do so. Speaker 2: [Christopher Owens, Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley, and Clark Burrus (right), ca. 1990s. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4504 Speaker 1: That's me on the far left, in the center, [Cook County, Illinois Board President, John] Stroger, and then on the far right is [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Harold Washington. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus (left), John Stroger, and Chicago Mayor Harold Washington, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4505 Speaker 1: The far left is Howard Medley, business man on the South Side who was a member of the R--CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] Board and also a member of the Board of Election Commissioners. And next to him, the gentleman in the middle is the--I'll think of his name in a minute, the paymaster from the Comptroller's office. On the far right is [Chicago Mayor] Michael Bilandic and the lady there is a lady I was very proud of who was the very first female and the first black Assistant Comptroller in the history of the City of Chicago. And we were honoring her at that time. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus with Chicago Mayor Michael Bilandic and colleagues from the City of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1977; (L. to R.): Howard Medley, Clark Burrus, unidentified man and woman and Mayor Michael Bilandic. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4506 Speaker 1: Standing is Roland Burris, standing to the left is Roland Burris, former Attorney General, former State Comptroller. And [Mayor] Michael Bilandic next to him. On the far left is myself. The lady in the center is the Secretary of Agriculture for the [President Jimmy] Carter administration. And to next to--in the lower right is the name we were trying to think of--somebody, somebody's got to know his name. He's dead now, but he did all of the--Frank, Frank Parker, Frank Bacon, Frank--I'll think of it before I leave here. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus and colleagues from the City of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1977; (Front row, L. to R.): Clark Burrus, unidentified man and woman; (Back row, L. to R.): Roland Burris and Chicago Mayor Michael Bilandic. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4507 Speaker 1: When I graduated from college-- Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus in his college graduation portrait from Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois, 1954. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4508 Speaker 1: That is, from left to right, me, next to me in the wedding gown is Heather Bilandic, Heather Morgan Bilandic and [Chicago Mayor] Michael Bilandic and my wife, Lucille. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus (left), Heather Morgan Bilandic, Chicago Mayor Michael Bilandic and Lucille Burrus at the Bilandic wedding, Chicago, Illinois, 1977. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4509 Speaker 1: That is the cover of the 'Dollar and Sense' magazine that reflects what they call the tripod of financial management in the City of Chicago [Illinois] at the time. That was Wilson Frost on the left, who was chairman of the Finance Committee and Joe Bertrand in the center, who was city treasurer, and me sitting on the right, chief, City Comptroller and CFO [chief financial officer]. Speaker 2: [Wilson Frost, Joe Bertrand and Clark Burrus (right) on the cover of 'Dollars and Sense' magazine, October-November 1978. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4510 Speaker 1: That's a picture, me on the left and Cecil Partee who at the time was a state senator--I mean, scratch that--the state's attorney. And he was introducing me as the chairman of the Hate, the first Hate Crimes Committee of the [Cook County, Illinois State's Attorney's Office and the first Hate Crimes Committee in the State of Illinois.] Speaker 2: [Cook County, Illinois State's Attorney Cecil Partee and Clark Burrus in a clipping from the 'Chicago Defender', Chicago, Illinois, December 20, 1989. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4511 Speaker 1: That's the chief of staff at the comptroller's office on the far left. It's me in the center--I mean that's my wife [Lucille Burrus] in the center and me on the right. And this was celebrating my 25th Anniversary with the City of Chicago. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus (right) with his wife celebrating the 25th anniversary with the City of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1979; unidentified man on the left is the Chief of Staff of Chicago's Comptroller's Office. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4512 Speaker 1: That is, was taken in 1985. On the far left is Ruth Love, Dr. Ruth Love, who was the superintendent of the Chicago [Illinois] Public School System. In the center is Richard Thomas, who at the time was president, who later became the chairman of the board of the First National Bank [of Chicago]. On the far right is myself. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus (right) with the Superintendent of Chicago Public Schools, Dr. Ruth Love, and Richard Thomas in a newspaper clipping, Chicago, Illinois, 1985. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4513 Speaker 1: Okay, this is--when I went to the national post I was--at the, at the time, I was the first minority to serve on the Board of the Government Finance Offices of Association of the United States and Canada and England. And that was in 1973, '4 or something like that. But this is recognizing me as being the first minority to be elected president of the, of this international group. Speaker 2: [Clark Burrus in a clipping announcing his appointment to a national finance post, ca. 1973. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4514 Speaker 1: This is the, the sketch of the group that I headed with my team leaders on either side of me. And this was run, an advertisement that was in the 'Wall Street Journal,' 'New York Times,' 'Barrons' of England and one other paper, one other San Francisco [California] papers. Strangely enough, it was not, I don't think it was in any of the Chicago papers, the assumption being that everybody in Chicago [Illinois] knew about it, about us. Speaker 2: [Drawing of Clark Burrus (with glasses) in an advertisement for First National Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4515 Speaker 1: --Carnival Ball, which was the first one, which I was the king and my wife is to the right, Lucille, and to the left is Jackie, Jacqueline Marshall who was the, who was my assistant at the, at the bank [First National Bank of Chicago]. Speaker 2: [A newspaper clipping featuring Clark Burrus, his wife, Lucille Burrus (right), and his assistant, Jacqueline Marshall at the Carnival Ball held at the DuSable Museum, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4516 Speaker 1: This my queen for the Carnival Ball, Jewel Rogers Lafontant MANkarious and her son, John Rogers, who is head of Ariel Capital Management, one of the more successful minority investment banking firms in the country. Speaker 2: [A newspaper clipping featuring Jewel Lafontant MANkarious and her son, John Rogers at a Carnival Ball at the DuSable Museum, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4517 Speaker 1: Again, the picture of my queen, Jewel Lafontant MANkarious and me as the king for first Carnival Ball at the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: [A newspaper clipping featuring Clark Burrus and Jewel Lafontant MANkarious at a Carnival Ball at the DuSable Museum, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988. From the collection of Clark Burrus.] Story_ID: 4518 Speaker 1: This is the advertisement that appeared in a number of local and national newspapers and magazines, by the way, depicting the leadership of the First National Bank of Chicago and--there's a date up there. It's got to be early on, so it's got to be '82 [1982] or '83 [1983], something like that? Speaker 2: '81[1981]. Speaker 1: '81, okay, yeah, '81, that's right. And I am the third from the left, as if you guys couldn't tell. Now you want me to identify all those folks? Speaker 2: Yeah, from left to right. Speaker 1: Bill Lear, Larry Russell, the third one is myself, Adam Delp, James Buchanan, George Davies, who I reported directly to. The tallest one there is Barry Sullivan who was the Chairman. Next to him is the picture we saw before is Dick Thomas, who was the president at that time, and later became Chairman, and Jim Casson on the far right. We were the leadership team of the First National Bank of Chicago or Chicag-ah. Speaker 2: [Drawings of Clark Burrus (third from left) and others in an advertisement for First National Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 1981; (L. to R.): Bill Lear, Larry Russell, Clark Burrus, Adam Delp, James Buchanan, George Davies, Barry Sullivan, Dick Thomas, and Jim Casson. From the collection of Clark Burrus.]..