 Story_ID: 167915 Speaker 1: My name is Evelyn Pounds and I'm the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer and Larry Crowe with The HistoryMakers is observing today. We're going to start by asking to state your full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Cora Masters Barry, C-O-R-A, M-A-S-T-E-R-S, B-A-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. 05/07/1945, May 7, 1945, V-J Day [sic, V-E day] Speaker 1: Okay and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Today is May 6, 2005, which is the day before my sixtieth birthday. Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of the interview and you don't need to give the address. Speaker 2: Southeast, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Excellent. What is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm a professor by training in education, but at the current moment, I'm a CEO of a foundation that I founded The Recreation Wish List Committee. And we do a lot for children and we built a $5.1 million-dollar building called the Southeast Tennis [and] Learning Center [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: And when you say you're a professor, what did you teach? Speaker 2: Political science for twenty years at University of District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], taught some at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and some at American [University, Washington, D.C.], different classes. Story_ID: 167916 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about five People magazine-ish type questions, so bear along with me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What is my favorite food? I guess potatoes in any form. Speaker 1: Oh, any form, yams? Speaker 2: Mashed, potato chips, french fries. Speaker 1: All right, so that's going to be orange potato, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Africa. Speaker 1: Any particular part of Africa? Speaker 2: West Africa. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not going to turn out right, or it's not that deep. Story_ID: 167917 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you some questions about your mother and your father. So you just tell us a little bit about them and I'm going to ask you about your mother first. State your mother's first and last name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Isabell, I-S-A-B-E-L-L, M-A-S-T-E-R-S, and her maiden name is Arch, A-R-C-H. Speaker 1: And where was she born and the date of her birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Oklahoma, January 9th, well she won't tell us her age most of the time, but I think 1913, 1914. Speaker 1: Okay, so she's about ninety--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --three or four. Speaker 1: Somewhere around there. Okay. Where did she grow up? And, you know, just tell us about her in her early years. Speaker 2: She grew up between Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] and Kansas--between her mother, who lived in Oklahoma City and Idabel, Oklahoma, Tulsa, Oklahoma and Langston, Oklahoma and Kansas, where her father lived which was in Topeka, Kansas. Speaker 1: And what do you know about her background when she was growing up? Speaker 2: Well, when you say her background, I know her grand--her mother was not educated. Her father was a very intelligent man but not educated. Her grandfather--her stepfather, which was my grandfather was a preacher, so she grew up in a religious family. She grew up mostly in the city. Sometimes she spent time in the city. She was very adamant about education. She was a basketball star. She said they used to call her "Little Archie." She was very aggressive and she managed to get a college education through her own determination. Speaker 1: So when you say she spent some time in Oklahoma with her mother and some time in Oklahoma--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Topeka, Kansas--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Topeka, Kansas with her father, did she do something similar to what children do now? Did she spend weekends? Speaker 2: Her father used to kidnap her. They'd go back and forth. He'd come and take her. They'd go back and forth. There was no formal arrangement. He'd come take her--she and her sister. My aunt, Minola [ph.], would be in Kansas until they could go back to Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Your mom would go back and get her. Speaker 2: My grandmother would go get her. Speaker 1: Oh, you grandmother would pick her up and bring her back home. Speaker 2: Yes, they'd just throw them back and forth. Speaker 1: Were they traveling by car or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm so sure they were probably traveling either by car or--I don't know, maybe train, I don't know. It was just the way they did it back then. Story_ID: 167918 Speaker 1: All right, how would you describe your mother [Isabell Arch Masters]? Speaker 2: Amazing, aggressive, brilliant, tenacious, smart, strong, spiritual, just amazing woman. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Did she share any stories with you when you were growing up about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, she talked a lot about it. My mother always did what she wanted to do. She always accomplished what she set out to accomplish, so she was really--she was really a pathfinder in her own way and in her own life, really in way ahead of her time--basically, if she had been born in this time, I'm sure she would have been the president of the United States. So she was a very determined person. She believed so much in education. She had high morals, so she didn't compromise. Speaker 1: Was she the older of the two? Speaker 2: Second. Speaker 1: She was the baby? Speaker 2: No, there were eight of them. She was the second oldest. Speaker 1: Okay, but you said she and her sister would--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --her older sister--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --would end up in Topeka, Kansas. Speaker 2: She was the youngest between those two. Speaker 1: All right. And then were eight total. How many boys and girls do you think? Speaker 2: Uncle (unclear), Uncle Ed [ph.], Uncle Harry [ph.], uncle--okay four boys and four girls I think. One of them died early. Story_ID: 167919 Speaker 1: Would you state your father's full name and spell that for us? Speaker 2: Alfred, A-L-F-R-E-D, M-A-S-T-E-R-S. Speaker 1: And his date of birth and location? Speaker 2: I don't remember his date of birth and I think his location of birth was Oklahoma also. Speaker 1: How would you describe him? Is there-- Speaker 2: I didn't grow up with him because he and my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] separated when I was young. I got to know him when I got older, but I knew a lot about him because he was--and my mother is very proud of the fact--the first black [U.S.] Marine in the United States, so he is listed up in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]. He was a very enterprising person. He also went to Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma] and got his degree, and ultimately ended up being a big person in the union. He lived in Cleveland, Ohio for a long time and then he eventually he bought this big farm in Las Cruces, New Mexico and that's where he died. Speaker 1: So, he was in World War II [WWII]? Speaker 2: He was in World War II. Speaker 1: All right and he was the first--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: -first black Marine--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --first black Marine, Alfred Masters. Speaker 2: Alfred Masters. Speaker 1: Did he share with you any stories about, you know, the war or any memories? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't remember him sharing so much, but my mother, basically, said that he was fine, and then when he came back, that the war the missed him up. Her story is that that's what tore the family up because when he got back, he was psychologically damaged from his experience in the war and his subsequent experience coming back to the United States and being confronted with segregation and the marginalization of African Americans after he had gone over there and fought. So he is, what I call, a clear case of that syndrome that is so often spoken about. Speaker 1: Oh, I wanted to ask, did she tell you anything about his background when he was growing up since like before he went to the Marines when he was--any traits or any? Speaker 2: Well, his mother and I were very close. And I really don't remember the stories other than he was very smart, very enterprising just like mother and very, very aggressive, and he was the first in his family to get an education and he came out of a family of about nine. And so they met at Langston University. Story_ID: 167920 Speaker 1: Let me just back up here. Tell us something about the [U.S.] Marines, any stories your mother [Isabell Arch Masters] might have told you if he didn't get a chance to share with you about what it was like being black Marine. We know what it was like after he [Barry's father, Alfred Masters] got back, you know. Speaker 2: Well, it was very difficult. Even though they had integrated the Marines, they still had responsibilities that were non-combative. Even though they were in the middle of the battles, they couldn't fight them, so they were they were the grave diggers and the ones who had to clean the latrines, or do the cooking and drive people. They were very seldom allowed to go to the battle. I'm not mad about that. Speaker 1: Okay, then about the racism after he came, we know, but in the Marines? Speaker 2: There was quite a bit of racism, yes. They had the double problem of being in the Marines, having to be subjective of the hierarchy of the [U.S.] Military and at the same time not really having the opportunity to be supervised by one of their own but it was not a good thing. So a lot of times, when they were giving orders, they were not clear if they were orders that were in the best interest of the Marines only just people had that power over them, so that kind of made it difficult. Speaker 1: And I know he was the only one. I know he was the first, but at that particular time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, he was not the only one. Excuse me. Speaker 1: He was the first (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: He was the first and then after that, they opened it up for others. Speaker 1: All right, but when he served, he had some blacks in the Marines with him--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was in a black regiment. Speaker 1: Oh, he was in a black regiment. Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, of course, they had a white officer because that's what most of the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Right. Story_ID: 167921 Speaker 1: Did you know anything about your grandparents, maternal and paternal, but start with maternal grandparents? Speaker 2: My mother's [Isabell Arch Masters]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --your mother's mother and father. Speaker 2: My mother's mother grew up in Alabama and their family owned a lot of property. They were farmers and they built stuff and they did very, very well. They were the Louis [ph.], but one of them got into a battle with a white man--I don't know if he killed him or beat him up, but the whole entire family had to leave Montgomery, Alabama--really outside of Montgomery, Alabama, Conecuh [County, Alabama], I think it's called, right before (unclear). So they all left town and left their property down there because, you know, they would have been lynched and killed. They moved from there to Oklahoma, where they grew up in like Tulsa [Oklahoma], Idabel [Oklahoma], right in that area and moved ultimately to the city. My grandmother's father was a full-blooded Cherokee Indian and so that's her story. My father's [Alfred Masters] mother grew up in Oklahoma and I don't know a lot--I don't remember a lot about my father's mother, but I remember her. I grew up knowing her very well, but I just don't remember a lot. A lot of these stories get repeated to you and because I had not spent a lot of time around my father--my mother is still here, so I'm still hearing these stories. Speaker 1: So the Indian side came in your mother's side? Speaker 2: Both sides. Speaker 1: Oh, even on your father's side. Speaker 2: Yeah, if you see my grandmother, you'll see her picture, she looks like an old Indian women, and both my paternal and maternal grandmother have those high cheek bones, and that red in their skin. Story_ID: 167922 Speaker 1: How far can you go back with your family ancestry like your great-grandparents--what can you tell us about them? Speaker 2: Well, my mother--on my mother's [Isabell Arch Masters] side, her grandmother--her father's mother was a German woman who married a black man, named Bill Arch. Her parents were slave owners. They were from Germany and they came a few years before the war [Civil War]. And when the war started, they went back to Germany, but for those two years that they were here, because they didn't speak the language well, their informant was my great-great-grandfather who basically ran the plantation, did all the math, blah, blah, blha, fell in love with their daughter, which is unusual story. They give him and he a cabin and five hundred dollars, where they lived for years and they went back to Germany. Speaker 1: Both of them went back to Germany? Speaker 2: Her parents--my great-great-grandparents, Lucinda, was her name. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Her parents went back to Germany. She and my great-great-grandfather stayed in Texas for a while until they heard about the free state that was allowing people to come up there, which was Kansas, so they immigrated to Kansas in a situation called the Exodusters. That was when the African Americans left the South and exited up to Kansas. She about six kids at that time and went over to my great-grandfather, which was my mother's father, and they obviously were partially black, so some of them looked white and some of them looked like they were mixed. So she would go back and forth. She couldn't sit with them on the train so she would go back and give them (unclear). I really was sugar water in a rag and they would suck on that and tell the conductor that those were her maid's kids and she had to feed them until they got to Kansas. Speaker 1: Let us know if you need to stop. Speaker 2: No, I think I'm okay. Speaker 1: Now, that was really a turn of events where you had the black men marrying the white women during the 1800s. So the war--when her parents left to go back to Germany, this was the Civil War? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, this is really different because it was normally it was the slave master's sons with the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, or the slave master with the slave woman and no marriage was ever involved hardly. Speaker 1: Now, you said that your great-great-grandfather, Bill Arch, he was the foreman? Speaker 2: He was the foreman. He ran the plantation. He was brilliant. Speaker 1: This was normally--that is different too. Speaker 2: Yes, these people came from Germany, so they didn't have this stuff in their heads about race and inferiority. They just needed--they came to make money and do well and do land, but it didn't turn out like that. Speaker 1: And they did marry? Speaker 2: Yeah, they did marry. Speaker 1: And they moved to Kansas, but they stayed there for a while. He gave them five hundred dollars and a cabin and they had children there in Texas and they then became a part of the Exodusters. When they got to Kansas, what did they do when they made this migration to Kansas? Speaker 2: Well, ultimately they settled there. My grandfather, obviously, grew up and I how he ended up going to Oklahoma and meeting my grandmother, you'd have to ask my mother that. There's some areas there I don't know. But I know some of his siblings went on to to Canada and passed, and passed for many years. Story_ID: 167923 Speaker 1: Then I know we were--I wanted to ask you, how did you mother [Isabell Arch Masters] and father [Alfred Masters] meet, but you just mentioned--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, my mother and father I think met at Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma]. Speaker 1: All right, and is there any stories associated with how they got together like what attracted them? What was it about him that attracted--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, they were both smart, very smart and very handsome people. My mother was beautiful and my father was very nice-looking and I think between the looks and the smarts, they were just attracted to each other. He would always go wherever she was. He would show up, you know, coincidently. He just asked her to marry him. Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after? Would you say you take after your mother more or your father? Speaker 2: I say my mother, but most people say that I look like my mother, but I don't think so. I would love to look like her, but I just don't think I do. Speaker 1: What about personality? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I got her personality--that's a problem. A lot of people think I'm very aggressive and whatever else and I probably am. Story_ID: 167924 Speaker 1: --Let's talk about your early years. What is your first childhood memory that can come to mind when you think about growing up? Speaker 2: You know, when you think about childhood memories, things are snatched, some things. Sometimes you get confused between what you remember and what you were told. So I can remember riding on the train with my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] when I was about four years old with a red coat and a red hat; and a woman asked me the whole time could she have my hat and I kept saying, "No." And when we got to California and she asked me and I said, "I said, no, and when I say 'no,' I mean no." I remember that. I remember my mother saying, "You shouldn't talk to adults like that." I remember that. I remember growing up in California with my sisters and brothers. I remember my little sister in the baby bed. I used to stand there and look at her. Most of my years of growing up were in California. Story_ID: 167925 Speaker 1: About how old were you when you moved to California? Speaker 2: About five. Four or five years old, my mom [Isabell Arch Masters] moved us to California from Oklahoma. And that was also a migration pattern. That's when they migrated out of the South during the Great Migration. Oklahoma and Texas people moved to California, so we were one of those. Speaker 1: What part of California did you all move to? Speaker 2: Los Angeles [California]--as a matter of fact, we lived in Watts [Los Angeles, California]. When we first moved there, we lived in the Jordan Downs [Housing] Projects [Los Angeles, California] and the reason we lived there is because my mother had a degree, a college degree, an education. But they would not recognize her degree from a black college, which was Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma]. So the way she tells it, she had to go back and get a couple of more years of college because they didn't acknowledge the legitimacy of her degree from Langston, so she said, "While I go back to college, you want to be able to live with us, you just take care of us," so we were on welfare and we were in the projects. Now, when I later on became a professor, I romanticized that, and I was like, "We lived in the projects," and I thought we lived there a long time. I asked my mother and she said we only lived there nine months. I was like, that kind of kills my, you know, from poverty story, but it was transitional. But back in those days, you know, a lot of the projects were temporary housing for the troops and then after the war [World War II, WWII], they made them temporary. They made them housing for people. And then of course, they became institutionalized. Story_ID: 167926 Speaker 1: How--what was your family life like? How would describe your family, just the children and just things that were going on in the family? Speaker 2: There were six of us. And my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] was again, very enterprising. So we seemed to get everything we wanted in life. We didn't know that we were poor. I didn't know that we were poor-poor. We were poorer than we knew we were. My mother was very creative about that. We always were in good homes. That was the last time that we lived anywhere that we did not own. From that point on that we left the projects, mother bought a home and we must have lived in at least a dozen homes. She would buy them; we'd live in them for a while. Then she'd turn them into rental property and we would move into another house that she would buy. So we always lived in our own home. We always lived in good neighborhoods. We always had what we needed. You know, we didn't have any struggles. I don't remember not having enough food, I don't have that story to tell. She was adamant, again, about education so we always went to good schools. Speaker 1: Now, there were six of you. So where did you fit in? Speaker 2: I was somewhere in the middle. Speaker 1: All right, how many boys and girls? Speaker 2: Four girls and two boys. I was the third daughter. Speaker 1: So your mother and father [Alfred Masters] separated before you were five year old? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother left my father in Oklahoma and moved to California. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 167927 Speaker 1: Tell me something about after you moved out of the projects [Jordan Downs Housing Projects, Los Angeles, California], you did--she started buying property and all that. In your earlier memories, what was the environment like, the streets you lived on? Speaker 2: Always nice--we always lived in really nice neighborhood, really nice residential neighborhood--really good schools. We always lived in very integrated situations. My mother [Isabell Arch Masters], as a matter of fact, took pride of being blockbuster. She would often move us into white neighborhood. Sometimes we were the first and sometimes we were the second or third, but I grew up in a very integrated environment all my life. I think the only predominantly black neighborhood was the nine months we were at the projects. Speaker 1: Describe some of the things that really impressed you when you were younger and when you were say moved out of the projects into the first or the second home. What was it that impressed you, were it the sights, the smells? Speaker 2: I just loved the fact that we always lived where there were yards and trees. I just remember that very clearly. We always had a big backyard. We always had grass. We always had trees. And I will show a picture of that in one of the birthday parties, you can see. Our first house when we moved out of the projects is in one of these pictures. Story_ID: 167928 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: I attended a lot of elementary schools, [William A.] Diggs Elementary school. Speaker 1: And where was that? Speaker 2: In Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I attended a lot of elementary schools. My mother [Isabell Arch Masters]--we moved around a lot. I kind of just don't remember. I attended about five elementary schools. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that impressed you at any of those who made an early impression upon you and if so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, at Cienega [Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], when I was in the fourth grade. Speaker 1: What was her name again? Would you spell that for us? Speaker 2: No, the name of the school was Cienega. Speaker 1: Okay, Cienega Elementary--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: C-I-E-N-E-G-A. In Los Angeles [California], a lot of streets are named after Indians. So the name of the street was La Cienega [Boulevard], and the name of the school was Cienega. It was a man, Mr. Holloway [ph.]. He looked just like Superman. He was so fine. But he was a great teacher. Speaker 1: Now, was he a black man? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I had another teacher, Ms. White [ph.] and she looked like your typical school mom. She was tall. She was a white woman, had gray and in a bun in her back of head. She was a great teacher. They were both at Cienega Elementary School. Speaker 1: What impressions did they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --they just got the best out of me. They just got the best out of me. I was never a child who particularly cared for school. I never did more than I had to do. And I was always smarter than I demonstrated. I was not that interested in being a scholar, didn't care much for homework. I was just not that type of person. My personality was just--and they didn't let me get away with it. Speaker 1: So how would you describe the young Cora Masters? Speaker 2: Aggressive--I was kicked out of school two or three times for instigating. Speaker 1: Was this at Cienega? Speaker 2: Yeah, third, fourth, fifth grade--just acting up, never really bad, but I was mischievous. Let's put it that way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was never a bad kid but I was not very much much a child that you could manage. I pretty much did what I wanted to do. Speaker 1: Um--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My mother told me later--many, many years later in life when I was in her forties that I gave her more trouble than all of her kids put together. I was shocked when she told me that, but I was very aggressive. That's probably not the best word. I just did what I wanted to do. I had no fear. Speaker 1: At an early age. Speaker 2: Never had fear, but I was also gifted by God to have tremendous discernment. I could really read people and read certain situations, so that's probably what saved my life. Story_ID: 167929 Speaker 1: Did you have any dreams and aspirations at that particular time as to what you wanted to do later on in life or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: When I went to Cienega [Elementary] School [Los Angeles, California], you know 'Amos 'n' Andy?' [George] Kingfish [Stevens] [played by Tim Moore] and his wife lived right across the street, so we used to watch them like that. I told in Los Angeles [California], we were in nothing but nice neighborhoods and they lived exactly across the street. And they would go to the grocery store. And they would always have these carts. You know the ones that people take with them when they walk to the store? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And we used just stand there and watched theme every day. So that of interested me in wanting to be in the movies. Plus my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] took me when we were in the projects [Jordan Downs Housing Projects, Los Angeles, California], to audition for 'The Little Rascals.' She tried--she wanted me--she took me to Hollywood because she thought I was so, you know, I just had fearless personality and I could just do anything. Speaker 1: And who were all that were there? Do you remember some of the ones that were there with you? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I just remember going to an audition for 'The Little Rascals.' She thought I ought be in Hollywood. I mean I could cry at request. I would cry for money. My aunts--we'd have big family gathering and they'd say, "I'll give you a nickel if you cry." I'd stand right there and cry with the most grotesque faces. I just was a big cut up. Speaker 1: So you say right across the street was Tim Moore? Speaker 2: He was--whoever was Kingfish. That was his name? Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so now, that was interesting. So, you all, were in an affluent neighborhood. Speaker 2: I guess middle-class neighborhood. Speaker 1: And you were close to the studios if you could go down to the--where did you go for the auditions? Speaker 2: We were in the projects when my mother took me there. I guess she took me to Studio City. I guess we got on the bus or train, streetcar at that time. Speaker 1: All right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was like five years old, in that area when she took me--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --this was when you first moved to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: First year, she took me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 167930 Speaker 1: So when you lived across from the [George] Kingfish [Stevens], Tim Moore, just tell us how that experience was. What kind of person was he? Speaker 2: Well, he wasn't very friendly because we would stand--you know, picture kids, with their hands up, looking at the gate at someone, "Hi, Kingfish. Hi, Kingfish." He would never acknowledge us. He would never speak. Sometimes his wife would nod, but he just would not talk to us. He would not acknowledge us and we used to see him almost daily. Speaker 1: And you said his wife was small. Speaker 2: She was small, kind of doughty-looking, a lot shorter than him. And they would be walking to the store. They had this cart that you would roll. I never forget it because people still use it. And they would take it to the store which was around the corner and then come back. Speaker 1: Did they have children? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That's interesting. He was one of the favorites. Seems like he should have had an ongoing personality. Speaker 2: No, not at all. He was a sour puss. Speaker 1: But you all still watched him on television, and you still were in love with him. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was a entertainer there. Story_ID: 167931 Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school? Speaker 2: I went to junior high school in two places. In the seventh grade, I went to [Samuel] Gompers Junior High School [later, Samuel Gompers Middle School] in south central L.A. [Los Angeles, California] or near south central L.A. We were living way out there almost to Compton [Los Angeles, California] and then we moved from there to Pasadena, California and I went to Washington Junior High School [later, Washington STEAM Magnet Academy, Pasadena, California], and that's the only two junior high schools I went to. I graduated from Washington Junior High School in Pasadena. When we moved to Pasadena from Los Angeles, it was still highly--I mean it was predominantly white, and it was still at a point that if you were black and caught on the streets there at night, they would ask you what you were doing there, so when we moved in, where we moved there were very few blacks. And then we moved around the corner to another house where there were no blacks. We were really, what you call, "blockbusted" there. Speaker 1: What grades did the junior high school have? Was it seventh and eighth? Or was seventh eighth--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Seventh through ninth--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --seventh, eighth and ninth, okay. Speaker 2: So I was at Gompers in the seventh--Samuel Gompers Junior High School and then the George Washington Junior High School from eighth to ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Who were some of your friends in junior high school? Speaker 2: I don't remember too many of my friends when I was in junior high school in Los Angeles because I fought a lot. I was doing a lot of fighting. Don't ask me why. I just remember fighting a lot, never getting kicked out of school, never getting in trouble. Grades were just okay, but I don't know why I was fighting. I had two or three fights. I'm sure I had some friends. I don't remember them. I can see them in my mind, but I can't remember their names but when I got to junior high school in Pasadena, California, then it was a very cliquish place. So we had friends like Priscilla [ph.], Alan and Dale Pearson [ph.] and I had a crew. Story_ID: 167932 Speaker 1: Since the neighborhoods were mostly mixed neighborhoods, were there many black people in the neighborhood or were you the only black people in the vicinity? Speaker 2: There were no black people in our neighborhood. Most of the black kids that went to Washington Junior High School [later, Washington STEAM Magnet Academy, Pasadena, California] lived on--there was a street called Fair Oaks [Avenue] and on one side of Fair Oaks, it was almost totally white. On the other side of Fair Oaks, down below Washington Street, there was where most of the blacks lived. I mean it wasn't a ghetto, but it was where the blacks lived. It was a lesser expensive homes. And most of the kids who went to Washington Junior High School when they left--when I left school, I would go through the baseball field and climb over the fence and go over to Summit [Avenue] and go to my house. Speaker 1: So what would you say the percentage of blacks was in Washington Junior High School? Speaker 2: About 10 [percent]. Speaker 1: And that was about it. And how many were in your class? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember, not that many. Speaker 1: About one or two? Speaker 2: We had more than that, but not that many. Speaker 1: Were there other ethnicities there? Speaker 2: No. Well, there were Mexicans. Mexicans were a fact of life at that time, but not as much as it is now--nowhere near. There were Mexicans. I found more Mexicans when I went to high school, but I mostly just remember black and white and some Asians. Story_ID: 167933 Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Well, I went to John Muir High School [Pasadena, California], my first tenth grade. Then my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] decided for whatever reason to move back to Los Angeles [California]. So I went Manual Arts High School [Los Angeles, California], which was a really rough high school. It was really rough and we lived on 57th Street between Vermont [Avenue] and Hoover [Street]. And it was not a good place. I don't know what made my mother--I forgot what her reasoning was. Then we moved out of Los Angeles and moved back to Pasadena. Then in my senior year, we moved to Kansas City, Missouri, so I graduated from Paseo High School [later, Paseo Academy of Fine and Performing Arts] in Kansas City, Missouri and the year that I got there was the twelfth grade, I was a senior, and it had been the second year that it had been integrated. So we had some problems there. Speaker 1: All right, when you went to high school--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's hard to keep up with all of this, isn't it? Speaker 1: Yeah, because you went to like three different high schools. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in Pasadena or Los Angeles, in California that influenced you? Speaker 2: There was abBiology teacher in Pasadena in John Muir High School who did the same thing when I was in La Cienega [Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]--well, what happened the year that I was going into high school, I have this rare illness called strep cellulitis. I just got diagnosed about eight years ago or nine years ago, but I had it all my life. If I snick or scratch myself, I go into high fevers and all. So that was one of those times that I was, I think, shaving my legs and I got really sick and I was out of school for like--I didn't go there the first day or the first week. It was like three weeks before I went to school because I had high fevers. I had to go to the hospital, chills and fevers. You know, they had to bring me back alive. I almost die when this happens. So because I didn't do any of the entrance exams--they had tracks then, so I guess they put in the lowest track. So that was fine with me. I was making As like forty going north. I didn't have to look at the book and I knew it. And I was just as happy with that, but my biology teacher caught on. He said, "You don't belong in this track." You're not being challenged at all, so she stuck with me and took me to the principal and made them put me on a higher track because I was like making triple As. I didn't really care. It was really easy. So she used to come and bring me and work with me on experiments. I don't remember her name. She was a white lady. But I remember that she would not let me get away being in the lower track simply because I didn't take the test; and, so, therefore, if you didn't take the test, they just place you in the lower track, especially if you were black. I mean even though we were at Pasadena, California, there was a lot of racism at that school. Speaker 1: And when you went to Manual Arts High School, you say that that was a troubled school. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was south central L.A. school. Those people were serious. I was scared to death. Speaker 1: Now, was that an all-black? Speaker 2: Yeah--well, it wasn't all black--there weren't too many all black environments. L.A. was just integrated but it was predominately black. Speaker 1: Okay. And you stayed there for? Speaker 2: Yes, or maybe it may have been a semester. I don't remember, but not longer than a year. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at that school? Speaker 2: No, I don't remember them. I just remember trying to survive at that school. It was really out of my element. Story_ID: 167934 Speaker 1: How--did you get caught up in any of the integration--anything that was going on integration-wise? I know you said that most of the schools were already fully integrated in California. There was no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, what happened in Los Angeles [California] and Pasadena [California], it was not so much an issue of integration because that never was an issue. The issue was equality. I mean, for instance, of course, they would let guys play football because they were the athletes, but we never were on the cheering team or debating team. There was a singing group at John Muir High School [Pasadena, California] that was called, The Magicals, they sang a cappella, and they sang beautifully and I used to have a beautiful singing voice. I tried out and I didn't make it and there was no reason I shouldn't have made it, so it was the facto-kind of segregation. It was like we weren't allowed to do certain things, even though there was no law or rule written, we just were--we were never homecoming queens or homecoming princesses, you know. We just were there. Story_ID: 167935 Speaker 1: Alright, now when you moved to Kansas City, Missouri, that was quite a transition. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, not to mention the weather. Speaker 1: Right. So you went to Paseo High School [later, Paseo Academy of Fine and Performing Arts, Kansas City, Missouri]. Now what was the difference? You say this was the first year that this high school had been--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --second. It had been integrated the year before. Speaker 1: All right. What kind of environment there as it related to the mix? Speaker 2: It was very--like in Pasadena [California], even though it was integrated and they had their little segregated or, you know, issues around what they would let us do, there was still a lot of integration of social life, especially the guys, they would go with these white girls for sure. So that went on. But in Kansas City, there was just no mixing of the social--of the kids. Missouri was a slave state anyway, so the fact that they had integrated, there were definitely black kids and white kids and the black kids were from this side of the town and the white kids were from that side of town. Not that they were necessarily poor. They weren't, but I'll give you a good example. There was an English teacher--I don't remember his name--I see his face, who was very conscious and I remember that day, I bought an Ebony magazine to school and I was reading it because I was notorious about reading anything but I was supposed to read. He asked me could he have it. He took that magazine and kept that magazine and brought it back because he had never seen or heard of it before. He was fascinated by this Ebony magazine--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, this was around 1962? Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]. He was a really nice guy, and he was conscious about what we were--the ostracism that we were feeling. I decided that I wanted to sing in the senior talent show and everybody said they won't let any blacks in the senior talent show. They tried last year and they had really good talent. He happened to be one of the judges, so I applied. I mean I auditioned and I auditioned--at that time, I used to love vocal jazz, so I was singing the Dakota Staton song, '[The] Late, Late Show,' "Gee, it's cozy in the park tonight, when you hold and (unclear) me tight. Guess you know I love you so. It started in the late, late show" [sic]. And at some point, it says, "We kissed and kissed all night long," and they said, "you can't make it because it's kind of unacceptable kind of song. So I could not allow,"--so he said, "what if she sings another song?" Now, they had him on the spot because first they said I couldn't sing. So then they--so I went out. I was a big, big, big fan, I am still of show music, from 'The Sound of Music.' I came and sang, Climb Every Mountain." I was killing them notes. They said, "You can sing 'The Late, Late Show'." So I was really absolutely the first in the talent show, and that was me and my tenacity though. I didn't see any reason why. I am from California. I got it going on. So that was an interesting experience Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school, did you have any aspirations toward becoming a singer? Speaker 2: Yes, I wanted to be a singer. Speaker 1: What else did you have in mind about what you wanted to do in the future? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't interested in no career. I wasn't interested in nothing but having fun, singing. I wasn't, you know--my mother orientated us for education, so we had to get education, but it wasn't one of my priorities. Speaker 1: So how did you spend your leisure time in high school? Speaker 2: I've always been a leader--so--I mean I know now, I didn't know then. So I joined this club. I had this boyfriend who was ten years older than me. I spent a lot of time sneaking around with him, much to my mother's [Isabella Arch Masters] chagrin. She couldn't do anything about it though. I mean you can't control kids. So I was doing that with this older guy, joining clubs and being involved in stuff. Speaker 1: What kind of organizations were you in clubs were you affiliated in high school? Speaker 2: Well, there was this organization that was kind of like a high school sorority so we did a lot of stuff that high school sororities do. One, being exclusive in being mean to other people who weren't in it, for one thing. The other thing we did was we did a little charity stuff, go to the children's hospital. But mostly used it as an opportunity to have pajama parties and talk about boys and how much better we were than the rest of the world. Speaker 1: So when you got to Kansas City, you still were with an affluent bunch? Speaker 2: Yes, even though I did not live in that neighborhood. We lived across town, but, yes, I was with an affluent bunch. I always did--my mother never allowed us to hang out with--what she used to call--"fast kids." She just wouldn't have it, and if we were doing it, we couldn't bring it home. Speaker 1: Okay and this is during the '60s [1960], so a lot was going on with--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I hadn't quite gotten there yet. We're going to get there. I was still being quite full of myself and brainwashed. Story_ID: 167936 Speaker 1: After high school [Paseo High School, later, Paseo Academy of Fine and Performing Arts, Kansas City, Missouri], then where did you go-- Speaker 2: Went back to Pasadena [California], went to Pasadena City College [Pasadena, California] and promptly flunked out. Speaker 1: Now what do you attribute that to? Speaker 2: Not being interested. I made an A and--let me see, I made an A, and a F, and the rest were Ds. I think the A was in a cappella choir and the D was in the gym--the F was in gym, which it meant, of course, that I never went. The D was in all the rest of it. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you after that? Speaker 2: You mean what did my mother [Isabella Arch Masters] do? Speaker 1: Yeah, what did your mother do? Speaker 2: She told me I was going to get a college education or get a job, which, of course, terrified me the thought of getting a job. Speaker 1: All right. So what did your mother--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well I was quite all right with flunking out because I really--they used to have a thing at Pasadena College called, The Wall. I used to spend a lot of time on it. Speaker 1: This is w-a-l-l? Speaker 2: You know where you hang out and talk, and just, you know. I was having a ball. The problem was a lot of my friends from high school were going to PCC [Pasadena City College]. You know, Pasadena City College was probably the highest rated junior college in the United States at that time. I mean Pasadena was--you know. Speaker 1: This is '62 [1962], '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: Yes. But her thing was, "You're going to get a job or you're going to get back into college," which, of course, the job thing kind of terrified me because I wasn't used to that. So she wanted me to go to Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma]. I did not want to go to Langston because everybody in my family--my mother graduated from Langston, my father [Alfred Masters] graduated from there, my uncle, my aunt. I wasn't going to do the Langston thing. So she--I think they turned me down anyway. I think she applied. My grades were so bad. She said, "You apply as a freshman, forget that first disastrous year," which I told her I was going to do, but I never did. So my brother, which I hadn't mentioned, was a child preacher, started preaching three years old. So he was on the road a lot. I used to travel with him, singing a lot. Speaker 1: This was an older brother? Speaker 2: Baby brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's a bishop right now in West Palm Beach, Florida. But he used to travel all over the country and he was a preacher and I was the singer. There's a lot of stuff in my life. I can't remember all of it at one time. Speaker 1: Now, you sang gospel? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So were on the road that summer. Mother stopped talking to me about what--I don't know I probably lied and said I had applied and had not heard back or whatever. So were just traveling around the country and then we got to St. Louis, Missouri and we were on the way to Kansas City, Missouri, I think he preached in St. Louis we were on our way to Kansas City, Missouri which is where my aunt lived, which I'm sure he had some appointments to preach there also. And when we got to a place called Jefferson City, Missouri, my mother drove up this long hill and we were at this school called Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri]. She went inside the building, the administration building, came back out with the dean of students, and took my suitcase out and said, "You're going here to college." Speaker 1: And what happened? Speaker 2: I had a fit. I wouldn't talk to the man. She had not warned me. But, see, I had graduated from a high school in Missouri and this was a state school, so if you graduated, it didn't matter. You could just-and she had told him all this and he said, "Contingent on her records, I'm going to take your word for it that she is a graduate from a school in Missouri, so we can take her now because we're having freshman orientation." My mother dropped me off in the middle of nowhere at Lincoln University. They took me over to a dormitory hall called Anthony Hall, which was nothing but freshman and she took me to my room. I was furious. I didn't want to speak to her. I didn't even say good bye. She dropped me and my little suitcase off in the middle of nowhere is where I describe it. She went on about her business. Well, she tells the story that she went to Kansas City, where she was heading. Jefferson City, Missouri is almost in the middle between St. Louis and Kansas City, so like maybe 130 miles from one and about 140 miles from the other. So she went to Kansas City, Missouri and her plan was to check back and if I was still in that mode, she would come back and get me. So she left me there. She called back about seven or eight o'clock. I don't know what time. I didn't have time to talk to her. I had met some kids from Cincinnati [Ohio], from Chicago [Illinois], from Dallas [Texas], and from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], and one of our friend's father--her name was Jamilla Gibson[-Bell] . Her father [Joseph Deighton Gibson Jr.] was Jockey Jack and they used to call him "Jack, the rapper." Before he died, everybody knew him around the country, he is well-known. But, at the time, he was with Motown. So she had this portable battery-operated record player and they had all the advanced, pre-released versions of all Motown songs and another girlfriend that I met from Oklahoma City named Sandra Biggers [ph.] had a jug and on it wrote "medicine," but in it was wine. So between the records and the wine and the cards I was having a ball. So my mother called back. I was like, "I'm having fun." You know, "Alright thank you, talk to you later." So that's how I ended up at Lincoln University. Story_ID: 167937 Speaker 1: Okay, so you stayed at Lincoln [University, Jefferson City, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Two and half years. Speaker 1: All right. Now Jack, the rapper or--what's his name, Jockey Jack? Speaker 2: Jack [Deighton] Gibson [Jr.]. Speaker 1: Jack Gibson. Speaker 2: He was well-known as "Jack, the rapper" before he died. He used to have a big convention down in Florida. Speaker 1: So he did rhythm and blues? Speaker 2: He used to be a DJ in Chicago [Illinois] and then he went with [HM] Berry Gordy and at the time I met Jill [Jamilla] Gibson[-Bell], he was one of the vice presidents at Motown. Speaker 1: Okay, so this was '64 [1964] or '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: Yes. We were getting all those--it's right in there. Yeah, it was my freshman of '64 [1964]. We were getting all the new records, [HM] Smokey [Robinson], the Martha and the Vandellas, The Supremes, The Temptations. We were getting all of them even before they were released. Speaker 1: So you were making history or being a part of history with the Motown. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah we were having a ball, 'Fingertips,' we had all those records before they were released because her father worked at Motown. I wasn't even thinking about going back to California. I was having me a good old time. Now education was not a part of my plan. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, you stayed at Lincoln for two years, what did you do after that? Speaker 2: Two and half years. Speaker 1: Two and half years, what did you do after that? Speaker 2: Well, my first year, a lot of my friends flunked out. I just didn't have a flunking gene. I mean I wouldn't study but I was smart, so I mean I'd cram at the end and pass. I remember one time--and I partied an awful lot--really that was really my goal. I looked at the curriculum--you know, they give you the book and I was like, "I am not spending the next four years of my life uh-uh. I'm just going to have a good freshman year." But some kind of way I passed. I didn't flunk out. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What did you major in? Speaker 2: Probably sociology. I was a good writer. I was a good reader, and I passed. I mean I never was on associate probation. I got in a lot of trouble, but the dean told me--he called me into his office and he told me, "The only reason that I'm not giving you a funny book and an apple--." There used to be a thing and they put you on a train with a funny book and an apple and send you home. Speaker 1: This was the way they got rid of students if you flunked out? Speaker 2: They'd give you a funny book and an apple--no, not when you flunked out, but when you got kicked out, but he said, "The only reason I haven't done it is because you're just one person and you just cannot be in all those places at one time." They were accusing me of everything. I was a leader. But I was a leader in the sense of keeping mess up. We had the mid-semester freshman--we terrorized them and toilet-papered their room and find entrances to get into the dorm through the basement. I was always at the forefront of whatever it took to create chaos. I think we sent the poor dorm mother to the rest home. Drove Ms. Procter [ph.]--drove that poor lady crazy. I was having the time of my life. I had learned I was so white bread, coming from California and so they had to, you know, kind of urbanize me up. You know, I came up there with (unclear) clothes and cottons, rolled down socks. I didn't know anything about knit suits or leather jackets. You know I was like with The Beach Boys and they were like with the--you know, so they had to black me up. You know, they were like, if we didn't just look at you, we would think you were white because I was like "you guys." They were like, "Who is this weird person from California?" So by the time I got home for Christmas, my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] thought she had sent to college to refine me and I'm walking through the door saying "Dig, jam, what's happening?" She's like, "What are you talking about?" So I enjoyed that until I got, you know, until everybody left. Story_ID: 167938 Speaker 1: Then I told my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] I didn't want to go to college anymore in the first semester of my junior year [at Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]. I said, "I'm tired of college. I don't want to go to college anymore." So she said, "Okay, you made good enough grades to transfer in case you change your mind and I'll let you come home." So I made straight--well, I really made Ds and I went back and talked to all my teachers and they changed it to C-, so they could get rid of me and I could get myself out of there. So I got to California in January or December whenever I left that mid-semester. My mother already had set me up. You see my life is really a history book because my mother had set me up with a pilot Head Start program. Head Start had just been, had just come out and they had a pilot program and my mother had put me in there. I went into the training for Head Start, and I worked like a slave. And my mother cut the deal, "Okay, I'm going to keep half of your salary and I'm going to put it away. And after these three or four months if you don't want to go back to college, I will give you your money and you can go on with your college. If you do, then we're going to apply it to your tuition." And so I was getting up every morning. I was the teacher assistant. There was the teacher who was with a B.A. degree, a teacher assistant, who had to have two years of college and a teacher aid, who just had to have high school. That's how it was structured there. I was great. I was really great, but I was doing more work than the teacher. And she was making twice as much as me and that's when education got driven home to me. It's like, "Okay, I see right now I'm going to be working real hard and I'm making no money. I'm going back to college." Speaker 2: So this was the turning point. Speaker 1: It was the turning point in my life, but I didn't want to go that far away from home, but I wanted to go back to a black school, so I ended up at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: All right and that's in? Speaker 1: Houston, Texas. Not that far from California, well, it was far, but closer than Missouri. Story_ID: 167939 Speaker 1: So when you made the decision, you were in Pasadena [California], to go to Houston [Texas], why did you choose Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas], and why did you decide to choose Houston, Texas? Speaker 2: Well, for a couple of reasons, one it wasn't too far south. I didn't want to go really south, south. It was one of the closest historically black colleges [HBCU] to California and my grandparents were in Beaumont, Texas, which was eight miles away. Speaker 1: These were maternal grandparents? Speaker 2: My mother's [Isabell Arch Masters] mother and stepfather. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So it was a natural fit to me and it was an urban school, which was very important to me because Lincoln [University, Jefferson City, Missouri] was stuck in the middle. You had to make your fun, which, you know, your kids leave, your buddies leave, your dogs leave you don't have no fun, but Houston--no, I'm sorry, Texas Southern was in the middle of Texas, I mean right smack dap in the middle of it, so it was a good choice. What I didn't know was that my mother had written the dean of women and had told her that though my grades did not reflect, that I was very bright and that I tended to be influenced easy, so she asked her to put me in what they called, scholarship hall, which is a dormitory where you have to have B+ average to be in there. So they threw me in there which meant there was nobody to play cards with all night, nobody to drink with. So the first semester, I was on the dean's list just didn't have nothing else to do. Speaker 1: Now, this was a complete turnaround. Speaker 2: It was a complete turnaround. Then I pledged the sorority and my life went into another direction. Speaker 1: Which sorority did you pledge? Speaker 2: It's only one, Delta Sigma Theta. And I was, you know. Speaker 1: Did you become involved in any organizations? Speaker 2: Student council. I mean I went from one, leading kids or being a leader, keeping up mischievous to being a student leader. And that's when I really started to eventually to evolve to the movement. Speaker 1: What did you major in? Speaker 2: Sociology and psychology. And that first semester there I made 3 B's, an A, and a C. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or people at Texas Southern who--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Dr. H. A. Bullock, the head of the sociology department, a graduate of Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]. He was a scholar in sociology. He was hard as nails, he was excellent and I ended up being his research assistant. Dr. David Abner [III], who was in the business school and that's a whole other conversation, and then Dr. Granville Sawyer, who was the president of Texas Southern University because I ended being sort of a student leader at the middle of the movement when there was a lot of chaos and confusion in the university, I was one of the students that was always involved in the negotiations and what I call interpreting four-letter words from student leaders to twelve-letter words for the president who had gotten his Ph.D. in linguistics. So those were the people who had tremendous impact, but especially Dr. Bullock. Story_ID: 167940 Speaker 1: Now, this was around '66 [1966], '67 [1967], around in there? Speaker 2: Mm-hm, I graduated--I pledged Delta [Sigma Theta] in '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: And this was also around the time that Malcolm X was assassinated. Speaker 2: Yeah, but my hero in the movement was Stokely Carmichael. I mean to this day I credit him to taking the shackles off my mind, my complete transformation as a black person took place in the auditorium at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] when Stokely Carmichael came and explained white nationalism to us, how self-hate and how beautiful we really were. He talked about deviled food cake and angel food cake and the good guy always wore the white hat and the white horse and he told how he had been brainwashed through nationalism and through television. I can't even begin to explain and it was just like all of the things that I thought were bad about me. And that's when I discovered how beautiful I was. From that point, for about two years, I was a crazy woman. I was like, "Kill the pigs. Kill honky." I just went crazy. I had a bush bigger than this house. I was reading 'Black Race,' '[The] Autobiography of Malcolm X,' '[The] Fire Next Time.' I mean I was reading black. I went crazy. I went through that whole period of, you know, accusing my professors of being sell-outs because they were living in twenty-five thousand [dollar] houses. I don't know where I thought they were supposed to be living in. Speaker 1: And you became as outspoken in that arena as you were in the mischievous arena? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you head up any of the student groups in campus? Speaker 2: I was the president of my sorority at that time, but I was--I was just like I am now. I had my foot in Greek life, but I also was very sympathetic and supportive of the Black Power Movement; however, I was never deeply ingrained into it as an organization because of my lack of respect for some of the leadership. But, I was, myself, radical in my thoughts. Texas Southern was the first college to be shot up by police officers. A lot of people think it was Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] or Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], but it was Texas Southern. Where a police officer was killed by a ricochet bullet. Speaker 1: Okay, what year was this? Speaker 2: That had to be in 1965, maybe. Speaker 1: In 1965? Okay and what was the incident? Speaker 2: No it couldn't be, I graduated in '67 [1967]--it had to be in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay and that was during the time, well, I don't think [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was already assassinated then, but it was getting close to that time. Speaker 2: It was getting close to that. I remember that day. Story_ID: 167941 Speaker 1: And would you describe--let's describe the event at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] where the police officer shot--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There is a street that used to go through the middle of Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] called, Tierwester [Street], T-I-E-R-W-E-S-T-E-R and there were always issues with close Tierwester because you had to cross this busy street to get to the other side of the campus. Stokely Carmichael there is a--there is a law--federal law that prohibits you to cross the state lines to create a riot. We call it "The Stokely Carmichael Law" because he would go from state to state and incite people and then he would disappear. And somebody would just come behind him and just sort of start the thing rolling. I mean there's no proof of it but I'm sure that's what happened. So it started this mammoth just spontaneous demonstration to close Tierwester and the kids started throwing rocks at the cars that were going back and forth. Now, I know it wasn't their idea. I'm sure they had people there. I'm not the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], but I just know that there were people who were instigating those movements. And so the police came and the kids started barricading themselves in boy's dorm and they shot up the dorms. The kids had no weapons. So a police officer was killed by their own ricochet bullet. The police ricochet bullet. And the kids were, you know, under their beds and behind mattresses. So the whole campus was closed down. There was a lot of demonstrating and et cetera. It was major and that was the first time. Speaker 1: This is during the time the United States government instigated--what is it--COINTELPRO [Counter Intelligence Program], and a lot of those devices were planted into the college campuses. Speaker 2: I went to a college to demonstrate the whole thing and when we pulled up, there were these people sitting in a car taking pictures of everybody. So I'm sure there was, if not still, an FBI file on me. There were these big buses that said, "State Farm." So we went into this church--see and that is different between being raised in North and being raised in the South. They said, "Stand in the line if you have been in jail, stand in this line. If you haven't been to jail, stand in that line." Well, I stood in the already been to jail because I had no intention of going to jail. That just was not into my DNA and a lot of my friends came looking for me. I said, "Sorry, that wasn't the deal. I can't go to jail." See, they grew up in the South. That's why I admire what the people did in the South because they had the (unclear) fortitude and the oppression in their lives. Well, you know the song, "I'd rather be a slave than be buried in my grave." Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I had discrimination but I didn't have segregation, so I always thought I was free. There were very few people that would call me a nigger to my face. There weren't signs that I couldn't go somewhere, so I hadn't psychological, physiological and emotionally conditioned to oppression. So I didn't have that in me that says I go to prison for this. That's just wasn't who I was. I mean I even did a paper on that later on when I went to graduate school because the courage it took to be in the front line of Civil Rights Movement, I think is underplayed and underappreciated. So that's my little--never get involved in something unless you're ready to do the whole thing. It was a life lesson for me. Story_ID: 167942 Speaker 1: When did you--was it at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] that you decided what your career would be? Was it at that particular point in your life that you decided that you would become a professor of political science? Speaker 2: No, I had no intention of ever teaching in my life. I was really thinking I was going to be a social worker. That was all confused, but I got pregnant in my senior year by a professor. I had finished college. I finished undergrad [undergraduate] school and the president offered me a position because he didn't want to lose me because I was such a good, during that chaotic time, he needed somebody who he can talk to and who can keep the lines of communication open, but I went to graduate school there. I didn't know at that time I was pregnant but by the end of that semester I had graduated in the middle of the year and had a semester in graduate school there. I left, went went home and had the baby in August and then moved up to northern California--I mean I went to Pasadena [California], had my daughter, Lalanya and then I moved up to northern California and never missed a beat with my graduate work. I went to Hayward State [later, California State University, East Bay, Hayward, California]. I was working on my master's degree. Story_ID: 167943 Speaker 1: You got your master's at--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I just went there [Hayward University, later California State University, East Bay, Hayward, California] for a couple of--they didn't have semesters they had quarters and my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] was getting her master's degree in California State in Los Angeles [California]. I went down there. When I was in northern California was when really the Black Power Movement peaked. That was during the time that they were killing the Black Panthers in Chicago [Illinois]. I had gone to--it was during the peak of the Vietnam War. They were having demonstrations every month on the fifteenth. They would have demonstrations mostly in Washington, D.C., Berkley, California, where I lived and San Francisco [California], which was in Candlestick Park. I was living there during that period of time. My sister came to town with this guy who came with her. I was after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King's [Jr.] assassination and he came with Lorie (ph.)--not Lorie with [Ralph] Abernathy and I sat at a table, David Hilliard of the Black Panther Party and Cecil Williams and his wife for breakfast where David Hilliard was trying to explain to Abernathy why they should coalesce between The Black Panthers and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. I'd never seen anybody eat grits like Abernathy. He wouldn't lift his head. I just wanted to put a rag on it and call him what he was. The man was talking to him and he ran out of grits. He was still eating them. I was like, "He's not even listening to this brother." So we went--Candlestick Park was like two blocks from the house. We left our cars and walked down there and David Hilliard got up and made a speech and he said, "We will kill you," but he didn't mean kill, he meant it in a metaphoric way. When he finished and it was time for Abernathy--Abernathy had a problem because he was trying to always be King, so he tried to get the King thing going where he--like King would say, "I have a dream. I have a dream." Abernathy that was his-"[Richard] Nixon is the one, blah, blah, blah. Nixon is the one," but before he got up there, he was so nervous after David Hilliard. His hands were shaking. His papers were shaking. He was so scared man. He didn't have any courage. So he got up there and made that speech. They arrested David Hilliard on site and he stayed in jail for fifteen to twenty years from that speech because that was during the time right after all those assassinations where you couldn't even--you know, like now you can't even joke about hijacking a plane, that was during the time you couldn't even metaphorically speak about killing. And of course, they wanted to continue. He was the last of the leaders of the Black Panther Party. So I was there for that. I used to tell people that my life was like Forrest Gump's life. I used to find myself in situations that were historic and so that was my time up there for that year. I was very chaotic. I went to California State University [East Bay] at Hayward [California] and it was during the time of Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio]. They had killed these kids at Kent State--shot these kids and there was a lot of racism at the college I was. The head of the college was a Mormon, so they just eliminated--they just closed school for the rest of the semester and I was upset because I had not a chance to get my grade where it needed to be. I left there--my point is when I left northern California and went to southern California to go to my mother's graduation, I had so much black rage in me, I was near a nervous breakdown. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 167944 Speaker 1: Now, before you left Texas--you left Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] in--what was that 1969? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was '69 [1969]--I graduated in '69 [1969]? I may have. I can't remember really--'69 [1969], yeah because my daughter [Lalanya Masters] was born in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay, she was born in '69 [1969]. So you were actually at Texas Southern when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you said you remembered that particular day--what were you doing that particular day? Speaker 2: I was giving a speech. I was a Delta [Sigma Theta]. We were in the student lounge and there was some kind of event going on where there were the different sororities, fraternities, the dean of women when everybody was getting up and making speeches about things and when I got up to speak, I saw this activity where people were walking and finally, somebody came up and gave me a note and said, "Dr. King had been shot." We just immediately discontinued the program. I can see it like it was yesterday. All the little pink and green sitting over there and all the little red and white sitting over here and I'm standing at the stage and the dean of women got up and said that we, you know, out of respect. They didn't say he was dead. They said he had been shot. By the time we got to the dorm, they announced that he was dead. That was another situation when people began to riot and stuff. Speaker 1: What was the atmosphere like at Texas Southern? Speaker 2: Very bad. They were rioting, and throwing rocks and acting up and I was just crying. And then next year, [Robert] Bobby Kennedy got shot in June when I was there in summer school. I didn't leave--I almost missed registration. I stayed in the house for a week. It was a very interesting time. Speaker 1: Because we were closing out, we're getting ready to close out of the '60s [1960] and head out toward the '70s [1970]. So you find yourself back in California at the university--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I did a lot of studying at the University of California [East Bay] at Hayward [California], but I did a lot of studying at Berkley [California] and I would come out on Fridays and I would just be confronted with tear gas because there was always, every Friday, like clockwork, these anti-war people, SDS [Students for a Democratic Society], would have a riot. And every Friday, like clockwork, the National Guards would come out with the tear gas. I remember one morning at eight o'clock in the morning in stacks, that was part of the computer, so if you want to do research, you have to go back in the stacks and get microfilming and I came out at ten o'clock, tear gas was everywhere. I was like, "I am tired of the revolution. I got a baby. I got try to get an education. I got to go on with my life." So after I went back down to California to see my mother [Isabell Arch Masters], I came to Washington [D.C.] to visit a friend of mine. And I stood out in the balcony and I looked out there and I said, "There was something about this city." One thing I liked about the city was black people were everywhere. And they were in the corner dancing by themselves with music on their shoulder. I was like I called my mother back I said "Mother I'm moving to Washington There are black people everywhere." I was just tired of white people. I was just tired of them. Story_ID: 167945 Speaker 1: So, when you--your decision to come to Washington [D.C.], was that for school? Speaker 2: School, a friend of mine was here that I had been in love with for years, my baby's [Lalanya Masters] father really, but more importantly I just liked the city--what I felt there, I felt black people were really in charge there and I didn't know anything about the plantation mentality and the colony, and I didn't know all that. I just saw them everywhere. I applied to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], so they accepted to me--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Then you went to Howard? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Urban studies, I transferred from sociology into urban affairs, urban policy. Speaker 1: And you got your master's from Howard? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: While you were at Howard, was there--what was the environment like? Speaker 2: They were still in the revolution. I'll never forget it, my first day in class, I was like--I'm so glad I'm at Howard now because I'm away from Berkeley [California] and all that demonstration and stuff. And the first day I got to class, there was a white teacher who got up and asked us all to tell our names, and a guy named Bambo (ph.), I can't remember his first--his last name got up on the-stood up on the desk and said, "Tell us what your name is first. We don't have to tell you not an m-f thing." I was like, "Oh, my God, here we go again." So they were on the fringe, they were near the end but they were still--I mean this was graduate school come on now it's time to get serious about your life, but we had that element there even then. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did you find that was so different being in the nation's capital at that particular time at Howard University that was going on other than, you know, a lot of blacks around and them being involved in the movement. What was it that actually impressed you or impressed upon you ideals that would be instrumental in your getting into fabric and the fiber of what was going on in the nation's capital? Speaker 2: First of all, I made a mistake by not making the distinction between the mentality at Howard University and the mentality of the people at Washington, D.C. So one of the first things it discovered was I considered a colonial mentality. The people were very tied to the jobs they had in the government. People were saying they were a "GS [General Schedule] this and GS that," I had never heard that before, so there was a kind of colonial mentality that was different for me. There was a lack of self-sufficiency, you know, aggressiveness, a sense of pride. It wasn't there. Story_ID: 167946 Speaker 1: I was--and I got involved really not too--I was in graduate school [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and met up with this guy--I'm trying to think of this restaurant/bar up on Georgia Avenue that used to be there a long time ago. It was really well known, who said he was on his way to a [HM Walter] Fauntroy campaign meeting. Me and my friend went with him and we ended up in Walter Fauntroy's campaign. So I really kind of got involved in politics almost immediately upon arriving there with my daughter [Lalanya Masters]. And it was not long after that that I met [HM] Marion Barry at WUST [radio station] for a rally for Fauntroy. We were supporting Fauntroy's campaign, Channing Phillips was running, Fauntroy was running and I forgot who else--I just remember Channing Phillips. It might've been HM] Sterling Tucker was running for non-voting delegate. That was the first election that these people had ever been able to vote. So that was a major--the first time they could vote was going to be a non-voting delegate, so that was exciting. Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: 1971. Okay, when you met Marion Barry, did you have any idea that he may play a role or a part?(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was very arrogant, very arrogant because he was there. At that time, he was head of Pride [Inc.], so he was an activist. I didn't know that about him but you could tell that he thought he owned the place the way he walked in. And he ran up to make a speech, so he was a principal that night to support--I think he supported and endorsed Walter Fauntroy. That was his candidate and I saw him a couple of weeks later at our sorority meeting. He was doing surrogate work, running around, campaigning for Walter. But he was a player. Speaker 2: Okay, did you have any idea that he might be in your life in the near future when you met him at that particular time? Was there any particular attraction? Speaker 1: No, I couldn't stand him. Story_ID: 167947 Speaker 1: So, after you finished at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], then what did you do when you got your master's from Howard? Speaker 2: It's all kind of jumbled up there. I'm trying to think--did I work for the National Council of Negro Women as soon as I finished or while I was in school? At some point, I had a job as assistant director of a program called, Sisters United for the National Council of Negro Women and that was a job that dealt with kids--girls who were in need of supervision, so we did a lot of stuff with that. I met my husband in graduate school, my first husband. Speaker 1: Okay, what was his name? Speaker 2: Moses Wiles, Jr. He was in graduate school there. We got married I think right out of graduate school, I did. He was a year ahead of me. Speaker 1: So this was around 1972 or '73 [1973]? Speaker 2: We got married in '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: What did he do? He was in grad school but after he finished? Speaker 2: Well, he was a consultant. That was an era of consultants. They were all working for some--I think he worked for Al [Albert] Nellum at that time. So they were all making all this money consulting. Then he went back to law school. I got pregnant with my youngest daughter, Tamara, and during that period, I started teaching UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] in political science. Well, it was really Washington Technical Institute really and I was there a couple years before it transcended to--until they merged. But that whole period of time, I became very politically active and I worked on [HM] Marion's [Barry] first campaign for school board. I was his volunteer coordinator. But even prior to that and getting married, he wanted to run--the second election phase that came to Washington [D.C.] was the elected city council and for that first city council, he wanted to run for chairman of city council. David Eaton was the chairman of that I was the coordinator for the committee to draft Marion Barry for chairman of the city council. So that meant I did the work and David Eaton signed the letters--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, at this particular time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Reverend David Eaton. Speaker 1: Reverend David Eaton. Speaker 2: He was the pastor of All Souls [Church, Unitarian, Washington, D.C.] at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, now, at this particular time, we're getting around the '73 [1973] and '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: It was all around the same time. Speaker 1: All around the same time--at D.C. or Washington D.C. did not have a localized form of city government. Speaker 2: That was the election that was going to give them their first elected city council. Story_ID: 167948 Speaker 1: You said that in 1973, 1974, your position was you were the chair--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: [HM] Marion [Barry] wanted to run for chairman of city council. There was resistance to that because Marion was a hotshot, you know. People wanted [HM] Sterling Tucker to run. And Marion always wanted to do what he wanted to do, so he started a committee called, "The Committee to Draft Marion Barry for Chairman of the City Council." I was the coordinator of that committee and Reverend David Eaton was the chair of that committee, which basically meant I did the work and he signed the letters. That's really what it boiled down to. I was politically unexperienced for the most part. That's when I really began to gain my political experience under the tutelage of Marion. Speaker 1: And this was in 1973? Speaker 2: He was still, if I'm not mistaken, at Pride [Inc.]. Even though he had been on the school board, he was still at Pride because the school board wasn't a full time job. I remember they had a rally to support the home rule charter because you had to vote that you wanted the home room charter that would give home rule to elect a mayor, city council and school board. You had to vote on that. I remember because it happened on my birthday. It took place at the hotel at Thomas Circle [Washington, D.C.]. It's important because a lot of things have changed since then. And I was there at that rally, and I had my petition and I was doing my coordinating job, running around people to sign this petition to draft Marion Barry as chairman, to run for chairman of the city council. And I ran into a guy named [HM William] Bill Lucy, who was a big union guy then and is a big guy now. And I walked up to him I wanted him to sign, and he told me, "Not only am I not going to sign it, he not going to win and you're wasting your time and get out of my face with it." I'll never forget it. I went somewhere around the corner and I was crying. Marion is running around looking for his coordinator. He found me and he was like, "Why aren't you out there doing your job?" I was like, because my boss was really--what's Marion's campaign manager for years--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It'll come to you. Speaker 2: He's very critical. Anyway, I was crying. I talked to him and he said, "First of all, dry your tears. We don't have time for that one. Number two, you asked everybody." He said, "This is what you know. Don't give any opportunity to say that they weren't asked. You asked everybody. You even asked Sterling Tucker, asked everybody and write down if they said yes or no. So, later on, they can never say that they weren't asked." That was my first political lesson, and from that point on, I tell people who are running for office, "Ask everybody for your support. Never give them an opportunity to say you didn't ask." That was my first political lesson. Long story short, they got in a room, Carol Harvey, Sterling Tucker, [HM] Walter Fauntroy--not Sterling Tucker, Walter Fauntroy, Carol Harvey--I can't think of his name for the life of me, but, anyway, a lot of the people back in those days, John Wilson, Reggie Robinson. John Wilson, at that time, hadn't started running for office. He was still a Marion Barry supporter or worker, so to speak. And they said they had done an assessment that Marion would not be a viable candidate for chairman of the city council and I was so angry because I felt that most of the people in that room had an agenda, which was to get Sterling Tucker as chairman. So I mean I just raised all kinds of cane because I didn't want to bite my tongue, so there was no decision made that night. But the next day, or the day after that, Marion called me and said--I was still in graduate school [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--and asked me to come up to see him. He was at the presidential building where the school board was located. He told me that he had made a decision that he was not going to run for the chairman of the city council and I was very upset because I was a fighter. I wanted him to run. So he said, "But don't worry about it." I'll never forget this. He walked me downstairs. Thanked me for all my--"I know you worked hard." I had worked hard. He walked me out and we stood on the corner of 12th [Street] and Pennsylvania Avenue and he said to me, "I may not run for the chairman of the city council, I'm going to run at large," he said, "and I'm going to win." He said, "But in two years," and he kind of just waved his hand like around, he said, "Everybody in this city is going to think that they know me personally." I did not know then that he had it in his mind to run for mayor. I just know that two years later, that's exactly what he did. Speaker 1: And this was in 1974 when he ran? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 167949 Speaker 1: Would you just kind of talk a little about the Home Rule Act and what that meant for the city--for Washington, D.C.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, it just gave them the first to pick their local election official. It was incremental process of giving us self-determination. You know, we were called then, and I still believe until we get full statehood, we were called "The Last Colony" that we were basically ruled and run by committees from the [U.S.] Senate and the [U.S.] House [of Representatives]. They ran us and the president and they appointed part of that mayor commission form of government, but they were appointed by the president. And so they did their bidding. So this was the first time for us to determine who would be our elected officials. So our first elected city council had [HM] Sterling Tucker on it, and [HM] Marion Barry, and I think it was [David] Dave Clark, Polly Shackleton. I think [HM] Nadine Winter was one. I can't remember all of them. Speaker 1: There were twelve of them, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then one chairman? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Because before this Home Rule Act, people in [Washington] D.C. had to vote either in Maryland or Virginia. Speaker 2: They didn't vote period if you lived in D.C. You couldn't vote in Maryland or Virgina. You just couldn't vote. In 1960, I think you got the right to vote for the president of the United States but you didn't have any local officials you could vote for here. Speaker 1: And there was no representation in [U.S.] Congress from the district. Speaker 2: No representation in congress. The first election was the nonvoting delegate, which [HM] Walter Fauntroy won and held forever. They only had two people in that position in the history of this city. We're on our fourth mayor I think. Speaker 1: So after you--you worked with, you chaired up or you worked with his campaign [Marion Barry] and later, he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I worked with him as a large campaign. I did that. And he won obviously. There were several at large seats. I'm just trying to think. I can't remember everybody who was there, but he was one of the at large representative and he got like financed and--the finance committee. The mayor was brilliant. Speaker 1: Now, after the Home Rule Act, wasn't congress still over the finance? Speaker 2: The budget. Speaker 1: Okay, the budget. But his was financing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was the one on the city council who got with the budget and knew it by heart. And that was a very smart place to be if you had ambitions to become mayor. I mean he knew what he was going to do. Nobody else--somebody knew. I didn't know but he knew. Speaker 1: Okay, so he won in '74 [1974] and he stayed mayor for, what is it like sixteen years--no, what was it? Speaker 2: Three terms. Speaker 1: Three terms, that was twelve years to 1991 or 1990. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And that was his strategy to become mayor and when he got in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He would have probably still been mayor had he gone another direction with his personal because he is still very much loved, but anyway that was my involvement with the political scene at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: So I was always very involved and I taught political science, so. And I was having my second child [Tamara Masters] during that period of time also. Story_ID: 167950 Speaker 1: Okay now, you said that your husband, Moses [Wiles, Jr.]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Wiles. Speaker 1: --went on to become a lawyer. You all were still together? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you stayed at the University of Washington and Washington Technical School [sic, Washington Technical Institute, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Federal City College, Washington Technical School and D.C. Teachers [College] came together to form the District of Columbia [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: All right and you taught there before? Speaker 2: At Washington Tech, the one that was housed in Connecticut Avenue. Speaker 1: All right, and then when they came together, you still taught political science? Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was at Washington Tech, I taught social science, meaning I taught psychology, anthropology, sociology. It was a two-year curriculum and I taught the social sciences and political science was one of them, but when the school merged, the disciplines became much more specific, so out of those social sciences, I chose to stick with political science. Then I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to get my Ph.D. in political science. I did my coursework but I didn't do my Ph.D. It was too much. Speaker 1: So how long did you stay to work on Ph.D? Speaker 2: About a year and half. It didn't take long because I was teaching at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay, so you and Moses Wiles, how long did you all stay-- Speaker 2: We separated--I don't know because we stayed married much longer than--we separated but then we stayed married for another five or eight years. So we moved over to Lisle Place (ph.), where I raised my children. Lalanya was five years old. She was born in '69 [1969], '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. '72 [1972], '73 [1973]. In 1974, I was pregnant with Tamara. She was born in November 6, 1974. So we moved there, and I think Moses and I separated maybe three years later. She was about three years old when we broke up. Story_ID: 167951 Speaker 1: What did you do after that? Speaker 2: I taught at UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]. I became chairman of the--I got on the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission. Speaker 1: What did that entail? The boxing commission, what was that all about? Speaker 2: I started dating a guy in boxing in '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, really in '74 [1974]. I met him at the Hilton Head [South Carolina] and he was heading up the camp for Leon Spinks. And a bunch of friends of our, a bunch of girls, had gone to the Hilton to have fun, and we met him and we met all the guys in the camp. Then we started dating--and I became, just leave it to me. I'm not just going to be on the side lines. I started to learn everything about boxing. Meanwhile [HM] Marion [Barry] had won as mayor [of Washington, D.C.]. You know, to the victor goes the spoils. So he had called--so his people called, not him so much, "What do you want?" I obviously didn't want a job I wanted to stay at the university because it allowed me to be able to raise my children in a way in which they wouldn't be farmed off to babysitters and after school programs and latchkey kids. And finally I said to him, "I want to be on the boxing commission." And he said, "The boxing commission?" And I said, "Yeah." Well, what had happened is I decided to have a fundraiser. I had always been interested in sports and children, let me go back. And we decided to have a fundraiser to raise money, a group of us, we called ourselves, Network Plus, and we decided a fundraiser to raise money for the athletic programs because they were cutting them at [Washington] D.C. schools. Speaker 1: This was after you came to D.C.? Speaker 2: This was after I came to D.C. This was after Marion became mayor. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is early '70s [1970]. Speaker 2: Early '70 [1970]. I was at UDC, I was married [to Moses Wiles, Jr.], I was in this group called, Network Plus, a bunch of women, we were (unclear) and then we decided to incorporate--we decided we needed to do something else with our lives other than drink wine and hang out all the time. So we decided we wanted to have this fundraiser for kids to benefit the athletic program. We decided to put on a boxing match. And I said I was going with this guy named Sam. And so he helped me and gave me the ins and outs. So we put a boxing match together. We had Bennie Briscoe and we had tiger--we had Lady Tiger [Trimiar]. We had women's bout at the [D.C.] Armory. Speaker 1: This was a professional or semi-professional? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm telling you girl. We put on a real professional card. I got a lot of technical advice from my friend, but we had to do all the promoting and the matchmaking and all that stuff. We had to deal with the boxing commission. They were terrible. They were sexist and incompetent by my standards. Speaker 1: Now these were all males? Speaker 2: All males--I'm talking about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And all white males? Speaker 2: No, they were not--most of them were white but the commission at that time was headed by a guy, at that time, who smoked a big cigar, had a great big stomach, and the chief of police was on it, at that time Bertel Jefferson (ph.) and Bobby Mitchell was on it then, Bobby Mitchell from the [Washington] Redskins. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Those were the three commissioners. And then the rest of the guys on the commissions, the inspectors and the referees; those were white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we had to deal with these people to get license for our fighters and to get our trainers and get our managers license, as promoters. We had to deal with them and it was just horrible dealing with them. They just treated us so badly. They just would not take us seriously, and they were not competent, I felt. So after we had the fight, which was a great success, and we gave the money to the school system. You know, but that gave me a little taste of boxing. Speaker 1: How much do you think you raised? Speaker 2: I can't even remember. It was like fifteen thousand [dollars]. It was a lot of money back then. Speaker 1: Back then, it was a lot. Speaker 2: Remember we put on a whole big match. We had to pay fighters, trans--hotel. I'm surprised we made anything. About fifteen thousand [dollars] we cleared. Speaker 1: Where was that? Speaker 2: At the Armory. I'm telling you. Back then, I had a lot of nerve, but I always had nerve. I mean, at that time, I didn't think it was a big deal, but it was a great big deal. We had the first woman fight, which ended up being more interesting than the main event. Bennie Briscoe, which was a journeyman, middle-weight, he was a great fighter. So he was our headliner. Anyway, so after that experience, it was a great experience. I really enjoyed. The mayor kept trying to find for his people--you know you have to take care of your people. Give them a job whatever, I didn't want a job. They kept trying to put me on these commissions, the education commission, the ABC--I didn't want to do none of that. Things had to have high interest to me. So finally I said, "I want to be on the boxing commission." He said, "The what?" I said, "The boxing commission." He said, "You're kidding me, aren't you?" I said, "No, I'm not. I'm not kidding I want to be on the boxing commission." So he put me on the boxing commission. No, it wasn't that simple. He said, "Okay." Marion always has been a pioneer and stuff. He said, "I can handle it if you can." Because I didn't know what that meant. Story_ID: 167952 Speaker 1: So I went on about my business, forgot that I had said it, was teaching at UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]--a friend of mine came to me and said--it was like a month before the election and [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter was running for re-election. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He said, "We need to you come take over as coordinator--minority coordinator for northern Virginia. They had just fired somebody. We need to get the boat out. So I took a leave of absence for that last month. So this was like six weeks, from September to November, I took a leave of absence from UDC and I was able to do that because one of my friends, Shiela Harmon had agreed to cover some of my classes. Speaker 2: I know Sheila Harmon. We went to school together. Speaker 1: Yeah, she had agreed to cover some of my classes for me, and I moved over to an office in Virginia, and I was minority coordinator for Carter-[Walter] Mondale. And that was quite an experience. I was balling out redneck Democratic state people left and right. They asked me to come over there and do a job, which was to get the black vote out. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I had exactly six weeks to do that. So I'm good at what I do. If I accept it, I'm going to do it, but I'm going to do it the way I know to do it. So one of the things that happened was they said--I said, "Well, there's a lot of little things we can do." We did a lot of little things. I knocked on doors. I went and talked to the senior citizens. I mean I did those door to door things. I knew to do that. I had been trained in the [HM] Marion Barry school of politics, so I knew you had to get on the street. I had done that. I said, "What we need to do is have a rally--a get out the vote rally." And, when you're working for the president of the United States, there's no cost and there's everybody available. So there was like--Sarah (unclear), I'll never forget this I remember she was working for the White House and they would call me, and they would say, "Well, we'll give you Cliff Alexander [Clifford Alexander, Jr.]." I said, "No." Pat Harrison [sic, Patricia Roberts Harris]. "No." And they would keep giving me and I said, "Look, let me tell you something. Those people won't attract the people we're trying to attract. We're trying to attract the people who don't ordinarily vote. The people who would come to see them, are going to vote. They get it because the people who would not ordinarily vote, don't know Pat Harris and Cliff Alexander, so what we're doing here?" So they said, "Well who would you want?" I said, "[HM] Jesse [L.] Jackson." Because at that time, Jesse was the man and I knew that would bring the grassroots people out. So they gave me Jesse Jackson. So I mean I coordinated all that. Story_ID: 167953 Speaker 1: So then, you know, we started laying it out about how it's going to be set up. So I had said, this is a very important story to tell you what I was up against--that what I wanted on that--and I got the ministers to buy in--again, the [HM] Marion Barry school of politics, get the local community because they already had said, "Who is this person from Washington, D.C. over here doing stuff for us?" I immediately went to all the people who were somebody and I said, "I need your help." I said, "I don't know nothing. They just sent me over here. I can't do this without you." So I got them to buy in to support what I was doing. And I went and got all the ministers. I knew some of them because my brother had preached there as a child minister. So I had gotten them all to buy in to the minister's association. I said, "We need your help. Y'all just lead me with God's help," you know, whatever. So then they're setting it up. So I said, what I want on that stage are the ministers and [HM] Jesse [L. Jackson] and that's it. "Well, what about the party?" You know, the [Democratic] Party leaders--you know, the state party leaders because the cameras were going to be there. I said, "They can sit in the front row, but they can't sit on stage, and I mean that." So this white guy came to my office about six [o'clock] at night. I had a desk that was two cement blocks and ply wood, you know, that was my desk, upstairs, right on the main--I think that's Washington, the main street, then [Clifford] Alexander [Jr.], yeah. He came--he came with his wife. He was tall like Abraham Lincoln and she was kind of short. And so he came and he stood over me and told me in so many words that I was going to do it their way and that who did I think I was that the party regulars, the people who have done all this work, the chairman of the democratic Virgina committee and the chairman of the--and the vice chairman of the--they were going to sit on that stage. I looked at him and I said, "First of all don't you ever come into this room and yell at me again, and you sit down. I'm not standing up. You sit down." So he sat down and I said, "Now, you can do it your way, but I won't be there and neither will Jesse." I said, "I am not bringing all those black people to T. C. Williams High School [Alexandria, Virginia] to be on a plantation, so they're going to sit in the audience in the great white father is going to sit on the stage and look down at them. I think not. They're going to have the ministers that they're familiar with sitting on that stage with Jesse Jackson, and y'all are gonna sit y'all white asses--I said it just like that--excuse the expression--on the front two rows and act like you got some sense and don't insult me and don't insult my people and you ask me to do a job. I'm going to do it my way or I won't be there and neither will Jesse." I saw his wife go, "Yes." You can just tell she was just so happy. Somebody done stood up to her bullying husband. He looked at me. I said, "I'm not going to do it that way. You do it my way." So long story short, that's how it went. It was a huge success. He came up to me and he shook my hand and he said, "This was so great. You were so right. Here is my card when this is over, if you ever need anything, you're doing a great job." But that was the kind of stuff I had to deal with. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That never crossed anybody's mind. You bring all these black people people. I put flyers out and I went places. I went to the projects where our people are registered but they won't vote. I said, "Jesse got a message for you." I didn't put vote or anything. I said, "Jesse wants to talk to you, come to talk to Jesse." Of course, Jesse was brilliant and [HM] Alexis [Herman] was with him at that time. So everybody was working on the campaign. That's where everybody got to be such a much. So that was a great experience and, of course, [Jimmy] Carter lost and all that but-- Story_ID: 167954 Speaker 1: While I was there though, I got a call. They said, "The mayor [HM Marion Barry] has just sent your name over to the city council to be on the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission." I had totally forgotten I said this to him. And I was like, "What?" And they said he needs a resume and they need--these are the boys in commission people calling. I was like "Oh, my God, I didn't mean it. I don't really want to do this," right. So I'm running back to Washington [D.C.] to try to get out of it--I said, "Naw, I can't," everybody said, "oh you go on and do your thing." Oh, my God. All hell broke loose. When they announced that I was a nominee for the boxing commission, you've never seen such sabotage, those people accused me from everything to drug dealing to prostitution. They had all kind of rumors out. They were lobbying, all, but the problem with it was it was stupid stuff. What it really boiled down to was they didn't want a woman on the commission, so they used issues like, "She can't go into the locker rooms," and blah, blah. Then they--that was bad enough. It was a big controversy. There was a woman named Hiawatha Knight, who had just been put on the commission in Michigan, so there was precedent for it. But-- Speaker 2: Now, was she black or white? Speaker 1: Black. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I got a call from Betty King at the boys in commission from the. She said, "I need to talk to you. You need to come downtown." So I said, "Oh, something is going wrong." So she showed me this letter and this was an anonymous letter to the city council, which literally accused me of prostitution, drug dealing, anything you can think of--me, little old me, single mom with two kids. I was so angry. So I called the mayor. I said, "It's an emergency. It's an emergency." They finally put him through. I said, "You've seen this letter?" He said, "What letter?" I said, "The letter they circulated on me." He say, "I saw it." I said, "Well, what do you think?" He said, "I told you I can handle it if you can." I said, "Oh, okay, it's time for me to handle it." So I knew--John Ray, at that time, was commission for regulatory affairs, that they were going to bring it up on my hearing. I had already done a controversial interview where they said, "New Boxing Commission, Nobody is Lightweight in the Political Arena." That was the title. I'll never forget it. They brought up the issue of weigh-ins. I remember saying, "I'm not in a beauty contest. I'm here to do a job." They were like, "See, she's arrogant." So what I decided to do was I said, "I'm going to do a Kennedy move." I called my, then, estranged husband [Moses Wiles, Jr.]. I said, "I need you to come with me to my hearing." I got my two kids out of school. I got my friend, Norma Stewart, who ran funeral home, Stewart Funeral Home [Washington, D.C.], and they let me use their blue and black limousine. They picked me up. I put on my one little fur coat, took my two kids and my husband. We got out of it and went in there. My whole family--I was sitting there with my whole family, looking like the American family. And [HM] Nadine [Winter] was going to be the one who brought it up. And she was on the committee, but John was the chairman. Story_ID: 167955 Speaker 1: So, I went to the hearing [nomination hearing for the District of Columbia Boxing and Wrestling Commission] and I could tell and everybody would question me. They--my best friend at the time was a woman named Madeline Petty--and when they did the article on me and they interviewed different people and they asked her what was my greatest fault, she said, "She has no patience, whatsoever. That is her greatest fault." So she was on the pillars of the community, go-getter, progressive, professionally superior in everything she did and my best friend, so you had to have somebody from the community, somebody from the church and she was my witness, one of my character witnesses. So she's sitting next to me and John Ray is asking me do you have any experience in athletics? And I'm like, "You mean did I play football?" She kicked me. I was like, "No, but"--because you know a commissioner's job has nothing to do with that. It is an administrative job. You are ruling on licensing and standards, and safety and all you have to do is be mildly intelligent and have a whole lot of integrity and you can do a good job. You don't have to know anything about sports. You don't even have to know anything about boxing really. You just have to know what the standards are and the rules and enforce them. But they were just asking me questions that were just no relevant. She was kicking me to make me answer--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Answer them--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --answer appropriately and correctly. So when [HM] Nadine [Winter] got up, she kept looking over there. She said, "That's your family?" I said, "Yes, that's my husband [Moses Wiles, Jr.] and my two children." So she, "I have a letter here." I said, "I understand you do. Is it signed?" She said, "Well no." I said, "Oh." In other words, I know you're not about to read something in the record that's anonymous. And she says, "Um," and Marilyn kicked me and, you know, so she said, "Well, you know, anyway it is anonymous and so we won't," you know, "but there are some allegations." I said, "Oh really, I'm not aware of any allegations because allegations usually have an author behind them." And so we moved on. She said, "But aren't you separated from her husband?" I said, "We have an '80s [1980] marriage." So he had agreed to do it on one condition I give him some free tickets to the fights. So that was the deal we cut. So when it was over with and I had gotten through my confirmation, I got outside, I shook his hand, he took a taxi home. He said, "Now remember the deal." I said, "You got your tickets, Moses." The kids and I got in the car and I took them home, but that was my confirmation and I was sworn in by [HM] Marion [Barry], then the mayor [of Washington, D.C.], we got so tickled, it was like they had to move my swearing in into the city council it was that many people and press there. It was major, you know, swearing in the first woman and we started laughing, we couldn't get through the swearing in. We were just cracking up. I'd raise my hand and he'd laugh I'd laugh. Finally, we got through it. Speaker 2: And what year was this? Speaker 1: That was '75 [1975]. Story_ID: 167956 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: How long did you (unclear)? Speaker 2: Ten years. Speaker 1: Ten years? Speaker 2: I was harassed and mistreated. The first weigh-in, Carol Thompson at that time, now Carol Thompson Cole, but Carol Thompson was the director of consumer regulatory affairs, the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission came under the consumer regulatory affairs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they have their first weigh-in. So I'm coming, you know--they don't want me there. So I walk into the room and there's this--you know, these screens they have for, when you dress behind them. So they have the screen. So I thought, okay that's a good compromise. I thought they would examine the boxers behind the screen if they got an issue, you know. They had me sitting behind the damn screen. I was like sitting there looking out--can you imagine me sitting behind a screen. How dumb is that? So I jumped up, ran downstairs. The director--we were on the ninth floor, she was on the third floor and went into her office. They said she was in a meeting. I said, "I don't care." I went in there and I said, "You gotta come with me." So she came with me and I said, "Look, that's for me to sit behind." And she was like, "We can't--gentleman, we can't do this." Speaker 1: None of the men were sitting behind the screen. Speaker 2: What was I supposed to do behind the screen. It made no sense. So I had to deal with that, but it was okay because I learned a lot in that job as commissioner about what was going wrong. My first fight I went to--the fight started at eight o'clock. I got there at 7:30, the ring wasn't even up. The fight didn't even start until 9:30 and then when it was over, the boxer didn't get paid because they didn't make any money. So I mean I was running all these things. So the chairman at that time just was trying to make my life hell on so many different levels. Long story short, the mayor [HM Marion Barry] removed him as chairman and made me chairman. Speaker 1: In what year? Speaker 2: Probably the next year, I can't remember. Story_ID: 167957 Speaker 1: I was sworn in as chairman of the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission. Well, first I was sworn in as interim chairman, which there was no such position, but, no, he didn't have enough sense to know that. The mayor [HM Marion Barry] had enough. He was tired. He was tired of me calling and complaining, you know. I just wouldn't let them get away with nothing. I was giving--he was giving me hell. I was giving everybody else hell. So then I became chairman and I changed everything, made the promoters--if you can't pay the fighters, you can't promote. So I would make them bring the purse to the office and I'd have it under lock and key. And the purse meaning the money that was paying for the--anybody that had to get paid by the promoter, they had to bring that money in advance. I had that money. If nobody showed up, people were going to get paid. I made them put up the ring the day before and for it to be inspected the day before. All the things that went wrong, I started working on correcting, and I got really involved with safety, which, of course, is a part of, you know my, gender DNA. So it's a long story, but I, at the end of the day, was a founder of the IBF. Speaker 2: And that's the? Speaker 1: International Boxing Federation, I was on the executive committee of the USBA [United States Boxing Association] that lead into the IBF. I was on the executive committee of the World Boxing Council [WBC] and on the executive committee of the World Boxing Association [WBA] and my main thing was safety. I started and really promoted a thing called, The Passport, where fighters were getting knocked--like if you get knocked out in Michigan, you're not supposed to fight for thirty days minimally, depends how long you're out if it's a technical knockout versus--you know, you become unconscious. Speaker 2: You use that as recoup time. Speaker 1: Yes, and to rest your brain and without else, but fighters and unscrupulous managers and greedy trainers would go and fight in New Jersey. So I started a thing called The Passport. And you had to have your passport signed and if you didn't have that passport signed, you could not fight. So what it did was regulate and save these fighters, as I used to say, from themselves and from their unscrupulous managers. So if you got knocked out in New Jersey and you came to Washington [D.C.] to fight--if you went to the last ten fights, you know, you had to call the commission [District of Columbia Boxing and Wrestling Commission] and they had to have these passports. It was really successful. It was hard. I took my show on the road. I went to all the major boxing associations and made my presentation. I worked very hard. I traveled all over the world doing that. And it really became institutionalized although it was resisted by the promoters and the managers, but the boxing commissions had to buy into it because that was their job, I was trying to save people's lives, minimally save them from permanent brain damage. I remember one time Joe Frazier brought his son to Washington to fight. So we had this big fight, Joe Frazier's son is going to fight, Marvis Frazier, blah, blah, blah. So we had the fight. There was a rule. I was also instrumental in moving the championship round from fifteen to twelve because I was on the safety committee and they found out that people died from brain damage after the twelfth round, so we moved the twelfth round. So I had done all these safety things and worked world-wide and he comes in with his son. There also is a rule that there's no such thing you can't throw in no towel from no corner. So the boy had just got tapped, and the daddy acting all crazy in the corner, so they threw in the towel. And our referee, who I guess was scared, ended the fight. I said, "Pick that towel up, throw it back out and continue this fight until you determine the boy can't go any further." Well, by that time, there was so much chaos that it was difficult to resume the fight. So after the fight was over, I'm back there, you know, making sure everybody gets paid. So he comes in--I had suspended him for sixty days--no, I'm sorry 120 days. Speaker 2: Now, this was the referee or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --this was Frazier--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Marvis Frazier. I gave him the maximum suspension--medical suspension, which is serious. So his father came in. He got his money. And he was--didn't say anything. I said, "Here is your money." I wrote on his passport, "suspended for 120 days." He left. His father came in. He came in huffing and puffing, "Why you suspend my son? Wasn't nothing wrong with him." I said, "You thought so, you threw in the towel." He stood there and looked and me and smiled, and he said, "All right. All right, madam commissioner." He walked out and said, "She is a (inaudible response)." He tells that story every time he sees me. So that was me and my--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The son should have been happy. Speaker 1: The son, I guess, not really, he wanted to fight. Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: But I also I wanted to teach Joe Frazier, you know, I said, "Let your son fight." You know, "You can't protect him, and if you don't want him to get hit, let him wait tables or something." Speaker 2: Yeah, but that suspension, that gave him a chance to heal even if he had not been really hurt. Speaker 1: There was nothing wrong with that boy. He had barely been tapped. It was not long after that that we passed the rule about relatives being in the corner anyway because it wasn't worth it. People were beating up their kids in the corner, slapping them and everything. So, I stayed there. I had enemies in boxing. So at some point, and most importantly, [HM] Marion [Barry] had enemies. It was during the time that his world was beginning to disintegrate. His life was spiraling out of control, and the government--at that time, I didn't know it--was investigating him. Story_ID: 167958 Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So this was getting close to the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Late '80s [1980], like '88 [1987], '87 [1987], '88 [1988] so they had been following him [HM Marion Barry] and all. So they accused me of double dipping, which meant I was traveling, the city [Washington, D.C.] was paying for some of it, and the international organizations were paying for some of it, which was true, but they were not paying for the same thing. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So long story short, everybody was like headlines, "[District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission accused of double-dipping." It all got down to $1500. I'm telling you--when it got down to that--of course, I had to go get a lawyer and he said, "Now, I'm gonna tell you Ms. Barry"--well, it was Ms. Masters at that time--"I'm gonna tell you the truth," he said, "but you do what you want to do." He said, "This is political. You're friends with the mayor. They're trying to cut off the limbs to get to the main thing." He said, "Now, I've been told. I'm not gonna tell you who told me because I know how you will react that if you will cooperate and talk with people about the mayor's activities, then they can make this go away." I said, "Well, first of all, let's start with they can kiss my ass." Excuse me, that's what I said. I said, "Now, that being done--that's all you tell them--but let me tell you I don't nothing about the mayor's activities. We're not that kind of friends, so whatever his social life is, that's not the world I live in. I have a boyfriend. I have a life. I don't travel in his circles, but if I did, if I knew everything, I ain't telling them." So they went forward with the prosecution--well, they didn't go forward because he said, "Well, we go two things. We can beat it," he said, "we can beat it but it's going to cost you about twenty thousand [dollars] or thirty thousand [dollars] because they don't have any proof." Speaker 2: For $1500? Speaker 1: $1500, or you can plead the second degree--it boiled down to like shoplifting, that would be the charge. I said, "Plea," because I don't--I'm not taking my kids' college and spending it on no lawyers. They're not doing that to me. They're not breaking me for the rest of my life. I've spent a lot of time saving this money to educate my kids." So this is very interesting. My life is very interesting. Story_ID: 167959 Speaker 1: So I went in there that morning and the judge said, "Are you sure you want to--?" And I reimbursed the WBC [World Boxing Council] for $15,000 [sic, $1500] and the judge said, "You did what?" He said, "But wait a minute," this is what the judge said--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: $1500-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) $1500, he said, "Somebody needed to pay you." He said, "that was legitimate." This was the judge. He said, "Now, if the WBC or the IBF [International Boxing Federation] didn't pay it, then the city [Washington, D.C.] should pay it. So somebody's gotta to reimburse her. Let's start with that. Somebody was supposed to pay for her travel," because he knew what it was, he knew it was political. He said, "Are you sure you want to do this, Ms. Masters?" I said, "Judge, I want to get on with my life and I do not want to spend my children's education on lawyer fees." He said, "You know what? I understand that." So he said, "Okay, a year's probation, second degree whatever." So I walk out--I'll never forget this--this is going somewhere, a cop walked up to me and said, "I need you to go with me." My mother [Isabell Arch Masters] was outside, raising hell cursing out the prosecutors and everybody. She was so mad. I said, "Will somebody control mother." He said, "We gotta take you over." I said, "Where?" He said, "We gotta get you, you know, take you through the process." I mean, picture me and all--I said, "You gonna handcuff me?" He said, "Not if you don't want me to." I said, "No, I really don't." So I walked over and sat at his desk, just walking like friends. And he was like, (inaudible). And I was like, "What's the problem? He said, "This is f-ed up." I said, "Why are you saying that?" He said, "Because it is. This is f-ed up." He said, "You know, I'm"--I won't call his name on camera--I'm also the one who investigated this. He said, "I went all over the country investigating you and the worse that was said about you was that you were arrogant." He said, "I don't even know why you're here." And then he told me about a case that was another political case from the city council, whose name I won't call, who really had done some real funky stuff, real funky stuff in New York. And they sat there and said we're gonna go with--it wasn't personal--they said, "We're gonna go with the executive." They didn't even call my name, in other words, this was--they were just trying, and he said, "This just ain't right." And so he said, he finished the little process. I left. He called me two weeks later and said, "I want to have lunch with you." And I said, "Okay." So I went to lunch with him. We sat in the restaurant on Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.], upstairs Chinese restaurant, we talked about everything. I was still trying to figure out what he wanted. Finally, I said, "Okay they're putting the chairs up on the table to clean up for dinner, what is it? I mean is this the end of it? Is there a bottom line?" He said, "I just didn't have the nerve, but I would like you to manage my son." I said, "Excuse me." He said, "My son wants to be a boxer. He's a body builder. He's a big guy." He's a white cop and he said, "And I investigated you," he said, "And everybody said you have so much integrity. Your biggest problem was that you had too much integrity that you were getting on people's nerves, you know, sitting in the room and people--I'm not handling. Like the one time, I was on the ratings committee, I had to get off the ratings committee because I thought you were really supposed to rate people according to their ability. I didn't it was all about who knew what and who was paying what, so I had to get off of that. So he said, "And I want somebody who I can trust. Would you manage my son?" The arresting officer asked me to manage his son, which I proceeded to do. And I went into partnership with a friend of mine and we managed his son for about a year and a half until his son went and trained at Queens--Gleason's Gym in Queens [sic, Brooklyn, New York] and got beat up and decided he was going to go work for the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. It's a hard way to earn a living. You know, you think you want to be a fighter, but you see you have to really be hungry to be a fighter. When you got an education and a job waiting for you where nobody's hitting you upside your head-but we had named him "The Force." And I could just see it I had my whole little thing going, you know he was gonna wear blue. So I'm managing-that was how that turned out. Had a year probation. I took my daughter up there one day when I had to go meet with the probation officer, which was not very often because I used to call him and tell him I had to leave town because I'd be going to (unclear)--"You can't leave town without permission." I said, "Well, then send a letter because I gotta go." So finally I took her up there. She said, "Why you brining up here?" I said, "Because I want you to see what happens when you get in trouble." So I took her up there so she can see people sitting around--you know, up there--and you see these people going in there--I never had to do urine tests because my little thing had nothing to do with drugs. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: I said, "Well, these people are getting urine tests. These people"--I took her in there. And really when I would go in to see the probation officer, we would talk about boxing. I said, "I brought my daughter because I want her to see what life happens when you get in trouble." He said, "Well, that's a good idea." So the last time I had an interview with him--I was supposed to see him once a month. Out of the year, I saw him four times because sometimes I just couldn't get down there. I was out of town. He didn't have time for me. He really had people to supervise. So when I see him he said, "I'm gonna miss you." I said, "This is where you tell me to keep my nose clean and don't be associating with any non-felons." He just cracked up and that was my little experience. Speaker 2: Well, that was a full-time position after a while. Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: Well, because those ten years--that was full-time. Speaker 1: No, it never was. I wasn't getting paid. I was a full-time professor and doing boxing. Speaker 2: But you said you took a leave from your professorship. Speaker 1: To go work on the campaign for [Jimmy] Carter. Speaker 2: And then you went back to the university [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and you did that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Yeah I did that--I'd leave my campus and go to the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission about three or four times a week. That was something you did. It was unpaid. Story_ID: 167960 Speaker 1: That was quite an experience. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But it was a great experience. Speaker 1: It was a good experience. Have you heard of other females being on the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission in another state? Speaker 2: When I was in the boxing commission--I'm leaving a lot of stuff out. I'm not good at patting myself on the back, but I opened up a lot of doors. As a matter of fact, I opened the doors for women inspectors, women judges. My friend, Shiela, ask Shiela [Harmon]. I got Shiela trained to be--I took Shiela with me to a boxing match. She had never been to a boxing match. I took her to see Matthew Saad Muhammad fight at the Resorts International [Hotel, Atlantic City, New Jersey] in the ballroom. Shiela stood him on the chair and yelled, "Kill him!" I said, "Oh, a boxing fan is born." So she went through training. She's an international judge now. So I-she's one of my stars. She began to travel all over the world and judge--judges, inspectors, doctors--to the point that NBC did a story called, "Women around the Ring" about women. And so because of me and my aggressiveness and my pervasiveness within the sport on the highest levels, many women became commissioners, had 'em in Las Vegas [Nevada], different places. Speaker 1: You remind me of [HM] Della Reese. She was interviewed at Howard [University, Washington D.C.] and she made the statement that after her bouts with mischievous and the types of personalities she exhibited early in life, she realized that she was a door opener for a lot of people because she had the fortitude the tenacity--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --to go do it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and everything to just walk through the doors, and if it wasn't open--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --kick it through--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --she would open them in whatever way she had to. Speaker 2: You have to have the ability to withstand the arrows and the rocks that are thrown at you 'cause it's not easy. Story_ID: 167961 Speaker 1: So you stayed at the University of Washington-Washington University [sic] for how many years? Speaker 2: University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Really until I became first lady--I was there for twenty-something years. Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you meet [HM] Marion Barry in the respect of even considering accepting his proposal of marriage? Speaker 2: Well, that's not the right way to ask that question. Let me just tell you about my relationship with Marion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were always friends. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And one of the few people--you know, how you know people in different phases of their life? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And every once in a while there may be one or two people who grow with you. There were people that I was good friends ten years ago that I'm not good friends with now. There's only a handful of people that I've been friends with for over twenty years because something happens, you know. I was one of those people that constantly grew. I was always involved in politics as my life went on. Marion was the mayor. He would run for reelection, I'd be involved in that. I was on the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission. We were friends then. I was friends with his second wife, his last wife. I was friends with all of them, as a matter of fact, Effi [Effi Barry]. She was in our Network Plus group. So that was all--we kind of fell apart during the worst part of like around the '90s [1990] when he was kind of spiraling into another world. I didn't see him very often. I would hear about but I didn't participate very much with him, but I was always his friend. What really got us back to being friends was when he got arrested and all his friends deserted him. Story_ID: 167962 Speaker 1: Now this was in 1990, right? Speaker 2: And I was amazed by that. I was amazed by the people who turned their back on him [HM Marion Barry]. And I just kept being his friend. Speaker 1: Because this was a man who knew everybody in [Washington] D.C. personally almost. Speaker 2: Half those people who walked away from him were people who did everything he did and just didn't get caught, and the hypocrisy of it and disloyal of it was amazing because my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] never taught us to be hypocrites. She also never taught us to be judgmental, so I was neither judgmental nor hypocritical--I just was not a person who ran in the circles he ran in. I was a mother, had two children, my boyfriend, George Walcott [ph.] was in New Jersey. I was in an out of town a lot. I was doing--now, I was doing boxing on another level. But when he got in trouble, I came--I was out of town. I called. I went to the house and it just so happens as God would have it, he was going into rehab and decided that he would go to rehab at West Palm Beach [Florida] at the--can't think of the name of it now, can't think of the name of the clinic, but it's real world famous, it just so happens my brother pastors a church in West Palm Beach. And when he told me he was going down there, I said, "Great, Tommy's down there." So it was real a bad time for him as you can imagine. My brother, who is just another one of God's angel on this earth, would take him tapes every day, sermons, you know, just looked out for him. The day he left the rehab center to go out, he went to my brother's church. My brother came and got him. He was there and I can't think of this TV actor-I mean this movie actor, who was there with him that day--I'll come back to him in a minute. And that kept a lot of communication going, you know, with him and Tommy and him calling me. "I saw Tommy today." You know, he was in rehab and not doing a very good job of it because he was always calling out and stuff. Then he left there and came back and did not leave office. And you know, I was just a good friend. And in that interim period, Effi [Barry] left him in November. He got arrested in February and that following November-I mean the trial was like, I don't remember the trial was like over the summer. Speaker 1: Was Effi his second wife? Speaker 2: Third. Speaker 1: Third. Okay. Speaker 2: And when he went through the trial, she went through the trial with him and he got through that and then that was like--the trial was like over the summer, if I'm not mistaken, I would go to the trial from time to time but it was a lot. Somebody just needs to write a story about that trial and all that was spread around that trial. And I was friends with him, a handful of people, Ivanhoe Donaldson and people like that they were friends--that was his campaign manager, whose name I couldn't remember. Speaker 1: That was who, Ivan--? Speaker 2: Ivanhoe Donaldson. Speaker 1: Ivanhoe Donaldson. Speaker 2: Then she left in November, and he went to prison the following October if I'm not mistaken. And during that period of time between--she left in November and he left office that December. That was his last day and [HM] Sharon Pratt took his place--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --his place. Speaker 2: And then started in January. He was out of office for that year. And we were friends, not girlfriend and boyfriend, but just friends, friends. I guess he was dating a lot of different women, but when it was time for him to start going to prison--you see, I always thought Marion was a nice guy to be a friend with but not to be anything else because I know him. Well, he went to prison, which was in October. He was supposed to be in prison six months. During the period of time he was in prison, was when he was supposedly going through his spiritual transformation. You know, how people find the Lord when they get in jail. So he was finding Him about ten times and we really started talking, communicating and relating on a spiritual basis and to hear him talk. And to hear him tell it that's where friendship turned to love-ship. I say he began to develop and evolve into a man that I could love, was my version of it. So by the time he came out, we were, you know, an item, or as they called it in the newspaper (unclear), "constant companion." So that was a whole 'nother phase of my life. Story_ID: 167963 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Cora Masters Barry, C-O-R-A, M-A-S-T-E-R-S, B-A-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is May 7, 1945, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: CEO and founder of the Recreation Wish List Committee. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Todays' date is June 16, 19--I'm sorry, June 16, 2012. Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the Southeast Tennis and Learning Center in southeast Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 167964 Speaker 1: All right, now we're going to conclude an interview that we started back in 2005. And we left off with your hearing--I think it had to do with something with the WBC [World Boxing Council] I think in 1987. In the last episode, your mother [Isabell Arch Masters] was very angry about the proceedings. Can you pick up from there? Speaker 2: Well, that was a long time ago. I guess at the end of the day when it was all done and said, I left the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission, continued the work in boxing. I worked with Michael Spinks, with Butch Lewis, Jersey Joe Walcott, and I led some delegations for Africa for the president of the Ivory Coast, and I did boxing with the associations. I still remained an active part with the World Boxing Council then my interest kind of diverted and life went on. Speaker 1: Okay now, during this time, you're still married to the mayor [HM Marion Barry]. You're the first lady of Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: I wasn't the first lady at that time. I wasn't married to Marion. My name wasn't Barry then. It was Wiles. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. That's right. That's right, I'm sorry. Okay, so--all right. So you continue to work in boxing. You're doing these international events. Speaker 2: Yeah, that went on for about four or five years afterwards and then other things became more prominent in my life. Speaker 1: I guess we'd like to find out what you did between that time and the time you met Marion Barry. Speaker 2: I knew Marion Barry since 1970. I had worked in campaigns with him. We were friends. I knew him for years. As a matter of fact, you may recall during the interview, I was an appointee of his on the boxing commission, so I knew him very well, but not long after that, his troubles started. I think we discussed this earlier in the interview. Speaker 1: He was incarcerated? Speaker 2: Yes, I think we went through all of that. Speaker 1: During that period of time? Speaker 2: Well, he wasn't incarcerated then, but later on, he was caught on tape in the Vista [International Hotel, Washington, D.C.] situation, had a trial and then was incarcerated, but I think I discussed all that history of our relationship and how it evolved. Speaker 1: Okay, he is--from what I remember--this is not written here--that his big trouble came in 1992? Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 1: In 1991, all right, and then I think he went through legal process in '92 [1992] and then he was finally convicted, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was convicted on one charge, simple possession and first time charge and acquitted on all the rest of the charges. And the judge sentenced him to six months in jail. Speaker 1: I think you said--I remember you saying that he changed--I mean that something about him changed. Speaker 2: There was a lot he had gone through. Obviously when we have trials and tribulations, we seek other avenues of growth and comfort; and Marion had to think about, a lot to go through and being one of his good friends and one of the few friends who did not abandon during that time. A lot of it, I went through with him. Speaker 1: I think we have it on tape already--I remember you talking about almost--he was a lot different after this--I mean--I'm just saying, so I don't know if you want to elaborate on it. Speaker 2: I don't have in front of me what we did before and I don't remember exactly discussing the nature of our relationship, but it did evolve from friendship to, as he would describe, "a love-ship," and we eventually became related to each other as boyfriend and girlfriend throughout and when he came out, and, obviously, evolved into marriage. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think I remember you saying you would not have had that relationship with the former Marion Barry. Speaker 2: Of course not. Speaker 1: Before that. Speaker 2: No, a lot of people were supporting him; a lot of people were fighting for him; a lot of people were coaching him; a lot of people were counseling him. You know, he is a very brilliant man and he was seeking another way to relate to life and humbled by all of it during that period of time. Story_ID: 167965 Speaker 1: Okay, [HM] Marion Barry, I think, remains probably a misunderstood figure in black history, I mean even to this day. Some people say, well, you know, they'll see clip of something he said and say, "Well, how can [Washington] D. C. love a man like this?" But the black community it seems really loves Marion Barry. That's what I'm seeing. Speaker 2: Well, I think the black community in D. C. loves him and then as I have traveled throughout the years with him and without him, most black people that I run into, admire and love him. I think they love him for his courage, for his ability to bounce back and fight back, not to get knocked down and not stay down. And those people who live in Washington and around Washington love him for that, but they also love him for what his contribution has been through their lives and the fact that they know in his hearts and hearts and through his actions, his policies, everything that he's done through his life, he truly loves his people and has fought for them and has empowered them. And that's something people don't--they don't forget that and they don't sell it out because of what they consider-one of the most common comments that you hear. He didn't hurt anybody but himself. So they just loved him for what he meant to them, what he's done for them and how he has shown his love and commitment to the community. Story_ID: 167966 Speaker 1: Okay, so you stuck by him [HM Marion Barry] while he was incarcerated and you all were married in 1994, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, you weren't working with the [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission then? Speaker 2: I left the boxing commission, and I was still a professor of political science at the University of [the] District of Columbia [Washington, D.C] even when I was with the boxing commission. The boxing commission was a unpaid job. It was a volunteer service job. I worked at the University of District of Columbia for almost twenty years and I was still working there as political science professor throughout all of Marion's [Barry] ordeals. Speaker 1: Okay, how did--now, Marion served from '94 [1994] to '98 [1998], did you have any official role in the government? Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: So you were just first lady of the--? Speaker 2: When he was re-elected in '95 [1995], '94 [1994] and served from 1995 to 1998, yes, I was. Speaker 1: So what was that experience like? Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't any experience that I wanted for myself. It wasn't anything that I coveted at all, but I found a way when he was elected and we were very instrumental. I don't know if I discussed this in the other campaign, but I put together a voter registration drive to register voters to make sure that the people's voices were heard that really wanted him back in and we registered over twenty thousand people. This was one that I headed up, and we got about nineteen thousand of 'em to the polls and as he won that election, which was one of the greatest political comebacks of all time, if not the greatest, political comebacks of all time. As one senator said to him, "You did what Lazarus did--the only person I know." Story_ID: 167967 Speaker 1: He [HM Marion Barry] asked me to chair his inaugural, and I was the chair of his inaugural committee, and so I chaired it and we had a great inaugural, but one of the things I noticed in doing that was that people love to give money to parties, and we were being given an awful lot of money, which I thought was a waste because, as I was watching television and experiences I had had, I noticed there was a lot of deficits in terms of our kids and recreations. In fact, I was watching TV one day, and I saw that the city council, the then city council, was cutting the budget of the recreational department and Marion and I were living in a--the same area I'm living today. And I used to look out of my window and watch our kids play basketball with mild crates, trash cans. Then by the time, I got dressed to go to school, they had lost interest and they were hanging out in the corner. So I'm like, recreation is so important, especially in our communities. So when I headed the inaugural and raised all this money, I just decided to have a creative austere inauguration, which I did and to preserve as much of that money as I could and I created an organization called, The Recreation Wish List Committee. And it's interesting because the reason it was called that is because I was able to save perhaps $199,000 and I called the director of the recreation department over and told her to bring us her wish list. And when she did, it seemed like it was a lot of money until I saw what the need was in the department and from there, is where we created that nonprofit. So most of my years as first lady, I spent a lot of time with the Wish List Committee. What we did was our mission was to help support, create, and enhance recreation for our kids and partnership with the recreation department and we did that all over the city [Washington, D.C.]. We put in tennis courts. We put in soccer fields, baseball diamonds. We resurfaced basketball courts; we did community centers, recreations centers. We did dance studios, boxing gyms, computer labs, all kinds of things, all over the city with heavy concentration of east of the [Potomac] River. And east of the river is part of the city where most of your underserved community lives, especially heavily African American poor people. Speaker 2: This is southeast [Washington] D.C. Speaker 1: Southeast D.C. and I did it, all over though. We were up in Chevy Chase [Washington D.C.]. We put in a playground equipment there. We did it all over the city. We had a map with pins and then we'd say "We'll do something here. We'll do something there." But a lion's share of the money that we raised and the services that we rendered were in east of the river or southeast Washington. We donated vans, (unclear), so we drove four vans for the city to the recreation department. Like I said, we renovated recreation centers. We did that for four years and that was a lot of my attention. I didn't spend a lot of time doing a lot of the traditional first lady things. I didn't go to many teas; I didn't cut ribbons; I didn't do much baby kissing. That wasn't how I spent my time. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were trying to get something concrete done for-- Speaker 1: Well, it's a powerful position if you know how to use it and if you're going to use it, just use it as a benefit for others. So I saw this as an opportunity to empower our young people and to help our young people. I mean I was getting my phone calls returned, so I was using that to raise money and donate equipment and fix up facilities in these areas, so kids didn't have to play basketball in a milk crate or in a trashcan. They could play it on a basketball court. Story_ID: 167968 Speaker 1: Who were some of the individuals that helped initially when you sent out a call? Speaker 2: Well, there was gentleman named [William] Bill McSweeney was a director of the Chevy Chase Bank [Washington, D.C.]. He was one of our main supporters. Katrina Peebles was our first president. She is [HM Roy Donahue] Don Peebles' wife of the [Recreation] Wish List [Committee] at that time. There was a young woman, at that time, but still a great woman named, Marian Niles [ph.], who was the secretary of the District of Columbia; there was a friend of ours who did so many great philanthropic things, Marilyn Funderburg [ph.]; there were, oh I don't know, Velma Nellum who dedicated her life to others. I think it, as it stands most in my mind, would be Bill McSweeney. Speaker 1: Okay, he played a role to make sure--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He helped raise money. He made sure that the bank supported us; he made sure that he open doors and was just there as a friend and a support system. He was chair of the finance committee for the inaugural committee and we almost converted almost that entire finance committee into the nonprofit. We just continued to do good work. That's what it was, it was finance committee for the inaugural and then a lot of the people stayed with me when I transferred it or converted it to a nonprofit for kids, thus was born in 1995, the Recreation Wish List Committee. Story_ID: 167969 Speaker 1: Okay, so you had projects all over the city [Washington, D.C.] at first. And then--so when did you focus in on this particular project here? Speaker 2: Well, I really didn't focus on it as a project initially, not to the extent that it is now. One day I was riding down the street and I saw this property, this land, and there were a lot of young people hanging out, looking like they could get themselves in a little trouble and I saw these poles that looked like they were tennis things. And I checked and said, "Yeah, there used to be courts there." They used to be called The Hart Court because it's right next to Hart Junior High School [later, Hart Middles School, Washington, D.C.], and I said, "I wonder if we renovate or build some courts, will the kids come?" So I did a little cursory marketing survey. We built six courts, and all the tennis organizations starting playing courts on them and having programs. The Washington Tennis [and Education] Foundation started using it for their Arthur Ashe [Children's] Program, the (unclear) Tennis Council used it, Totally Tennis, Tennis at Shiloh, all those different organizations that had junior tennis programs started using these courts and myself used to come and play tennis with my husband [HM Marion Barry] and also my coach was Dr. Arnold McKnight. And I would come and play tennis with Marion and then be coached by Arnold, and I started playing with some of the kids and I just took an interest in them. And I found out that through playing tennis with them and watching them--they could really play tennis because many of them were playing with the Washington Tennis Foundation at that time because they had an inner-city program, although they were up on 16th Street. They had a sort of busing situation, but those kids would settle their difference or their beef on the corner at the tennis matches or they would be flipping the birdie at each other, or call each other names. I began to do what I considered informal mentoring. For example, I would give them assignments. For instance, I would say, "Today, I want you to write when you go to school, good attitude, good results, bad attitude, bad results. Give me five things you did that when you had a good attitude, what happened, and five things that happened when you had a bad attitude." Then I'd be there the next day to collect it and talk with them. Finally, one day, I was standing on the corner with Dr. McKnight and I said, "You know what, doc?" I just put the racket--I just dropped my racket, and I said, "You know what? I want to build a building." I really believe to this day and I will believe it until the day that I die that was a vision from the Holy Spirit; just something came over me and said, "You should build a building." He looked over across there and he said, "What do you mean?" I said, "This is not enough. Tennis is not enough for these kids. These kids need--they need mentoring; they need homework assistance, they need guidance, they need more in their life. Tennis is not going to get them where they're going, not from this community." He always laughed because he said, "Okay, that's great but right now we gotta finish this tennis lesson because I gotta go," he was a principal up at [Ferebee-Hope Elementary School, Washington D.C.] and he needed to get to school. It was early in the morning. And that was my first inspiration about doing something here on this property that we are sitting in right now. Speaker 1: Now about what year was that? Speaker 2: That was probably about 1995. Story_ID: 167970 Speaker 1: So what was the--how did you proceed, what were the first steps in terms of building? Speaker 2: You know what I did nothing about it. Like many ideas, I thought about it a lot, but I never really made a move until one day [HM] Dr. Dorothy Height was having her grand opening--really she was launching her twenty-five million dollar campaign to buy the Sears Building down on Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.], 701-Pennsylvania--701--633. This is 701 Mississippi. That's 701-Pennsylvania Avenue and everyone was there, Hillary Clinton was there; [HM] Maya Angelou was there; Camille Cosby, [HM] Susan Taylor--all the African American women and then some other ones, everybody who was somebody was there. We blocked the streets and we were all there. It was a glorious day. The pictures are fabulous. She stood up and I think she was eighty-seven or something like that, and announced her capital campaign, twenty-five million-dollar capital campaign and, of course, as first lady, I spoke and blah, blah, blah. When it was over, I got in the car and I said to the driver-no I was sitting in my car crying and my driver was like, "What's wrong, Ms. Barry?" I said, "I'm so embarrassed." I was so ashamed, I felt so convicted because here this woman was eighty-something years old, launching a twenty-five million-dollar campaign and I didn't have the courage to go forth with my dream and vision of building a tennis and education center in southeast [Washington, D.C.] for my children, and I felt embarrassed by it. I felt convicted by it. I felt later that God had said, "Okay, I gave you the vision. Now, go do something. So I called John Tydings who was head of the board of trade for Washington, D.C. And I said, "I want to have a meeting with you." So, you know out of courtesy--I'm the first lady; he knows me; we have a mutual respect for each other. He said, "Okay." So we had lunch maybe a week or so later at across the street from the board of trade and I gave him my vision. He was the first person I discussed with formally, John Tydings. He said--he knew me from back in my [District of Columbia] Boxing [and Wrestling] Commission days too prior to becoming first lady or prior to being married to my husband [HM Marion Barry]. He looked at me and he said, "Well first of all I think it's great because I grew up over there and a lot of people don't know that." He said, "I really have an affection for the area," he said, "but more importantly if anybody else would have sat here and told me this, I would politely pat them on the back and wish them the best of luck and go on about my day," he said, "but if anybody can do it, you can do this." I said, "But I don't know what to do. I know what I want to do. I don't know how to do it." He said, "You have to do three things to get started. You have to find a bank that will support you and back you, you have to find an architectural firm that will give you pro bono services and you have to find a law firm that will support the process for you." I said, "Okay." So, we shook hands. He said, "When you get all that straight, call me back. I will support you. I will have to be in the background but I'll be right there if you can take those first steps." So I thanked him. I got in the car and I was crying. I was like, "I don't know how to do this. Well, how am I going to do this?" It was like a major assignment to me. Well as it was--that was like in November. Dr. Height's event was like the end of October, so my lunch with John Tydings was in November, a couple of weeks later. Speaker 1: What year? We're still in '95 [1995]? Speaker 2: We're in 1995. Speaker 1: Still in '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 167971 Speaker 1: And I had a Christmas party at my home for my nonprofit [The Recreation Wish List Committee] and it was near the end of 1995, obviously, and I called [William] Bill McSweeney in the den and I said, "I have to talk to you about something." He said, "What?" I said, "I want to build this building and I met with John Tydings and he gave me an assignment and I wanted to do three things and one of them is get a bank and I want to know if you'll support me in this project. Will you work with me? Will you partner with me?" He said to me, "Well, what about the people who will say you want to build a building just to get your name on something?" It shocked me because my motives were so pure. I was so driven about what these kids needed that I said, "Well, I never even thought about that, but I think that's an opportunity for someone--people buy naming rights. We could help raise money to build a building." I guess I gave him right answer. He said, "Well, I'm with you kiddo" because he used to call me "Kiddo." And then that same December, I ran into a friend of mine from way back, a woman named Pauline Schneider, who was at that time Hunton and Williams law firm, one prominent lawyers in the city [Washington, D.C.], used to be lobbyist for the city, well known, not one of the most prominent African American lawyers in the city, one of the most prominent lawyers in the city and one of the most prominent law firms in the country, and I saw her and I said, "I don't want to bother you right now, but right after Christmas, I want to call you." I called her right after Christmas--I called her the 1st of the year. And I said, "Pauline"--and I told her what I was trying to do and she said, "Okay." I kept talking, she said, "I said, okay." I said, "That's it?" She said, "Yeah, I'll commit the firm, pro bono services for the process. So now I had a bank and a law firm. Speaker 2: What was her name, Pauline? Speaker 1: Pauline Schneider--S-C-H-N-I-E-D-E-R [sic]. And then to make another long story short, Bill and--Bill used his connections with LEO A DALY, LEO A DALY architect and brought them aboard. So I had the three things that John told me to do. So I had not seen him. It was the year for the inaugural for [William] Bill Clinton's second term. Um, and I remember this because it was like January 20, or whatever that the president does his inaugural. Speaker 2: 1996? Speaker 1: No, I don't think it was '96 [1996]. Let me see if I can get that straight. Speaker 2: When he was elected, he served from 1996 to 2000. Speaker 1: Okay, so then we must have been going into '96 [1996]. So all of this took place in '95 [1995], so it was in 1996, but all this other stuff took place in '95 [1995]. Now, we're in January. We were in October, November and December of 1995 and now we're into '96 [1996] in January. I was at an inaugural event the Washington Bullets [later, Washington Wizards] and they had a big event over there. I saw this man with this half-moon bald head that is his signature profile. I made my way through the crowd and I tapped him on the shoulder. I said, "John [Tydings]." He said, "How you doing first lady?" I said, "Fine." I said, "I did it." He said, "Did what?" I said, "I did what you asked me to do." I think he hadn't given it more thought." He said, "What?" I told him. He looked at me and said, "You're a two-for or three for." He said, "Well, we need to meet, don't we?" So that was the beginning of the journey to raise the money to build the building and John and [William] Bill McSweeney got together and met with Leo Daly and he agreed to do all the architectural stuff pro bono and they asked me--people kept asking me to do things that I didn't know how to do, like you have to put together a design team. Okay, I didn't know what a design team was, but I just figured it out for myself. So I went around asking different people to work with me to be on my design team who were in specific areas that related to I wanted to do, for instance, I wanted to do a tennis and learning centers, so people were asking learning centers. I'd ask a couple of people who were involved in tennis or tennis projects, so I had educators and tennis people and we designed the building, so everything that you see at Southeast Tennis and Learning Center [Washington, D.C.] are a bunch of people who are amateurs, sat around the table and sat with the architects and said, we want to do this; we want a computer labs; we want classrooms; we want a community room that the community can use; we want tennis courts indoor and out; I want a (unclear)--it was all that. So that's how we designed it and put our little books together and I went on my journey to try to raise the money, which was the hardest thing I've ever done in my life. Story_ID: 167972 Speaker 1: Okay, so you had the three pieces in place. Speaker 2: I had the three pieces in place and so I said, "What do I do next?" So John Tydings, and all of them, said, "Well, you have to have capital campaign kick-off, much like [HM] Dr. [Dorothy] Height did, so he offered, so he offered the [Greater Washington] Board of Trade. Never in the history did the board of trade or since then have a capital kick-off for a capital campaign ever, but they let me do it. So I had all of these various corporations and banks, and financial institutions that came to this luncheon and I had my friend Paul Cohn from Georgia Brown, so there was like chicken, greens and it was a great event, a lot of bling. We did a lot of great stuff to make it a quality event. John Tydings said to me, "You know this is the first time we've ever served greens at the board of trade." That ought to tell you something about who is on the board of trade. So he laughed. After we did that, then what? I would hit dead spots, I'd hit walls. So I'd hit another wall. Story_ID: 167973 Speaker 1: So I'd never forget it--one night and I was always in prayer. Always in prayer because I always figured this is not my idea, this is your idea, so you better come up with some answers because you gave this to me, standing on the court. Nobody suggested this to me; nobody called me in a meeting; there wasn't a group of people waiting in a room somewhere planning. This came strictly from the Holy Spirit, so if the Holy Spirit is the one that gave it to me, then it's the Holy Spirit that has to guide me. So I sat on the side of the bed, just remember like it was yesterday, and I said, "God, what next? If you want me to do this, then you have to light my path because I don't know how to do this." I had not done any of this before. So I went to bed and got up the next morning. Instead of going to the office, I went to get my nails done. I had resigned from my position at UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] as a result of being first lady [of Washington, D.C.] because as much as I love teaching, and I was good at it, I was one of the best, I mean to this day, I run into students who tell me how much--I mean I loved political science, so I was really good, but me being first lady, it just felt too much to the university. There were people coming in my classroom posed as students and actually were reporters. It just got to be too much, so my only job at that time was being first lady and being the founder of the [Recreation] Wish List [Committee]. So that next morning, after I prayed that prayer to God about lighting my path, I went to get my nails. So I was getting my nails done. It was in Virginia, and that was before everybody had cell phones. So my security was waiting for me outside and so they came in and said, "Ms. Barry there is a call from your office, saying 'you have somebody to see you' and the phone in the car." And I said, "Tell Sheila [ph.]," who is one of my assistants, "to handle it. I don't remember having any appointments." So he said, "Okay." So as I got ready, they had just finished doing my cuticles and were about to paint my nails, Holy Spirit, the voice said, "Go to the office." So I told them, and I've never ever since done this, "Don't worry about the paint." I just got up, paid them and walked to the car, I said, "Take me to the office." And I got to the office. There was a white woman sitting there who I had never met before. I went in my office. They bought her in. She said, "My name is Jennifer Coken. I used to be with Hands on DC. I just started my own firm and I do capital campaigns and I do blah, blah, blah." I started looking around and she said, "What's wrong?" I said, "Nothing." It was like--I had just prayed that prayer the night before and this strange woman walks in my office and says she does exactly what I need. She had to have been sent by God. We formed a relationship that last to this day. She became my development person and she was Jewish and--she was smart and creative. I always called her, "My Joshua." You know Joshua held up the arm of Moses, well my arm would get tired. I remember one time I got so depressed, I just gave up. I wouldn't call anybody; I wouldn't go to any meetings; I just said--actually, literally, honestly was trying to figure out a way to just stop. I had come up with two or three different plans. I was going to announce that I had a terminal illness, so I could no longer pursue this project. And then I started thinking about that and I was like and then you don't get sick. What if you do get sick because you said it? What if God--you know, it was just craziness because I was just so worn out from it. And I would go places and people would say, "We got you a letter. We're going to call you for a meeting." What letter? It would be Jennifer. Well, when I would get depressed, she would keep the ball rolling. So to make a long story short, together partnering, we raised $1.5 million dollars. Story_ID: 167974 Speaker 1: So she [Jennifer Coken] was my Joshua. So we went through all of this together. So I would drive by here and there would be this big lot where I wanted this building to be--the tennis courts were there. And we had gone through the design and all that, but I had to raise the money. I had to raise the money. Raising the money was not easy because it was an existing tennis facility that was very competitive and me being a babe in the woods with the purest motives, which was to do something for my kids, I didn't understand quite naively why everybody wasn't excited about the possibility. The Washington Tennis Foundation [later, Washington Tennis and Education Foundation, Washington, D.C.] did not want this building to be built. I'm telling you this because it's an active part of history. It's no use not mentioning it. So they did a lot to block. At that time, they were called, The Washington Tennis Foundation. Eventually because I was in the middle of a capital campaign to build the Southeast Tennis and Learning Center [Washington, D.C.], they added education to their moniker, so it's Washington Tennis and Education Foundation now, but it wasn't then. Speaker 2: Who are they? Speaker 1: They are an organization who runs the program up on 16th Street, on the Kennedy Street--I mean it's the [William H.G.] Fitzgerald [Tennis] Center [Washington, D.C.] and they run programs up there for children and for adults. Speaker 2: Is this a black run? Speaker 1: No, they're white and they were doing a lot of programs on this side of town but they were busing the kids from here up there. Speaker 2: Is their clientele mostly black? Speaker 1: No, but they did have a program called, The Arthur Ashe [Children's] Program that they were getting funding from because they were the only ones in the city that were providing tennis for the under serviced, African American kids in the community, and they were busing them. Remember I said, kids were right across the street and they would be bused up to 16th Street. So I was running into a lot of under--well, I approached them quite naively--I'm really ahead of the story because I didn't know that they were blocking us. I didn't know that they wouldn't be supportive because I didn't understand the politics of anything. I just knew that I had this project I was trying to raise money for, and this was an organization that did something similar and that they would be very happy. So the chairman of the board came over, his name was John Sheeler [ph.]. I will never forget it and he bought his executive assistant--executive director, her name was Jennifer--and I can't remember her last--maybe it wasn't even Jennifer, but she was a nice person. So the three of us sat at the table and I explained to him what my vision was and he said to me, "It will never happen." He said, "There are a lot of people who have a lot of dreams." So I was sitting next to her, he was sitting next to her, she was between me and him and I felt her kick him. You know, I felt the impact. It was a small table so I felt the impact, and he kind of ratchet down a little bit, and he said, "But we don't have any money to give. We don't even have any tech advice to give on building a building but if by some quirk of luck you build it, we'll come and run it for you because you don't know what you're doing it." Okay. They left. And I had a little love seat in my first lady office. And I took a nap. I was so depressed and when I woke up, I woke up, I said, "Oh," expletive-deleted and I always credit him for my success because I don't know how long I slept, but when I went to sleep, I was depressed, but when I woke up, I was pumped. And from that point on, that was it. I always say it. I say, If it wasn't for John Sheeler, I don't know if I would have given up, but when he sat there and told me I was not going to make it, that I was going to fail like most people, everybody had great ideas, there was no--failing wasn't an option from that point on. Story_ID: 167975 Speaker 1: As we struggled and we would get money, I think the first money we got was one hundred thousand dollars from Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association]. And how we got that money was I called them cold and the lady who was over that at that time, and I don't remember her name, this is when I began to realize that the Washington Tennis Foundation [later, Washington Tennis and Education Foundation, Washington, D.C.] was blocking me. She said to me, "What is your relationship with the Washington Tennis Foundation?" I said, "I don't have one." "Well, you need to have a relationship with them if you want to call me." I said, "I think that's a conflict of interest. What is what I'm doing have to do with them?" When I hung up the phone I was so upset, I called [William] Bill McSweeney. I called my little angel. I told him my experience. He said, "Okay, kiddo." Maybe a day later, maybe not that much longer, I got a call from the secretary of the CEO and the president of Fannie Mae, inviting me to have lunch with him and his wife at their home. I went to his home, John Johnson [sic, James Johnson] and his wife, Maxine Isaac[s], and we had a good time. My first money came from Fannie Mae as a result of somebody trying to block. I'm just telling these kinds of stories because I want you to know that that whole success, you gotta give God credit. I mean these are just little miracles from Jennifer [Coken] walking into my office, you know, to his woman trying to block me on a lower level. Then I get to a higher level that I didn't even try to get to as a result of adversity on this part. The devil walking in my office, telling me I'll never make it. You know and sometimes there is an expression that says, "The devil may have bought it, but God said it." That was God saying, "You can do this. I got you." So I had a lot of those things that happened along the way. I called the people at Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] and said, "Well, Fannie Mae gave me some money, can you all give me some money?" So the lady said, "We'll meet you." So they met me out here on this bare land and they said, "Well, you're far away from your goal." And I had set a goal from no particular reason of three million dollars. I don't know where I got that number from. And all I had to show was a one hundred thousand dollar commitment from Fannie Mae. She said, "But I tell you what, why don't you do a sign that says 'future site of' just to get people knowing something?" By the way, I don't know how I left this out. All this property was property of the city recreation department, the city [Washington, D.C.] owned it. They leased it for one hundred years from the government for one [dollar]. So this property was already here. I didn't have to worry about the property. My husband [HM Marion Barry] was mayor and the recreational department wanted something built on this property but they couldn't initiate a thing. I know I am doing this kind of backwards. I have to remember-I have to make sure you understand that the property was already in play. It was just so perfect. That's another reason why I know God was in it. It was a beautiful stretch of land. So I went and I had a sign made with a picture of the design, future sign there. Then I called the White House, called my friend, [HM] Minyon Moore and I said, "Do you think you can get the first lady to come to the unveiling of the sign for the Southeast Tennis and Learning Center for my capital campaign?" Hillary [Clinton] came. I have wonderful pictures of us on this barren property. The recreational department set up the podium and people were out in the audience because the two first ladies meeting. It was right in the middle of her struggles--right in the middle of their struggles along with the whole impeachment thing. That was going on at that time. Speaker 2: Monica Lewinsky scandal. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So we just kind of met and hugged and talked. If you see a picture of us, we're talking and we're laughing, and we're talking to each other. It really wasn't about the project. It really was a personal conversation about, you know, just getting through stuff. And so she came and Pam Shriver from the USTA [United States Tennis Association] came. And we were standing on the stage, and everybody--and we had the kids from the kids next door. The school just opened, so it was in September now. I remember that. They hadn't practiced yet, the band from Hart [Junior High School, later, Hart Middle School, Washington D.C.], so they were horrible. They were so horrible, they were good. You know, we were all laughing. But they were, they had--so I had a little event. I created an event around this sign. This woman gave me a suggestion and I took it to heart. Story_ID: 167976 Speaker 1: I'm telling you this story because Anthony Williams was running for mayor. My husband [HM Marion Barry] said he wasn't going to run. We were still in office but the campaign was going on. He came to the event. I had already committed to support him, so when he came, I asked to come up and have a few words and he got up there and said, "If I become mayor, this is a worthy project, and I'll make sure," blah, blah, blah--he became mayor. And I said to him, "All I want from you is to open up some doors, make a few phone calls." That wasn't his personality or his style. He called me one and he said, "I got a better idea." At this point, I had raised $1.5 million dollars. Donald Graham gave me $50,000 and then I had gotten some money from the department of--$1 million dollars from the department of housing so I was getting money. So I said, "Why don't I just look in the budget and find the rest of the money. I said, "Okay," so to make a long story short, that's what he did. Speaker 2: So this is Mayor Williams? Speaker 1: Mayor Williams, if you step out of this building [Southeast Tennis and Learning Center, Washington, D.C.] and look at the corner stone, you'll see my name and his name. And we had a ground breaking. I hope I didn't leave anything important out as to how we got to the point where this building started getting built was a collaboration between private and public efforts, private, public partnership and so this whole design, the whole thing and even the builder came--never built anything in this city. There were from Colorado and they had built airports in Japan and stuff like that. Speaker 2: What's the name? Speaker 1: Hensel Phelps [Construction Co.]. Speaker 2: Hensel--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --H-e-n-s-el, then P-h-e-l-p-s. Speaker 2: Those were the contractors? Speaker 1: Yes, those were the builders. They came to Leo A Daly and said, "We want to come into the city with a special project." He said, "I have one for you." So our first--the first project they did in Washington, D. C. was Southeast Tennis and Learning Center. Now, you see their signs in front of Washington everywhere--they're all over the place, but this was their first project. And they built it at cost. Story_ID: 167977 Speaker 1: What was the--(unclear), tell us what was the program idea? You said you had two design teams, one to design the facility and one to design the program, well about both I guess--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, no, this was a capital campaign to build the building [Southeast Tennis and Learning Center, Washington, D.C.]. We had a great grand opening. I mean the concept was to have tennis and education equally weighted that these kids would come here and they would get great tennis, but that they would also get great tutoring, mentoring, computer, all kinds of things, but it hadn't be (unclear) out because we were so busy trying to build the building. So when we first opened the building with Venus [Williams] and Serena [Williams], we had a great grand opening. We had a great--that morning, [HM] Dr. [Dorothy] Height, [HM] Maya Angelou, [William] Bill McSweeney, the mayor [Anthony Williams], everybody was here. We had about two thousand people lined up and down the streets people with kids on their shoulders. It was in April--trying to see. Then we had a clinic that Venus and Serena put on and then that evening, we had a gala and raised a lot of money. But once all that was over, we actually opened in June and we didn't have any programs, but we finished ahead of schedule and under budget if you ever heard of such and we had one hundred thousand [dollars] left over, which we furnished the place with. It was in the summer, so I bought a program that was called, Freedom School that was from the Children's Defense Fund. They have a pre-package program where you hire people, and you go down on a farm and get trained. So our first program was the summer program and then we had coaches that did the tennis. I know it's confusing if you don't understand it. Speaker 1: What year did it open up? Speaker 2: 2001. I'm sorry April 22--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So this is the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --eleventh year. Speaker 1: It took like from the time you conceived of it in '95 [1995], six years, and then here it is. Speaker 2: I conceived of it in '95 [1995]. I started the process in '96 [1996] and opened it up in 2001. That's not bad. That's what God can do. Story_ID: 167978 Speaker 1: So what are the programs [at the Southeast Tennis and Learning Center, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Our programs are fabulous; we have, first of all, amazing tennis. We have now over thirty-five to forty kids who have gone through this program and have gone to college on full scholarship, tennis scholarship, so start there. Kids who ordinarily wouldn't have been able to go to college at all now, not only were able to go, but they could go free because of the education component, helping them with grades. Our programs offer everything from good tennis to tutoring to mentoring. We have an excellent computer program. We have Sewing and Know, where kids learn to sew and make their own clothes, these are the same kids. We have a program called, Blacks and Wax that started in the library one year in 2006 where we decided we wanted to teach the kids black history in a creative way so we did a little reenactment of the kids being different characters. That was in 2006--in 2011 and 2012, we've been at the Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] with it. It grew from there. So we have over seventy something kids that start studying in November various character, African American. And you go up on the Kennedy Center, Millennium Stage [Washington D.C.] and you'll see the performances because it's there forever. The kid's self-esteem--most of these kids come in, all of them, start with "I can't do it." "I can't do this research. I can't memorize this script. I can't help write this script. I cannot perform this" to I'll show you a video of these kids on Fox Morning News and everywhere else and they'll be performing this evening as a matter of fact, some of them. And they're [HM] Dr. [Dorothy] Height, they're [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.]. We have an amazing [HM] President Barack Obama. We have Arthur Ashe. We have Benjamin Banneker. We have Rosa Parks and every year we had a different theme. Three years ago, almost four years ago, our vignette, it's two parts, one is a museum, you'll see the kids behind rope and stances in full costume and full make-up, and you hit a light. They're frozen--that's why we call them Blacks and Wax and you hit the light and they come alive and they tell you who they are. Then if you go--either in the round room and now we have to take it out to the tennis courts because we've outgrown. We have 900 to 1100 people come to see it. There's a vignette that we do also in addition to the museum. The first vignette we did was called, From Chains to Change. And that, of course, was the journey from Harriet Tubman to the first black president and that vignette. The next vignette we did--the next year was Lift Every Voice and Stand. And that was a vignette that talked about the African American celebrities who had used their celebrity and their money to further the cause of justice. So that was one and then the year after that, was called, Surviving and Thriving. It was from Dr. Julie Ann Melrose [ph.] book about African Americans who had created wealth. We did the vignette of African Americans who created wealth but also used that wealth for the greater good. Story_ID: 167979 Speaker 1: That was really a hard one to do 'cause we found a whole--not a whole lot of our people give back. I was really disappointed in that. We had to really be creative about how--well, that's another conversation. Speaker 2: I know there's a lot of criticism about athletes and entertainers around that subject, but moving on the positive side, who are the ones that you found that really do make a contribution? Speaker 1: Well, I'll start with Bill Cosby. He has been very sacrificial in his giving--obviously, [HM] Harry Belafonte was one, Stevie Wonder is another--either using their celebrity, either giving money or both--let me see, Michael Jackson was phenomenal in his giving in his philanthropy--I can't think of his name--[HM] Ruby Dee and [HM] Ossie Davis--they gave of themselves and Sammy Davis, Jr. In the recent years, I think we look at some of the younger people, Jay-Z, what's her name--she does a lot in Africa and she give a lot of movie, Alicia Keys. She is very philanthropic and civic-minded. So we found them but there were a whole bunch who didn't, and I won't call their names, but if I didn't call them, they didn't do it. And we did a lot of research. Story_ID: 167980 Speaker 1: So that was very interesting. And then last year--this year I'm sorry, our vignette was called, Movement to Monument, which, of course, was the movement that led to the monument and so that was very interesting also. We performed that at the Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and it's on forever. You can pull it up on the website on the Kennedy Center for the Millennium Stage. So that is an educational program that we have that takes kids from low self-esteem to unbelievable self-acknowledgement and self-awareness and self confidence that they never lose. We have had kids who have gone to school and who have been able to be elected to their offices of ninth grade president because they learned how to speak and learn not to be afraid in front of all audiences from blacks and white. One of our worst kids came and told me he was SGA [student government association] representative for the ninth. I was like "Huh?" How did that happen? He said, "Well, when it was time for speeches, Ms. Barry, everybody was scared but me." I said, "Okay." Story_ID: 167981 Speaker 1: Okay, yeah I wanted to ask you about southeast [Washington, D.C.] and where it ranks in [Washington] D.C. in terms of crime, poverty and other things. Speaker 2: Well, in order to understand the significance of Blacks in Wax [National Great Blacks In Wax Museum, Washington, D.C.], for instance, and these accomplishments, in order to understand the fact that these kids have gone through college on these tennis scholarships have come out Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], ready to go to law school and medical school, you have to understand where we are. We are in the most underserviced area in Washington, D.C. and without having specific statistics, I can say they're the highest ranked in everything bad, in drop out, teenage pregnancy, drugs, crimes, drug-related crimes, anything that prevents a young person from actualizing their full potential, that's what this community has represented. So the transition of these kids despite the challenges that the community, the neighborhoods and in many cases, their families present to them is where the miracle comes in. That is why I get misty-eyed when I talk about building this building [Southeast Tennis and Education Center, Washington, D.C.] because I know that God put that in my heart to do because it's for his people and to fight to maintain this facility and keep it here for our people has been a battle. My biggest battle has not been facing the challenges of helping these kids and their families and there have been hundreds and hundreds of them since 2001--my biggest battle is maintaining this beautiful facility for these people because when you build something like this, when you have such a success, people come at you and they want it. Story_ID: 167982 Speaker 1: And it's just amazing. Someone asked me the other day, "Why were people always trying to put you out of the building?" I said, "Because I would too. It's a wonderful thing." So in 2009, Mayor [Adrian] Fenty, out of the clear blue sky, issued me a thirty-day (pause) on August 14--it had to have been on July 14, issued me an eviction notice to be out by August 14th. Speaker 2: Based on what? Speaker 1: Based on a technical thing that he saw--our corporate paper deadline had lapsed. Speaker 2: Oh the paper, the papers that you filed with the district [Washington, D.C.]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right, so what do you do, you call and you say you need to renew your corporate thing. That's what you do--you don't evict people. So nobody ever bought that. It was such a shocker, I never will forget it. I was at the house with [HM] Marcia Dyson and my assistant called me and her voice sounded strange and this guy, he said somebody this police officer--police, lieutenants, they don't even do that. It's marshals who do things like that. He said, "Ma'am, I never met you. I hate to do this under these circumstances, but we have to deliver this eviction notice." Speaker 2: Now, what was your relationship with your organization [Recreation Wish List Committee] and Michael Fenty [sic]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Mayor Fenty, Adrian Fenty--I didn't have a --We are the non-profit here--we are in partnership with the recreation department and the government that was established through a lease and memorandum of understanding with [Anthony] Tony Williams, or Mayor Williams, after we, you know, came together, built the building together, raised the money together and opened the building together and that is a coexistence that has been very successful since day number one until this. Mayor Fenty had a lot of goals for this city that didn't necessarily make sense to a lot of people. I was not the first person he had done it to, but when he did it, it was devastating when he issued that eviction notice to me. Speaker 2: Now, let me put this in prospective. You and [HM] Marion Barry were divorced then? Speaker 1: We're not divorced now. Speaker 2: Oh, you're still married now. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Okay, but you were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --We were separated. Speaker 2: Oh, you were separated. Okay, and he was not--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, he was. He was a city council member. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 167983 Speaker 1: So was he [HM Marion Barry] in conflict with Mayor [Adrian] Fenty? Speaker 2: No. Here's the thing--you're going to try to make sense out of it, and it's not going to work because no one ever made any sense out of it. Let me just tell you the story--this is what he did. He issues an--our corporate deadline had passed and that's what he used as a basis for it. We had a lease and memorandum of agreement. Well, when he first did it, I was devastated, here we go with God. I was devastated--I mean if I tell that this is my reason for living and breathing, it is. I'm sixty-seven years old and at that time, I was sixty-six, sixty-four, I don't even know how old I was. I was 2009, so do the math and this was 2012 and I was depressed and I cried all the time and I did nothing; and I wasn't sleeping and I wasn't eating. I was getting sick. I would say that went on for about ten days, almost two weeks, so one morning, very early in the morning, I got up to get a glass of water and I was heading back to the bed and I remember my friend telling me that when you really want to talk to God, you have to shout out to him, so instead of getting in bed, I got on my knees and I said, "God, I don't know what to do, but this is what I need from you, I need you not to let this kill me because I could feel myself getting sick." And he had done a lot of things to a lot of people and a lot of people had died and gotten sick because they had gotten devastated by the meanness of his actions. I said, "Don't let me get sick and don't let me die." I said, "Secondly, I need you to give me grace. I need to be--I need you to give me grace. I need you to give me strength, and I need you to give me peace." And I said, "And I need you to tell me what to do." I was about to get up and then I said, "Please, Lord, let me sleep," because I had been tossing and turning for ten days without any sleep. I got in the bed, slept like a baby. Woke up the next morning and the Holy Spirit put one word in my spirit and it was fight. My friend and former board chair, [HM] A. Scott Bolden took the case on pro bono (pause) with his law firm, very prominent law firm, Reed Smith [Washington, D.C.], he is the managing partner of that law firm. I tried to contact the mayor and his people--no--let me go back. I was at [HM] Marcia Dyson, Michael Eric Dyson's house visiting with her when I got the call about the eviction when I talked to the lieutenant over the phone. I'm going back to that because I don't know how much you know about Marcia Dyson, but she's warrior. By the time I had left that house, she had put it all on the Internet and women from all over the country, were already up at arms before I was even able to get to the other side of town. So this was already--God had me in the right place and find that. You know what I'm saying? I gotta understand these are miracles. There is an anointing on this building [Southeast Tennis and Education Center, Washington, D.C.]. This building was built as a result of the spirit of the Holy Spirit and anytime anybody comes up against it, it does not turn out right. So I'm walking around like a zombie. God already set me up. He already got me in Marcia's house when he got the news. He knew what was going to happen before it happened, so I woke up the next morning, and the word fight was in my spirit. I woke up, took a shower, ate a big old meal, started eating, started sleeping and started fighting. I was very quiet about it because I'd asked the Lord for grace and I'd asked him for strength, so I was very quiet about it, but I was very consistent with it. Story_ID: 167984 Speaker 1: There were a lot of things that happened, but I will tell you this particular story. [HM] Dorothy Height and I were very good friends to the extent that I would go to her house Christmas morning, me and Connie Newman [HM Constance Berry Newman] and have breakfast every year. I mean we were good friends, laugh buddies--Dorothy had lived enough that all her old friends died, so she had to get some new ones. So she had friends of every age group and we were friends. I need to say that because she tried to reach me when this hit the press and I wouldn't talk to her. And Connie said, "Dorothy is trying to reach you." I said, "I know." She said, "Well, you need to call her." I said, "I don't want to call her." She said, "Why?" I said, "Well, two reasons, one"--I'm telling the truth in this interview--if it sounds stupid, it's because it was stupid. I said, "One, because I'll cry and I don't want to upset her and two, because she can't do anything to help me." Remember this that I said that. [HM] Marcia [Dyson] did a last conference call with all these women. Women were on the phone that I will never know because they got this black women's round table, network, blah, blah going. Everybody on the phone trying to figure out what the strategy is to deal with this man [Adrian Fenty] and blah, blah, and somebody said, "Be quiet Dr. Height is trying to talk." They had put her on the phone and they had all kind of suggestions. We're going to march, we're going to protest. We're going to sit in; we're going to--I mean I'm just like a zombie. I'm sitting there and I'm zombie-ing out because--I'm not even mad. I'm still in shock actually from this--You've heard the story, so for somebody to just tell you "Get out," that's amazing. So the debate that was raging on the phone was, should we do it now? Because they did it strategically before Labor Day, where nobody is here--you know, in Washington [D.C.], during that time, nobody is here or should we wait until Labor Day until everybody gets back. Dr. Height said, "I know these people and what kind of people they are. I've dealt with them all my life. We will move now." Everybody got real quiet and she said, "I will write a letter--me and [HM] Dr. [Maya] Angelou will write a letter to the mayor and ask to have a meeting with them." Everybody got quiet, so the demonstrations and all that, that got eighty-sixed. So after we got off the phone, I called her. She never said anything about not calling her. She had such understanding--so to make a long story short and I'm trying not to shorten too many stories because this is history and it's all facts and it needs to be recorded. Maya and Dorothy put together a letter and sent it to the mayor and asked to meet with him. In that meeting was going to be [HM] Susan Taylor, Oracene Williams Price, the mother of Venus and Serena Williams, Dorothy Height and Maya Angelou. The mayor agreed to the meeting. I wasn't even supposed to be in the meeting. The mayor agreed to the meeting and then he cancelled it. After Maya had come in here, Susan was on her way here and Oracene was on her way here, he cancels the meeting. He canceled the meeting I think twenty-four hours before it was supposed to take place. I was stunned--not to be distracted--Maya, who does not fly, has this big old bus she travels on, got back on the bus and instead of going back to North Carolina, which she had come up from Winston Salem [North Carolina] for the meeting, she has a brownstone in Harlem [New York, New York]. She went onto to Harlem and called back to reschedule the meeting. The mayor agreed to reschedule the meeting. Fine, everything was fine again. He canceled it again twenty-four hours--refused to meet with Dorothy Height and Maya Angelou. Now, I'm devastated. I don't even care about the meeting. What I cared about was these are two women that I hold in such high esteem and for them to be disrespected like that because of something related to me, hurt me to my very heart to my soul. And I couldn't even call and talk to Maya. I was so hurt about it. Now, I know these are big girls. I know they haven't lived all this life without being disrespected, that's life but I didn't want it to be because of anything that was associated with me, so I wanted to keep it a secret. The mayor's people put it out there. I guess they thought they called themselves getting ahead of the game--they put it out there that they had a meeting, but it was cancelled and blah, blah. I don't know how much you know about this, but when you leave any and anybody who is watching this, Google it. That was the beginning of the end of this man's tenure as mayor. The fact that he refused to meet with those two women went viral all over the world. It became a call celeb--everybody was upset. So, again, the devil may have brought it, but God sent it. That turned the corner on the public discourse of this event of him trying to get rid of us. Then we went to court. We took him to court. Story_ID: 167985 Speaker 1: And I would just suffice by saying God was in that too because I asked God to make the Holy Spirit available to me to guide me and to counsel me and God speaks through people, so you have to know when somebody is giving you wisdom. So they wouldn't call back. They wouldn't talk to my lawyer. They wouldn't talk to me-they would just--I guess they had the clock ticking. They had the political disaster with the icons. A reporter, whose name I will not call, called me--we were like four days for the deadline coming up now--he said, "What are you doing over the weekend?" This is Friday--you know the deadline is I think Monday, Sunday or something--it was Thursday. He said, "You know how they are." He said, "They'll put your stuff out and then you'll be fighting to get in rather than fighting to get out." I got off the phone and I thought about it. I called my lawyer and I said, "Let's go to court." He gave me all the legal leads. I said "Scott [HM A. Scott Bolden], I don't care. Go to court." Scott went to court and filed a stay against them. The court gave them a date which meant they couldn't come and do anything to us. We went to court. Never seen anything like it. They changed the judge first and then they changed the court room on us maybe forty-eight hours--well, prior to that--the weekend prior to going to court, [HM] Dr. [Dorothy] Height had honored me as one of the freedom sisters during her Black Family Reunion [Celebration]. She always had a way of pumping you up and lifting you up and I had really not been going out a lot, so I think she did it to get me out of the house. And I'm sitting there in the middle of all these hundreds of people at Black Family Reunion and everybody walking up to me, "We're in your corner." And the stories they were telling me--I mean it was like I'm in this little hole--this sort of little silo of just fighting just from my house. But out there in the city [Washington, D.C.], people were like "How could he [Adrian Fenty] do that?" It was like something out there had gained its own life that I didn't create. I didn't pump it up. It just did, it happened that way because it was such a--it's like all that you do here with all these kids, how can anybody have a problem with it? Story_ID: 167986 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, let me tell you something, Eleanor Holmes Norton told me "when I first saw that on television," she said, "I thought, Cora must have done something really terrible. You know when somebody's doing something like that, we're going to wait for the real story to come out." She said, "You must've beat a kid or did something. I don't know." She said, "And the story never came out." It never made any sense. It was just a power move. It was one of those "because we can." So we went to court. On one side of the courtroom was nothing from press from front to back. You would have thought it was O. J. Simpson and on the other side was the community. And I was sitting on the front with my daughter and someone came and said, "[HM] Dr. [Dorothy] Height is here." I went out. They rolled her out right there next to me. She sat right there next to me on that front row. The judge looked out right in that room. The judge never wrote anything--all the judges now have computers, laptops, on their thing. The city [Washington, D.C.] presented their case. Our lawyers presented their case. The judge said, "Well, I'm not going to keep anybody in suspense. I'm ready to rule now. She turned to the city and said, "I'll give you another chance, but if that's all you got, they're going nowhere." Everybody started going, "Yay!" Everybody started screaming and shouting and you could see her trying to keep. She let her keep for about thirty seconds and then she said, "You all have done good up to this point. So just kind of calm down," so the courts killed him [Adrian Fenty]. We rolled out and had a press conference, me and Dr. Height. Then, okay, the city council under the leadership of Mayor [Vincent C.] Gray, at that time, Chairman Gray, passed legislation that if any nonprofit corporate papers lapsed, that they could renew them without any penalty and they grandfathered it back beyond, you know, to the time he did it, so even that flimsy excuse had gotten--so the council had passed legislation to undermine that little excuse. The court had said, "Ain't no way this is going to happen," and I'm not even going to give you all the details of what happened in the court because it was a beautiful thing. Then someone called me, another reporter, and said, "You need to call the head of the"--and I'm not going to use their names because these are press people--"of the editorial board of the Washington Post. Anyway, I talked to her and she did an editorial against the mayor for us. And the Washington Post was lock-stock involved and hand-in-hand with the mayor. They were one of the few editorials that wrote against him. So, now, we had the council, the court and the Washington Post. It was over. So October 1, the mayor threw up his hands and said, "I give up. No mas." There was--he just backed off. It was the beginning of the end of his tenure as mayor. He lost--and I'm not going to get into all of that, but the morning after he lost, I was sitting in my house--the following September, he lost. This was October 2009 that he lost and then September of 2010 is when he lost the election. And I sat there and I watched on News Channel 8, and Mike DeBonis from the Washington Post was being interviewed by this reporter from News Channel 8 and he said to Mike DeBonis because the Washington Post reporter was sometimes would be interviewed for their story. They had a big frontline--front paper story about the mayor after the day he lost, Mayor [Adrian] Fenty. So he asked this reported "Why do you think Mayor Fenty lost this election?" The man had five billion dollars and blah, blah, blah, had all the stuff that you--it would have been impossible. I can remember like yesterday, so I can tell you exactly what he said, he said, "It was death by one-- cuts, but it actually started last summer in 2009 when he tried to put out former first lady, Cora Masters Barry out her building that she built--that was the beginning of the end of his political career." Story_ID: 167987 Speaker 1: Well this is a triumphant story for you all, but it seems what a struggle over nothing. Why would he [Adrian Fenty] even conceive of even doing this? Did you have any idea after all this time? Speaker 2: Well, he had his vision, from what I understand, I never heard it from him so I have to just tell you what others have told me, as time went on, after this was all over, later on as you go down the road without getting into too much detail. He had another vision for this center [Southeast Tennis and Education Center, Washington, D.C.]. He wanted this center to be just tennis. He didn't want all this education, all this Blacks and Wax, all this computer, all this. He liked tennis. His sons played tennis. He just wanted it to be tennis. And he knew as long as I was here, it wasn't going to be that because we were doing to do full, multidimensional development of our children. He didn't want to nurture the children--he wanted either you play tennis or you don't and he wanted it to be regional. He didn't want it to be just serving the children of the city [Washington, D.C.] or especially the kids in this community, in which it was built for. He wanted people to be able to come from Virginia, Maryland and this would be a regional annex of a big tennis facility in Maryland. That's what this was supposed to be, an annex. None of it made any sense and it was one of the worst political mistakes he ever made. Speaker 1: Wow! What is he doing now? Speaker 2: I don't know. I mean I forgave. It was something--you know, God uses people for reasons. We were better off when it was over because more people knew about what we did. A lot of good things came out of it, but, you know, sometimes in order for God to get you displaced, you gotta go through something. I remember in the middle of it, looking up at him and saying, "I know you're doing this for a reason but I want you to know, God, I am not having fun." So I mean I don't know if he had been so egregious to so many people, that God used this as a mechanism, but it was the beginning of the end for him in this city. It wasn't the first time he had done it. I wasn't the first person he had done it to but I was the first one who fought back and won. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 167988 Speaker 1: So what are some of the milestones? Speaker 2: I think the milestones in this center [Southeast Tennis and Education Center, Washington, D.C.] is the kids going to college on full tennis and academic scholarships. I think some milestones are some kids who are about to go into professional tennis as a result of being here. I think the milestone--the greatest milestones are the greatest victories--the kids who were failing in math and English and come to our academic program in the summer set up, strengthening education through upgraded programs and they go back to school and they can read, and they can pass to the next grade, kids who are on path of death and destruction actually come here and find another reason for living, and finding that the travel, and the exposure and the support they get, gives them another reason to go in a different direction. The milestones are the little ones we deal with every day. The milestones are out there playing right now. Kids who--you know, I often say, blink at the Southeast Tennis and Learning Center and then a chills goes down my back. This is a safe haven, minimally, it's a safe haven. If you bring your child here and leave your child here, your child is going to be safe, your child is going to be disciplined; your child is going to loved; your child is going to be empowered; your child is going to be enhanced. Your child is going to have a better existence because they're there. I don't care if you come from a poor family or middle class family. This is such a multidimensional program and so many great professionals have great excellence and love, and the understanding in the Lord, in the hearts and souls of the people that are here. So the great milestones are the kids that get into college, the ones who get off the street and redirect their lives in a more positive way, but the everyday milestones are the kids who just--you know, I had a friend, one of our board members came over here one day and the kids just come here laughing and just so happy. He said, "I don't understand this. How do kids come from school, come to another place with school, where people are going to discipline them and tell them they gotta walk in the middle of--and don't put their hands on the wall, and they're happy to be here?" I said, "Because they just know it's a good thing for them." We have the best parent involvement than any of the surrounding schools. We have teachers who have kids here and say, "The parents don't go to the schools and support them like they do here." I said, "Because we do great things here." There is an anointing on this place. I invite anybody to go up on or Google or just look and see. It's just wonderful. Story_ID: 167989 Speaker 1: I know that the William sisters [Venus Williams and Serena Williams] inspired this on some level, so do we have any emerging tennis stars?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We have two sisters that started playing tennis here. They moved to Florida as many people do. The Means sisters, M-E-A-N-S, [Sarah Means and Elizabeth Means], they're like the William sisters, they're about eleven months apart and we call them "by any means necessary." They're on their way. We have [Taylor] "Woodie" McKnight who is fifteen and he should be on his way to professional tennis and we have a little boy here Ron John Renkin [ph.] and he's playing like Arthur Ashe was. So we have some stars. We don't look for them. They just emerge because our goal is to put a tennis racket in your hand that would take you through but if a detour is on the professional circuit, then that's okay too. So you--as the William sisters go into the dawn of their careers and they are because they're thirty something years old, all is not lost. You look coming in through the front door. They're going out the back door, going to be some people that came right out of southeast Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. There is a tournament--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --National Junior League Tournament. Tennis learning tournament and that organization is within the United States, which was founded by Arthur Ashe and it is for tennis really that appeals to diversity and inner city children and so we have teens here from all over Maryland, all over Virginia, from as far as Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New Jersey, Maine and they're all out there competing right now for the NJTL cup, we're hosting it. Speaker 1: Okay, has [HM] Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe been over to your place? Speaker 2: You know, when we first opened up, she sent us his racket and we have it in the display case and she supports us but she hasn't been here. Speaker 1: I think she'll probably be one day. Speaker 2: Yeah, she will. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 167990 Speaker 1: I know you mentioned faith quite a bit now. Do you have specific church that you belong to or denomination? Speaker 2: I belong to Union Temple Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.] under Reverend Willie Wilson. Speaker 1: Is Reverend Wilson--has he been a stock supporter? Speaker 2: Absolutely. And I've got to say, we've got some--the young girl who sang the national anthem that opened us [Southeast Tennis and Education Center, Washington, D.C.] up is a member of Union Temple--we have a few Union Temple people up in here. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 167991 Speaker 1: Southeast Tennis and Learning Center [Washington, D.C.], now how many years old? Speaker 2: Eleven, we celebrated our tenth anniversary last year with Venus [Williams] and Serena [Williams]. It was great. I can't believe--I just can't believe if from that first meeting with John Tydings. Eleanor [Holmes Norton] says it was my will. I say it was the will of God and I just followed his will but if--the young lady I was telling you about, Jennifer [Coken], she moved to Colorado. She just happened to be back in town [Washington, D.C.] and came to see on Friday, and she said when she pulled in front of the building, she had to get herself together. She sat out there and cried. I mean because she went through the process with me and then she moved, so hasn't been here these years that we've done what we've done--I mean she has come and gone from time to time but to think about her sitting outside of my office that first day and from the journey that we went on to pull up and see all this activity and see not only did the building get built but everything that was supposed to happen in this building and more is happening because, to me, one of the most terrorizing days of my life was the day the day after the grand opening--oh really a couple of days after the grand opening. I'm like--I compare it to being pregnant--a woman has a baby, she's pregnant and I can hardly wait--you like pregnancy until a certain degree, but you want to get this baby out of you. Oh my God, then when the baby is out of you, then it's, oh my God, for the next eighteen years, I'm responsible for this human being! That's what building the building was for me. Building the building--then when I got the building open, it was like--what am I going to do with it? It's got to do what it's supposed to do. I mean you don't build a building for the building sake. The building has to come alive with the promise of tomorrow for our children, so that was my great challenge is programming and now--it's--well you see. Story_ID: 167992 Speaker 1: Well you got at Southeast Tennis and Learning Center [Washington, D.C.], you had, you know, this magnificent facility, you got people out in the community that have expertise--some are known, some are unknown, you got the children that have needs. What is your operating philosophy for social services kind of center? Speaker 2: Well, one is no child gets turned away because of cost and that this is a village and we will surround them and support them as long as we can. So when you walk in here, you walk here with the attitude that you want to be a part of it and we will do the rest. We will bring it to you. And we haven't always been successful. We have lost some kids along the way. The young girl across the street-every time I see her, tears come to my eyes, she had such promise but her family situation was so challenging that instead of coming here, we took her places. She had such great potential, but she spent most of the time babysitting her sibling's children. Here is a kid babysitting kids, so that's heart breaking, but I'm better for it now because I know that for everybody that we lose, there is another opportunity to have a success. We don't give up on anybody. They give up on us. That's one thing. Story_ID: 167993 Speaker 1: This should not be a hard question at all but we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: That is a hard question because the African American community, I don't even know if that word applies anymore, the word, "community." We have become such a diverse, diffuse group of people that I don't know if we have collective goals or collective promises. I mean my promise for every African American, especially a young person, is to have a sense of consciousness of where they come from and what their responsibility is to this planet and to our people, and to do that, you know, you have to immerse yourself in history of your people and yourself and your family and you have to know why God put you this earth, and you always have to remember where you came from. And I see less and less of that. I don't want to be the person that says, "This generation" because I do know young people who have a consciousness but not as much. I mean I watched on television the other day, they were talking about this white boy who goes to school called Martin Luther King and he mistakenly got a scholarship that was intended for an African American. I don't know how it happened but he gave the scholarship back because he knew that it really wasn't intended for him and they did a man on the street interview, and the white people said, "Well, that was the right thing to do because it was intended for an African American," and the black folks said, "well, it shouldn't matter what color, he should be able to keep it." I was like, "Really?" So I don't know what to say. I swear to God. I'm not kidding. This happened about a week ago. Story_ID: 167994 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too and this shouldn't be hard to answer either, if you look back on everything you've done at this point in life, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: This, Southeast Tennis and Learning Center [Washington, D.C.] because it will last forever, what we do with these kids will be in their lives and in their children lives forever, ever and ever. If I die today, I've made a difference in my community, I've made a difference on this planet. Speaker 1: Okay, somebody else I talked to this week was lamenting the fact that a lot of times we start things and there are great people that begin things and they thrive under certain leadership but then there is no one coming behind them to do it. Have you prepared staff, you know? Speaker 2: All day long, I try. I have the young girl, who is our education for our program this year and we had to hire and fire people. She's twenty-nine, but she is bright and she is committed and she is a quick learner. All these resumes and she'd bring people in and I'd interview them, I didn't say anything, so at the end of the day, she walked into my office the other day and said, "Mrs. Barry, you have not interfered." I said, "You have to learn. I want you to learn. These are your hires, so good or bad or in between, you have to be responsible for them," training them about excellence, training them about how to motivate people, training them and you can't train people about commitment, you can't train people for heart. If they have the heart and the commitment, then I'll give them the mechanics. I know she has a heart for our kids, little, teeny things that nobody even knows are signs, so, yes, everyday I worry about that. I am trying to institutionalize the passion. No one is ever going to have the passion for this place like I do. The place looks like it looks today, it's eleven years old, you never know it if you walked the halls. That is institutionalized, taking care of this building is something that kids do, not just the maintenance people--everybody does. There is no gum in the building. I mean--you go into a building into this side of town and it looks like this after eleven years, and it's never been repainted in eleven years, that's love, but I think I'm building leadership through the children that we have mentored through here, through the staff and even the parents. Speaker 1: Do you have--are there any plans to replicate--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Everybody talks about it. People want to replicate the building, but to replicate the program, you have to have passion and commitment. It's easier said than done, every time that someone comes and says, "I want to do what you did," I'll sit with them; I'll give them the story but there have been many more commitments in sports facilities to combine education and to include education in it because I think it's criminal; I think it's a felony to present any kind of sport to any African American child and underserved community and not combine it with education. You have to do the two together if you want to have a child that's going to be successful in life, so much of that has been duplicated. The overall thing that we do, parts of it but not the totality of it. Speaker 1: I have to ask this question as an old basketball player, are there any basketball courts here? Speaker 2: Right up the street? Speaker 1: Have you invited our president [HM President Barack Obama] to come and play? Speaker 2: No, I've invited--I'm trying to get Michelle [Obama] and the girls to come play tennis. They play tennis. I'm gonna get there. We've been to the White House a lot. Story_ID: 167995 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family now. You have a daughter. Speaker 2: I have two daughters. My oldest daughter is Lalaynya Masters Abner, she's in Atlanta [Georgia]. She's an actress. She has done many things. She is also a director and a teacher. She has a group in Atlanta. She is fabulous. The name of her group is called--let me see if I can do this right-H-O-T--House of Tribes. And many of the prominent actors come and do workshops there. She uses the curriculum from Susan Batson which is a very prominent acting coach to the stars, and she is an actress, herself. She started being an actress, but she is the director and teacher of the House of Tribes and they've done a lot of great things. She graduated from Howard University, drama [Howard University, Department of Theatre Arts, Washington, D.C.]. She went to Duke Ellington School of [the] Art[s] [Washington D.C.]. She has been in the arts I mean all of life. I mean she started acting when she was three years old when she was doing puppetry so she is my artist child. Then my other child is my academic child, which is Tamara Masters Wilds Lawson. And she just got her Ph.D. four or five years ago, married a wonderful young man, Harry Lawson, just gave me my first grandchild, Zora Asali Lawson [ph.] and she is now the CEO and president of Posse D.C. [The Posse Foundation, Inc., Washington, D.C.], an international organization that sends kids to college for free tuition. So she's a CEO, a Ph.D. and an m-o-m. So I'm proud of her. Story_ID: 167996 Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything that I haven't asked you about? Speaker 2: We already talked about my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] getting a Ph.D. at sixty-seven and running for president four times. We talked about that. Speaker 1: That sounds, strangely enough, that I think we did, but just mention it again just to make sure we have it. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I just turned sixty-seven, so I have a better appreciation for it. When she went back and college educated all of us, Dr. Isabell Masters, she went back and got her master's degree from Los Angeles--I mean UC--University of California [Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and then she decided she wanted to get her Ph.D. so she went to the University of Oklahoma at Norman [Norman, Oklahoma] and got her Ph.D. Did a dissertation of the life and times of [Oliver L.] Brown--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Brown as in the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to think of his first name right now, I can't think of it, but I will in a minute. She graduated to Topeka High School [Topeka, Kansas], so she had an interest in that. She was Who's Who and she was sixty-seven years old. Now, that I'm sixty-seven, whereas I think that was nice, there were a lot of articles written about it. Now that I look back, at sixty-seven, I can't even imagine going after a Ph.D. So now I have an even greater appreciation of that accomplishment. She just recently passed in September. They had tried to do some stuff with her, [The] HistoryMakers did, but I don't know what ever happened with that. She was quite a role model. My mom never defined for us gender. So she just did things way ahead of her time. If she was born when I was born, she would be president of the United States, but she ran four times and that's all in--yeah, and she when she died, they wrote about it, all over the world, they called about it because she was a presidential candidate. She made history. Speaker 1: She ran as a Democrat? Speaker 2: She ran as a Republican. Speaker 1: What time period was that when she ran? Speaker 2: Her last election was around the same time--it was so funny--[William "Bill"] Clinton's last one, so that was her last year running and all the years prior to that. Then one year, she was--the lesser candidates had a convention that also ran and she was also their nominee so one of the years she ran. But it was so funny. She was on the ballot in Arkansas and she got a lot of votes. And I took her--and she was a great writer, very smart lady as you could probably guess--to the White House my last year in office and I'll never this experience and we got up to the receiving line--I'm first lady--I'm still first lady, so they're going to stoop the line and give me a little extra time, right. When she got to President Clinton, she said, "I got something to give you, can I give it to you?" He said, "Yes, you certainly can." I almost died. My mother is reaching in her purse and talking to the president, I'm thinking the secret service is going to throw her on the ground and she gave him this article that she had written about him that was in the main newspaper in Arkansas, a great article, and then she took his hands in both her hands and said, "I have something that I want to say to you," it was right in the middle of the impeachment--advice she often gave us, she said, "Don't let them drive you crazy. You're young, you're smart, you're handsome, you can get another job." And he said, "Thank you so much, ma'am," and I have that picture of her saying that. I was like, "What other job can you get, mom?" You know, he has the job. Yep, she said, "You're smart; you're young; you're handsome, you can get another job. Don't let them drive you crazy." Speaker 1: That's priceless. Speaker 2: It is priceless. Story_ID: 167997 Speaker 1: Now, are you still friends with former Mayor [HM] Marion Barry? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we're great friends. We're better friends than we were living mates. Well, we were very good friends prior to getting married, you know. I went to his last--he just got re-elected [to Council of the District of Columbia] in September and I went to it--and I don't usually do that. We live our lives in a very different way, but I went to his victory party and the reporter asked me why. I said, "Because whether anybody recognizes this or not, this is probably his last campaign. He has been in every ballot on the [Washington] District of Columbia since 1971 except for the one year he was in prison. That's something." So I wanted to be here because I'm one of the few people who were with him from the beginning. I was there for the first time he ran for office for the school board until this last time. So, yeah, we're good friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 167998 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, I've often thought about that because I'm at the stage in my life where those things happen and I have a lot of friends who are leaving us--you know, I think just a person who--just a very--my mother [Isabell Arch Masters] raised me to be very real. She raised me to have compassion for people and to not be a person whose value system was on material things, so I would just like to be remembered as somebody who had a good heart and did the best I could for other people and from my heart...