 Story_ID: 638335 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our int- our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Carl Compton Bell [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell], C-A-R-L, C-O-M-P-T-O-N, B-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Ten, twenty-eight, forty-seven [October 28, 1947], Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a physician. I'm a psychiatrist. I'm a CEO. I'm a researcher. I am a martial artist. I am a father. I am a husband. I think that's about all, that's enough. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's a pretty good description. And, sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: I don't know, November 3rd, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Chicago at 1900 South Michigan [Avenue]. Story_ID: 638336 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight kind of warm up questions we ask and they only require a short answer then. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I guess so, what is it? Pizza, I would guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, they're all the same to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: They're all the same to me. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Nobody cares. Speaker 1: Hm. Okay. All right. Well, we have to re- revisit that one at some point-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --in this interview (laughter). Story_ID: 638337 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We're gonna, I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and, and your father's [William Y. Bell, Jr.] side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Pearl Debnam, P-A, P-E-A-R-L, D-E-B-N-A-M. That was her maiden name. I'm not sure I remember her middle name. Her last name was Pratt, P-R-A-T-T [Pearl Debnam Pratt]. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a, now Debnam's kind of a, I haven't heard that before, is there a story behind that name? Speaker 2: Debnams, the Debnams lived in Montclair, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. It's Debnam? Speaker 2: D-E-B-N-A-M. Speaker 1: N-A-M, okay. All right. Okay. All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, she was born in Montclair, New Jersey, date of birth, I'd have to look it up. I have no idea. Speaker 1: Would you say in the '20s [1920s] probably, what do you think? Speaker 2: Hm, let's see I was born in '47 [1947], she was about thirty when I was born, so 1917. Speaker 1: Yeah, that seems, seems about right. Speaker 2: Somewhere in there. Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that, that's correct. Okay. What do you know about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them and-- Speaker 2: I can trace my mother's side of the family back to her mother's mother. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Great-grandmother. She had, my mother's mother, my mother's mother had one son, and one, two, three, four daughters who were all in New Jersey. My mother married my father and moved to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you, your, your, as far as your great-grandmother is concerned, did, did she, I mean does that, does your mother's side of the family, is that, that's as far back as you can trace 'em on her side? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: And it's in New Jersey, right? Speaker 2: It's in New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. So there's no history on that side of, there are no stories from slavery or-- Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: --or coming from, coming north from the South or-- Speaker 2: Not that I know of (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know of. Speaker 2: I mean part of the difficulty was when my mother moved to Chicago we pretty much lost contact with the New Jersey side of the family only to visit there two or three times 'cause, you know, you traveled by train or by car back then. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what, what did your great-grandmother do for a living and what, what was her name (unclear)? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Louise Debnam [Louise Davis Debnam]. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And I've got this written down somewhere in some sort of genealogy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I've never, I never really traced it that well. Speaker 1: Well, I guess it, what I, I think we'd like to know is are there any stories from that side of the family that are passed down about-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --the, the, their lives in New Jersey and what they were doing? Speaker 2: Not, not that I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not that I can think of. Speaker 1: So did your mother grow up with means or did, were they were struggling or (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they, from, I, I don't know how she grew up. I mean, she was, she had a master's degree in social work, so they were-- Speaker 1: So she was able to go to school? Speaker 2: --they were educated. My grandmother and grandfather, B.B. Debnam (ph.), owned a house. My Uncle Sammy [Samuel Debnam] was a watchmaker or knew about watches. I'm not sure about the other aunts, what they did but they owned their own home, so they were, I guess, middle class, working class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Combination of working and middle class people. Speaker 1: Did your mother share with you any stories of growing up, what it was like and when she was growing up? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, not a clue. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause she would have been reaching, I guess, the middle teen years during the Depression [Great Depression], you know, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess so, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. She, she didn't talk about that or-- Speaker 2: My mother died when I was eighteen. So, you know, you don't really talk to your parents about history or things like that before eighteen. You gotta be grown to talk to them, to find out, you know, what was what. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was, I was busy trying to be a bad little boy. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, where did she go to school, college? Speaker 2: Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Clark University [Clark Atlanta University] in Atlanta [Georgia]. Story_ID: 638338 Speaker 1: Well, we'll go to your father's side now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can, can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Yancy, Y-A-N-C-Y, Bell, B-E-L-L, Jr. [William Y. Bell, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I believe he was born in Memphis, Tennessee. Date of birth, I don't know, I, I sent it in, I remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I don't, I-- Speaker 1: Was he older than your mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt]? Speaker 2: He was a little older than my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it would have been 1915, something like that? Speaker 2: Nineteen? Speaker 1: Fifteen [1915] maybe or-- Speaker 2: Maybe. Speaker 1: --some (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Somewhere in there. Speaker 1: All right. And well, how far back can you trace his ancestors and-- Speaker 2: I can trace his ancestors back to my great-great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: Not offhand. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's somewhere written down. Speaker 1: Now, were they, was the family based in Memphis when your great-great-grandfather was active (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There, the story goes, and I, I read this out of a book 'Negro Vanguard' ['The Negro Vanguard'] by Bardolph [Richard Bardolph]. There's another book with some Bell family history in it, the story goes that my great-great-grandfather was a slave and had recently gotten off of the boat and reportedly was from Madagascar but I don't know how in the hell he got all the way from Madagascar, the east side of Africa all the way to the United States but apparently there were some slaves who did. Speaker 1: This is now, I will just pause here and just, just, dwell, dwell on this a second. The, I've heard this story before and I've interviewed two other people that had this kind of ancestry that they were incredulous about themselves. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: One person that I interviewed, not in this position, but outside was Armstead Allen out at Olive-Harvey [Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. Speaker 1: He has a similar story of Madagascar lineage. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And-- Speaker 2: Interesting. Speaker 1: --out of-- Speaker 2: Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: --Arkansas or Louisiana, I think-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Louisiana or Arkansas one. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. He's at Olive-Harvey College. Speaker 2: Olive-Harvey, I'm-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --(unclear) Olive-Harvey not Chicago State. Speaker 1: Yeah. So it's not, it's, it's, when I first heard it, I thought it was, was odd-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a little strange. Speaker 1: --but I've heard a couple of more stories-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about it so Madagascar (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But apparently he was a, he was a young boy and was a slave. And he apparently was very arrogant and self-directed and reportedly he was a blacksmith. Now, my aunt, Bernice Just [Bernice Bell Just] who was married to Highwarden Just who was the son of Ernest Everett Just, the cell biologist, my aunt tells me that our family story is actually Alex Haley's story in 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family'] with the blacksmith [Tom Murray]. Because apparently Alex Haley and my father were friends, but I don't, I don't know how true this is. At any rate-- Speaker 1: And Alex Haley was from Tennessee as well. Speaker 2: Alex Haley was also from Tennessee. Speaker 1: Yeah. And what, what, what was your great aunt's name? Speaker 2: My aunt, not my great aunt. Speaker 1: Oh, your aunt, okay. Speaker 2: Bernice-- Speaker 1: Bernice. Speaker 2: --Bell Just. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.] had three children, Grace [Grace Bell], Bernice, and my father. Speaker 1: Okay. So she's like the family historian basically for that side, sort of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I guess, I don't know. Story_ID: 638339 Speaker 1: But at any rate my, my [paternal] great-great-grandfather had just gotten off the boat and he was, he worked his self up to a blacksmith. And was very defiant and was so defiant that in, started in South Carolina, was on the plantation in South Carolina, and he used to hire himself out to make money so that he could buy himself free. And reportedly he bought himself free and then he went back to buy his wife free who is also reportedly from Madagascar. But the mistress of the plantation would not sell my great-great-grandfather his wife and supposedly during the Civil War they escaped and wound up in Memphis [Tennessee]. That's the decent side of the story. The other side of the story is that my great-great-grandfather was a woman's man and he was off somewhere working, hired himself out or was actually by then free and was working. And apparently my great-great-grandmother during Thanksgiving, apparently Uncle Henry [ph.] who is not really an uncle, was told to steal a horse or to get a horse, and my great-great-grandmother took all of the kids from the plantation and went to Memphis where she caught my great-great-grandfather in bed with another woman. And apparently Uncle Henry at some point got hanged because he never got horse stealing out of his blood and got caught stealing somebody's horse, even though he really wasn't related, you know how that goes. But that's the, that's the seedy side of the, the Bell story. My great-great-grandfather then proceeded to go into ministry and become a preacher and he preached. And my great-grandfather [John H. Bell] also followed in his footsteps and became a minister. And then my grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.] followed in their steps and became a minister. And, in fact (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What denomination, I'm sorry, what, what, what denomination? Speaker 1: Was the, a bishop in the, at that time Colored Methodist Episcopal church. Speaker 2: It's, what we call the C.M.E. Speaker 1: Which then got changed to be the Christian Methodist Episcopal church. And apparently there are stories of Bishop Isaac Lane and Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] that the bishop started along with the help of my grandfather. And my grandfather apparently, I think he went to Lane College, I'm not sure, I think he went to Lane College. And then he went to Yale [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut]. And in 1924 got his Ph.D. in Arabic and Semitic languages from Yale (background noise) in 1924. Story_ID: 638340 Speaker 1: So you're talking about your, your [paternal] grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.] who was, who went to Yale [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] and became a, an expert in Arabic and---yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he, he got his Ph.D. in Arabic and Semitic languages and wrote his doctoral thesis, was some Arabic name Waki Wa Salik [sic. 'The Mutawakkili of As-Suyuti,' William Yancy Bell] or something like that. Speaker 1: Now, this is-- Speaker 2: Which is still, which is still referenced today. 'Cause apparently he-- Speaker 1: Oh, his, his dissertation? Speaker 2: --he was a scholar, he was like a serious scholar and had traveled to Africa, traveled to Egypt, traveled all over the place. Speaker 1: So he came along in a time when classical education was popular amongst the-- Speaker 2: Classical educationists. Speaker 1: --the higher educated black people, people like William Scarborough [William Sanders Scarborough] and Charles Anderhill [ph.] and people like that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were, were classics experts, writing textbooks in those days and I think that's part of-- Speaker 2: It is-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --he was a, he was scholar. Then apparently he got another Ph.D. which I found out recently from a seminary, Garrett [Garrett Biblical Institute; Garrett Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois], I think, I'm not sure. But my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] was quote, based on this 'Negro Vanguard' ['The Negro Vanguard,' Richard Bardolph] and this other book, my grandfather rather was a quote, race man, end quote. And in one of the books it talks about in 1919 him trying to get Marcus Garvey out of jail and gave some fiery speech which is still preserved somewhere at the museum in New York [New York]. And then I've got a, apparently my grandfather was paling around with Benjamin Mays, Mary McLeod Bethune, Tobias Channing-- Speaker 1: Channing Tobias [Channing Heggie Tobias], yeah. Speaker 2: --Channing Tobias, Walter White, Thurgood Marshall, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And apparently my grandfather organized a meeting with President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] of which I have a picture. Speaker 1: So those are the movers and shakers in the black political lexicon in those days. Speaker 2: Back then-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah. No, they were, and some other people. I don't remember all of their names. But he, he organized this meeting with Truman and they went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and met with Truman and tried to get Truman to do something about the race problem. Speaker 1: And so, all right. And what was the outcome of the meeting? What was the, well, (laughter)? Speaker 2: Outcome of the meeting, I don't know. I mean, there were, there were some concessions made. And apparently Mrs. Truman [Bess Truman] and Mary McLeod Bethune got to be tight. Speaker 1: Now, this is, I guess, to put it in a historical perspective, this is right at the, Truman becomes the president just as the country was thinking about and started moving towards desegregation of the [U.S.] Armed Forces-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and other-- Speaker 2: And that that was part of their conversation was desegregation of the Armed Forces conversation. I'm not very historical. I tend to be more here and now. Speaker 1: I hear you. Speaker 2: Zen frame of mind. Speaker 1: So I try to stick that stuff in in case somebody who's listening to this later knows the context of it. Speaker 2: Hey, I hear you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's all, that's all I'm doing. Speaker 2: Must be nice. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: I wish I had that skill. It's not in my brain. Story_ID: 638341 Speaker 1: So that would have been the, well, you know, you did know that's part of the conversation of, of that, those days, the desegregation of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --and your [paternal] grandfather was pivotal, I guess in, in-- Speaker 2: He was, he was right there in it. There are stories that my [paternal] aunt [Bernice Bell Just] tells about on my grandmother's [Annabelle Compton Bell] side were the Comptons who were up in Michigan and Edward Compton [ph.] was her father. And I'm not sure how they got up in Michigan but apparently my aunt's grandmother sent her a white china doll and my grandfather said, "Oh, it's very pretty, but let me make it prettier," and took it and painted it black. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --they were living in New York [New York] at the time. And in New York there's a church on 127th [sic.] and Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], Williams C.M.E. Church [Williams Institution C.M.E. Church, New York, New York] and there's this tremendous, at least there used to be, this big hall called Bell Hall [ph.], and apparently my grandfather built the church. It's this two story huge building. So he had a, he built a number of churches, he was, you know, he was quite a character apparently, full of spit and vinegar. Speaker 1: And now you mentioned before, you referred to him as a race man, now-- Speaker 2: That that was the common term. He was-- Speaker 1: People, yeah. Speaker 2: --he was in favor of the liberation of black people from segregation, slavery, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And then he made, he didn't apologize for it. Speaker 1: Okay. And just a note to anybody watching this that Garvey [Marcus Garvey], from what I believe was jailed in 1927, he was up on charges before but never, so his speech, I don't know if you're sure about the date of his speech but I didn't know about him being in jail until '27 [1927]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But just, you know, if-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --somebody wants to look it up. Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah, it's in this 'Black Redemption' ['Black Redemption: Churchmen Speak for the Garvey Movement'] book by Burkett-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --I think, Randall-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Burkett [Randall K. Burkett]. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: And there's a chapter on my grandfather and his work. Speaker 1: So he was one of the pivotal figures of the mid-20th century I guess in terms of race relations-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and politics and-- Speaker 2: He was on it. Speaker 1: Somebody we haven't heard as much about as some of the others but if he set up that meeting, I mean that's really (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hey, he was, he was, it, it, it's interesting. I have dug into the C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] literature 'cause another woman I knew was a C.M.E. person and she was deep in it and she gave me a C.M.E. calendar with his name in there and there were other C.M.E. bishops who were very, he had nurtured and trained them. Who knows? Speaker 1: So that's quite a legacy. Now, did your, your, your great, now, now that's, that's your grandfather? Speaker 2: That's my grandfather. Speaker 1: Yeah, and his, his name was-- Speaker 2: William Yancy Bell, Sr. [William Y. Bell, Sr.] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) William Bell, Sr., okay. Speaker 2: And his father [John H. Bell] apparently handed down this story. I mean and there are, you know, there are, there are these stories apparently, which I haven't bothered to keep up with. My great-great-grandfather told my great-grandfather who told my grandfather that he should not work for white people 'cause they were all crazy, and he based that on their wanting to enslave people which didn't make sense to him. Speaker 1: Hm. Okay. That's the, the, the ancestor from Madagascar, right that telling him? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Apparently. Story_ID: 638342 Speaker 1: Are there any Africanisms that he [Bell's paternal great-great-grandfather] passes down from Madagascar to the family that, that you, I mean, that are recognized as such that you-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. My mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] and father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] were divorced when I was two. And so I lost contact with them to some extent, although my father would pop up from time to time. He was a Ph.D. in sociology, two master's degrees, social work, he and my mother were both social workers. And so I sort of lost contact with the Bell, I, you know, we were in Chicago [Illinois] everybody else was somewhere else. And it was, traveling was hard 'cause you had to go by car or by train. But I remember when I was around eight I went to South Boston, Virginia, where my [paternal] grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.] was living in a two story house with a basketball court next door and a church that he owned across the street, a three story church 'cause apparently he had decided he would retire down there and built his little empire. And I remember, I think, it was Christmas and he owned some land in the back, probably, I don't know, fifty, sixty acres in the back. The Compton side of the family, my grandmother's [Annabelle Compton Bell] side of the family owned about 120 acres in Michigan, so these folks were always, always had property. But I remember going down at Christmas and there was a lake on the land but I remember going out the back and my grandfather, because this was in South Boston, Virginia, in the '50s [1950s], probably around '54 [1954], and my grandfather had built and painted three billboards which depicted God throwing Satan out of heaven because the people that he was ministering to were for the most part illiterate and so he had these three billboards and this log cabin church that he had built before he was able to build the three story brick thing across the street. And I, I remember going back there, I don't remember when this was but I, I was out of medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and his file, my grandfather's file cabinet was still there and I remember riffing the file cabinet. And what I found interesting, I found pictures of my great-grand--great-great-grandfather, great-grandfather [John H. Bell] and I found letters from Benjamin Mays at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Mary McLeod Bethune and all this stuff, his passport that had travels from 1920, 1917, 19--all over the world. But what I found interesting was his filing system was the same as mine. Now, this was a man that I had only spent about a week with, so I, being a biologist, it's very, I, I can see genetics in action and how that thread runs through people, even though there, there may not be as much association in the family, half of what people are is genetics, so we're the same people (laughter). Story_ID: 638343 Speaker 1: Did your father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] have any stories about growing up that he shared with you? Speaker 2: There, there was a, no, no, no father stories other than swimming. There was a story about my grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.] being a little boy and delivering something to a white woman's house when he was very young, eight or nine or something, and seeing a bathtub which he had not ever seen before. And he remembered standing in it, a big large metal tub, and the, the woman who was white found him and told him, made him strip naked and had him walk home butt naked so there's, there's that story. There was a story about my grandfather being seventy-five and being able to put both legs behind his head and walk on his hands 'cause apparently when he was, he was in Chicago [Illinois] at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and wanted to go to medical school but couldn't 'cause he was black and apparently was staying with somebody from India and so apparently he learned some yoga as far as I can tell. My daughter, my oldest daughter [Cristin Bell Carol] has done some digging and found other kinds of things. I know that I was born on Drexel [Boulevard] at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]. But again, my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] and father divorced so I didn't really have a lot of contact with him. Story_ID: 638344 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Pearl Debnam Pratt and William Y. Bell, Jr.] met? Speaker 2: I have no idea, I think they met at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I'm not sure, but they were both at Howard. My [paternal] grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.] was at Howard with Howard Thurman who was the guy of the school of religion [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], I guess, at the time. But I'm not, I'm not sure 'cause again, they both, my mother died when I was seventeen or eighteen, my father died shortly after that, after we had finally hooked up, shows you how life is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I missed, I missed a lot of the history. Speaker 1: Okay. So they, at the time they met your, your mother was an undergraduate student? Speaker 2: Probably undergrad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And then I think they both went to Clark University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] or no, Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Atlanta University and got master's degrees in social work. Story_ID: 638345 Speaker 1: And then my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.], my father was also a big Urban League man. And, in fact, my father's second wife was Arnita Boswell, Arnita Young Boswell, who was Whitney Young's sister. And so my father was all up in the Urban League stuff and was the big executive director of the Atlanta Urban League [Urban League of Greater Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] at some point. And I've got pictures of my father, apparently my father and Thurgood Marshall used to go around and sue railroad companies. And I've got some of the, you know, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] released some of their files and archives. And it, I've got my father's name, I presume it was my father, I doubt if it was my grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.], and Thurgood Marshall and Channing Tobias [Channing Heggie Tobias] or Tobias Channing, whichever. Speaker 2: It was Channing Tobias. Speaker 1: Channing Tobias. And some other folk who were, who were just going around dismantling segregation, suing, suing the railroads all over the place. And then I've got another picture of my father with Bill Berry [Edwin C. Berry] and some other folks at a National Urban League meeting. Speaker 2: Yeah, Bill Berry is a prominent Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Prominent Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] guy. Speaker 2: --Urban League, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He used to be head of the Chicago Urban League. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 638346 Speaker 1: And then my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] wound up, yeah, he, I think he may have done, he might have gotten another master's degree in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] because he, there's a, there's a thesis that I'm pretty sure was his about the black recreational activities in the Hill District in, in Pittsburgh. And then he finally wound up in San Francisco [California] teaching sociology 'cause he went and got his Ph.D. for, in sociology from somewhere. But again that history is, is sort of lost to me 'cause they both died when I was a testosterone flooded teenager. And, you know, you, when you're, when you're under, when you're in your latency age from five to thirteen, you don't know anything. When you get to be thirteen to eighteen then you know everything, can't nobody tell you nothing. So I, I don't really have their history other than newspaper articles. I came across a newspaper article, 'cause, you know, now everything is microfilmed and, and digitalized, and I, I did a search in the Chicago Defender's archives and found seven or eight articles on my father and probably another twenty or thirty on my grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.]. Speaker 2: Hm. That's something, yeah. Story_ID: 638347 Speaker 1: Now, what does this feel like to--'cause a lot of people don't, you know, can't, well, they may ask relatives about their father, their grandfather, their grandmother, but they don't think, you know, if they go to the Defender [Chicago Defender] they won't, or the archives of a paper they won't see headlines about 'em (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: How does it feel to see them in a, in a headline? Man, when you first, did you have any, any idea that they were-- Speaker 2: Well, I knew that my [paternal] grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.] had gotten his Ph.D. from Yale [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] in 1924. I knew that my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] and father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] had master's degrees. I mean, I, you know, I'm the wrong guy to ask anything of because I don't, I don't really care. It doesn't matter, you know, it's what do you do with what you got while you got it when you got it that's important. It doesn't really matter where you came from, doesn't really matter that you're able to trace some great accomplishments or achievements by your forbearers. I mean, I think it could be helpful for some people. I didn't, I didn't see the picture of my grandfather with Truman [President Harry S. Truman] and Mary McLeod Bethune until I had finished medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and was well on my way to doing whatever I was doing. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're saying it has no influence on you whatsoever in terms of how you-- Speaker 2: I mean it's nice. I've got, I've got a picture of my father with Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I've got a picture of my grandfather with Truman, and I've got a picture of me with Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. I doubt that there are, is another black male in the United States that has pictures of his father and grandfather and himself with three presidents, telling them to do something. But, you know, I mean it is what it is so, you know. I mean everybody's got the capacity to do something of value. Speaker 1: I appreciate your humility but I'm, I'm, I guess I'm asking this because you are a psychologist-- Speaker 2: Psychiatrist (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Psychiatry-- Story_ID: 638348 Speaker 1: Are you trained in psychology too or just psychiatry? Speaker 2: A psychiatrist is a person who goes through four years of medical school, so I delivered fifty-two babies, did open heart surgery, I had, I had a great time in medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], who studies psychiatry in a residency, so I'm a M.D. who is a psychiatrist. Psychologists are people who do undergraduate work four years and then do four years of training in psychology, they cannot prescribe medication, they are not physicians, they do not understand physiology, biology, for the most part 'cause they didn't spend four years training in physiology, biology, biochemistry, pharmacology. And more importantly they don't understand clinical medicine and so they, they are limited in understanding how complex behavior is and they don't, they tend not to see the genetics and the biology of behavior which is a, it, it, it's, it's, it limits them to some extent. But, you know, I mean, I don't know, I'm just doing what I'm doing. I'm not, I'm not trying to do anything special, I'm not trying to be somebody. I'm just doing what I'm doing. Speaker 1: Well, okay. Speaker 2: No, I'm serious. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I'm real serious. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it's genetic, I really think it's genetic. I have a son, William Yancy IV [William Y. Bell IV] and William has a leadership gene in him, and I see it. He, he just, he's, he's a know it all. He's fourteen, even when he was five he was a know it all, he just, he's got this thing about follow me, you know, and I'm like, "William, you're five, what are you talking about?" And he struggles with how to be a leader 'cause he wants to be a leader, it doesn't, and I'm not, I, if I didn't understand biology I would think it's him having seen me in leadership roles but I never really saw my grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.] or my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] in leadership roles 'cause they were, they weren't in my life to speak of. Speaker 1: But you weren't, you, you weren't aware of what they were doing-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: --I mean, they didn't, it wasn't discussed really in the household (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not a clue. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 638349 Speaker 1: From again, my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] and father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] divorced when I was two. My mother married my stepfather when I was five, he was a blue collar work a day kind of guy, nice guy, Marion Pratt, had a solid family, you know, nice people, he was a blue collar guy, he worked. I would help him paint walls and take down wallpaper and plaster and, you know, fix stuff. And, and maybe that's what gave me my sense of wanting to master things but I think that's, that's genetics. That's, it's, it's not, it's not, it's not nature or nurture, it's nature and nurture. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Growing up I had models. I made models 'cause I wanted to see how stuff worked and I always wanted to fix stuff, wanted to build something and that's genetic, that's not just, it's, some of it's learned but a lot of it's genetic. So I don't really, I don't really have that close up and personal. I've, I've learned it over the years, you know, as I've gotten older my appreciation for history has increased and improved but as a psychiatrist what's very clear to me is that people have to be who they're gonna be, you know, and you, you spend your psychiatric career trying to tell people it's okay, you know, don't nobody care why you're doing this or who you are or where you're from or nobody cares, what are you doing with your stuff, you know, are you being valuable or are you just farting around and being trifling and languishing or are you doing something that's adventuresome and exciting and challenging and dangerous and, you know, and that's what, that's, that's what I'm a do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Trying to have some fun. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I, I wanna revisit this later. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: 'Cause I think it's, but, but let me just move on to-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: --growing up. Story_ID: 638350 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory of growing up? Or, oh before you answer that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --let me go, go, back a little back and ask you, I forgot to ask this que- question. When you consider your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I have no idea. I would say my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] but I don't, I didn't get to know him well enough to say that but I would say my father. I think I have some, my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt], my mother was a very warm, loving, gentle, kind person. She was a social worker. My father, biologic father, was a very bright man, full of adventure and excitement as was his father [William Y. Bell, Sr.], as was, I mean, the, the, the story in the family about my [paternal] great-great-grandfather was that he was high spirited, quote, unquote. And he had a streak, a stubborn, tough streak in him, which I have, it's biology, that's temperament, temperament is determined by biology. And so I'm tough, I'm, you know, I'm like, kill me, you can try (laughter) but you're not gonna get very far if I have anything to do with it. So, I mean, I, I there's this, there's this toughness and resiliency in my family that I think I get from my father's side. But my mother was tough too, I mean, she was working, taking care of me and my brother [William Y. Bell III], and she was a, a adoption specialist so she was trying to get children adopted which must be hard work. Story_ID: 638351 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory. I have one, I just don't remember what it is (laughter). I remember being on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] and I remember, I've got some early childhood memories. I remember all these people coming up from Mississippi and running down the streets of Chicago with no shoes on which I could not do 'cause I always had shoes, 'cause you needed shoes in Chicago 'cause we had something called wintertime but these people, these poor black people for the most part had come up from Mississippi and their feet were tough from no shoes and they could run down the street with no shoes on and I couldn't and I didn't understand why that was. I remember, I've got straight hair quote, unquote, and everybody else around me had tightly woolen hair, I won't say nappy. And I remember going to the barbershop wondering why I couldn't get a razor line, you know, it's like well, what is it about me? Well, you don't need a razor line. I'm like what's, what, you know. I also remember going out trick or treating on Halloween and there was a, there was a policeman next door and he had a dog. And I went next door and they gave me a grapefruit in my trick or treating bag. And then I went next door and I got a nickel. And then before I get to the third door I got robbed (laughter), the West Side of Chicago. And I went home crying 'cause I was about five or so. I remember going to Howland School [George Howland Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and them insisting that the kids take showers and I, we didn't have a shower, so I thought that was the coolest thing in the world. But the reason they were insisting that the kids take showers was because my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] who was middle class insisted we take a bath every night and the other kids were not bathing regularly. So I used to have a great time taking a shower. I, I have a memory of playing outside and it was not really any place to go or anything to do and they were tearing up the street and they had these big black things that would warn people all about there being holes in the ground and they would, you'd light it and I guess it was some lantern oil in the thing, and I remember sitting out and throwing dirt on that trying to cover it up, to put it out, it's an activity. Another time I remember a kid bringing it, a gun out of the house, and it was a real gun and I remember saying, "Oh, can I see that?" Him saying, "Yeah," and he gave it to me. And I, it was heavy, I remember it was heavy and I told him at four or five, I said, you all, "Do you know you should take this back in the house," (laughter), "'cause this is heavy, there's something wrong here. I don't know what that is but it's something wrong." I remember being, my brother [William Y. Bell III] being in the Cobras and, and wanting to wear a war buckle, so in case you got into a fight you could defend yourself. I remember catalpa trees which were also called elephant ear trees and they had these long, thin seed pods which apparently you could smoke. Speaker 1: They called 'em cigar trees I guess or something, yeah-- Speaker 2: Cigar trees, yeah. Speaker 1: --in some neighborhoods. Speaker 2: I remember being five or six or eight and going to visit my [maternal] grandmother [Louise Davis Debnam] in New Jersey and me and my brother sneaking down into the basement and smoking some Lucky Strikes, you know, just little black male stuff. Story_ID: 638352 Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: A brother. Speaker 1: Just a brother? Old, older brother (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my, I, my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] and Arnita Young Boswell had a daughter, Bonnie Boswell. And then my father being a man about town they divorced at some point and he went and married Barbara Bell in San Francisco [California] later on. But Bonnie was, I didn't know, I didn't know, I didn't know I had a sister until I was about twenty because my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] never bothered to tell me. You know, I think back then parents were attempting to shield their children from all of the male, female stuff that was going on in everybody's life because everybody was trying to be idyllic and middle class and upwardly mobile and everybody was trying to, you know, put on airs essentially, trying to be appropriate and proper. I think my mother's biggest mistake with me was just letting me be me. Speaker 1: You say a mistake? Speaker 2: Well, you know, everything's a double edged sword. So being a free young black male is problematic for a lot of people 'cause they're like, "Excuse me, how dare you even begin to think that you're free? How dare you think there are no limits on you? How dare you strive to do something of value?" So, you know, I, I would get my occasional knocks and lumps and people trying to put me in my place as it were, which was a little disconcerting, you know, and not pleasant, that's for sure. But-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --whenever that would happen I had the habit of thinking to myself as somebody would check me, I would think to myself, you don't know who I am but you will. And it wasn't out of, I mean, I guess, I'm arrogant, but, sorry-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: So you're, you're saying that your mother, your mother really didn't prepare you, you know, that your, well, you've read probably some of the, I guess, the critique in the black community a lot of males being raised by single women and-- Speaker 2: Well, my stepfather [Marion Pratt]-- Speaker 1: --they're not able to give (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My stepfather-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was there. Speaker 1: (Unclear), okay. Speaker 2: From-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --five on. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he, I remember him, you know, 'cause he was a work a day guy and he would cut his finger and I would go, "Oh, blood," and he would just say, "Ah," and keep on going which is manhood. Speaker 1: But did he, he try to prep you for, for-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --those kind of, kinds of people? Speaker 2: I was, no, no, I wasn't being prepped, nobody was prepping me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nobody was telling me to study, nobody was checking my grades, I had to, I had to get 'em signed off on. I got horrible grades in grammar school, oh, because everybody I was hanging out with was in a gang and, you know, I was, I'm in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 638353 Speaker 1: What neighborhood on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] did you grow up in? Speaker 2: 1633 South Spaulding [Avenue] which is, I'm not sure of the neighborhood, maybe Austin [sic. North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: 1633 South Spaulding, oh. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right across the street Howland School [George Howland Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And they, you know, I mean, like I remember, I remember Eddie [ph.] who lived next door in the basement and Eddie invited me by for lunch one day. And lunch consisted of two pieces of white bread and some Alaga molasses which I guess is a southern thing. And I was like, and, you know, my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt], my mother did teach me to try to be polite. And my mother had sayings that she would lay on me. One of her favorites for me was, "Don't cut your nose off to spite your face," and I didn't know what the hell she was talking about. Another one was, "Waste not, want not," and that one I sort of understood. But I have all of these sayings that my mother told me in my head still. So she prepared me that way. She took good care of me, she cooked, oh, that woman could cook, whew, oh, I ate well (laughter). I ate extremely well. But she was not, I don't know, I remember my friends on Easter getting new suits and I never got a new suit, you know, it's like, and they would, you know, we'd go downtown and they'd have their new suits on, sporting, you know, like what is that? I remember pitching pennies, being in a gang, starting a gang, we, I moved from the West Side when I was around seven, and that we moved into Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] on 50th [Street] and Ellis [Avenue]. And so I was right on the edge of the poor area that black folk lived in, west of Cottage [Cottage Grove Avenue] and north of 47th Street. And I was a city rat so I was all over the city. And I, I, I remember at seven they did something, my parents did something and I ran away, ran to the Lake Michigan and slept out on the park bench at seven. Got cold, went home, got a spanking (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, I just wanted to point out that, I guess, Cottage Grove in those days was represented a, a clear dividing line between the black and white communities (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Cottage-- Speaker 1: Hyde Park, the, the university community of Hyde Park and then the all-black community on the other side-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but-- Speaker 1: --west of it. Speaker 2: --but I, my sense is that around '54 [1954], '54 [1954], '55 [1955], was when Hyde, well, Hyde Park apparently and it's always been integrated to some extent-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but I think that's because the black people that were living in Hyde Park were maids for the most part. If you go into most Hyde Park apartments, there are these two large bedrooms and then there's this little bathroom and little bedroom in the back of the kitchen which is where the maid was supposed to stay. But I think there were some other, there were other wealthy black people also living in Hyde Park but it wasn't, you know, integrated but integrated. Speaker 1: Yeah. The University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is a to-, sets the tone for that side of the street (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 638354 Speaker 1: I'd be running with people on the west side of Cottage [Chicago Grove Avenue] and down on 47th Street because back then it was presumably safe. And I would, I was all over the city, all over the city, not straying too far but I was 47th, 45th [Street], 43rd [Street], over to King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] which is, used to be called South Parkway-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --where Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] was-- Speaker 2: When you-- Speaker 1: --which was like the black corridor. Speaker 2: Yeah, when, when you moved at seven, did that like, did that like keep you out of gangs or you said your brother [William Y. Bell III] was a Cobra. Speaker 1: No, we, we brought the gangs with us. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the Cobras moved from-- Speaker 1: We started the East Side Cobras which morphed into the Vandells which morphed into something else. And I had friends, the Phillips [ph.] boys were in gangs, another guy named Juno [ph.], I mean, we were all in a gang. Speaker 2: Well, how would you describe a gang in those days? I mean, what, what, I mean, compared to now? I know now it's a lot of drug sales involved and a lot of (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We thought we were tough. We would have fights with rival groups. There was initiation rites that you had to go through. We carried knives and weapons. And by, by when I was eight years old I knew how to make three types of zip guns. You know, I, I now understand that all males sort of do that. And, in fact, research shows that 50 percent of black and white males all commit a felony level violent offense by the time they're eighteen. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The difference is, is that black males get caught and prosecuted and white males don't. I remember Bryant Gumbel lived up the street from us, about a block. And he was what we referred to at the time was a jupid [ph.], which was a person who is intellectual, middle class, intelligent. And-- Speaker 2: What did you, now was jupid, stand for certain letters? I mean, what was, I mean, how did it, how did they get jupid? I mean how did-- Speaker 1: How should I know? You know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --everybody had a nickname. Story_ID: 638355 Speaker 1: Well tell us, tell us the jupid [ph.] story. Speaker 2: The jupid story. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So when I was growing up we always played. Did horrible in grammar school but I hung out with the, with the guys, you know, and we would play football, baseball, basketball. And one day, I guess, we were going to get a baseball game going and I remember I was sitting on the bat, and we were up over on 50th [Street] and Ellis [Avenue] in the, in the backyard and Bryant [Bryant Gumbel] came by and said, "Golly, gee, hi guys. Are you going to play baseball? Golly, gee, can I play?" And Melvin [ph.], and my brother [William Y. Bell III], and Shug [ph.], whose name is Jonathan [ph.], Bubbles [ph.], you know, we had these nicknames, we're like, who is this punk? You know. And they, 'cause I was, I was the youngest, I guess, or not, there was, there was another kid who was younger but he was like far younger. I must have been twelve, thirteen, I don't know, probably, probably about twelve. And they said, "Carl [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell], get rid of him, he's getting on my nerves." So I took the baseball bat and I chased Bryant home for about two blocks, just, you know, trying to swing the baseball bat at him and he ran. He's, Bryant's a little older than me, about a year or two older than me. But Bryant was never embraced or, or Greg [Greg Gumbel] was okay. Greg was regular, you know. But I suspect that their parents [Rhea LeCesne Gumbel and Richard Gumbel, Jr.], I mean, it was almost like there were two worlds in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. There was my world which was the gangbangers, and then there were the, there was the other world which consisted of doctors' sons and middle class people. I was sort of on the cusp 'cause my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] was, stepfather [Marion Pratt] was working class, my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] was a social worker so I had working class, middle class and so, and a, and I floated, I would float, and when I got to high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] I, I floated with everybody. I would hang out with the white intellectuals 'cause this was in the '60s [1960s], '61 [1961] to '65 [1965]. I would hang out with the winos on 47th Street. I'd hang out with the gangbangers east of Cottage [Cottage Grove Avenue]. Hang out with the blue collar guys. Hang out with the doctors' sons and, you know, I mean they all had cars. So I would, I would float a lot, go up on 63rd Street, hang out on 63rd Street which was the, the Blackstone Ranger [Blackstone Rangers] area. Story_ID: 638356 Speaker 1: Let me go back to grade school [George Howland Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. You said you were kind of a poor student on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Horrible. Speaker 1: You really didn't concentrate on it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: There wasn't any pressure from home then (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No pressure from home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They didn't seem to be worried about me. They loved me, they took care of me. There really wasn't, the, you know, it wasn't like you're gonna go to college, you're gonna, what, (makes sound) I mean, I was pretty much on my own as far as I could tell. Speaker 1: Now, now, was church a big factor when you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --were growing up at all? Okay. Speaker 2: I, church, I made church a big factor because Norman Spaulding [Norman W. Spaulding, Sr.], my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] had gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with a friend, Clara Spaulding [sic. Janet Spaulding], and Norm Spaulding used to be on the radio. He was a radio disc jockey and he was Clara Spaulding's husband and he was a jazz radio disc jock and Clara was a teacher. And they had a son Norman, Jr. [Norman W. Spaulding, Jr.], and Norman, Jr. grew up over on 47th [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue], Blackstone [Avenue], they owned a home there. And Norman somehow or another got himself into St. Paul's choir which St. Paul's Church [St. Paul and the Redeemer Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] was on 47th and Dorchester, 48th [Street], 49th [sic. 50th Street] and Dorchester. And apparently they would pay you if you would go get kids to be in the choir, so Norman recruited me and I found myself at St. Paul's Episcopal Church in the choir and I would, but I was going by myself. I was about eight or nine. And I sang in the choir, I sang in Orchestra Hall [Symphony Center, Chicago, Illinois], and I was in plays, you know. I recruited some other people and got paid 'cause, you know, they pay you fifty cents a week to be in the choir and it was like, that was big money. You know, you'd take pop bottles back. I, I do, I do remember another early memory of the iceman driving a ice cart up the alley when I was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and hanging on the iceman's truck and getting a ride. But the, the Spauldings, Mark Jones [Mark E. Jones, Jr.] who is a lawyer, they, everybody, back then everybody was clustered together on, yeah, I mean, there were some serious ghettos in Chicago [Illinois]. But then when we moved to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] things opened up a bit. But nobody seemed to be that interested in my grades. Story_ID: 638357 Speaker 1: Did you have any, were there any teachers that, that stood out on (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Valcar Bowman was a-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --science teacher, a black man. Speaker 1: Is this on the South Side or-- Speaker 2: This was in the South Side. I went to Kozminski grammar school [Kozminski Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Kozminski, okay. Speaker 2: Actually I must have, I went to Kozminski, Reavis [Reavis Elementary School; Reavis Elementary Math and Science Specialty School, Chicago, Illinois]--they put us in a Jewish temple, the KAM temple [KAM Isaiah Israel, Chicago, Illinois] 'cause, you know, I, I, my sense is, and this is in retrospect, there were all these black people moving into Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and moving to Drexel [Boulevard] and so the schools kept getting overcrowded so they had to build Reavis which was on Drexel. And Kozminski kept getting overcrowded so they kept trying to figure out where to put all these black people that were coming 'cause the neighborhood was changing from pure white to more integrated and mixed. Speaker 1: Now, are these the days of the Willis Wagons and that (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was before the Willis-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: --Wagons. I remember, I remember Harry Wilson [ph.] was a gangbanger and I think, I don't, I don't, I don't remember if Harry Wilson was white or not but Harry Wilson wore a black leather jacket. And when I went to Kozminski at recess we would have these fights where the kids would line up on each side of the playground and we'd run together and we'd just fight. And we were always boxing, you know, you were always throwing some hands, you know, 'cause that was a black male thing or playing slap where you would slap a person in the face. It was either slap or body shots and so I did that. And I remember Harry Wilson was having a fight with somebody and I got to hold his leather jacket which I thought was the coolest thing in the world. Harry had a brother named Butchie [ph.] and Butchie, Harry, Harry wasn't quite right 'cause I saw Harry kill a cat once and his dog was chewing up the cat. He was swinging it around his head. He hung the cat. And I thought something's wrong with him, you know, he's--something's not right with him. And I remember Butchie had engineer boots 'cause back then you wanted to have engineer boots in case you had to stomp somebody. War buckle, leather jacket, 'cause the leather jacket would be harder to cut you or stab you, I mean, we, you know, (laughter) eight, nine, ten, eleven, we're doing all these things, making Molotov cocktails, having gang wars, didn't know what we were doing, we were children, you know, but the human brain doesn't get fully developed, the computer part of the human brain doesn't get fully developed 'til twenty-three or twenty-six, so you can't expect good judgment in anybody under twenty-six. But I remember Valcar Bowman was a science teacher and-- Speaker 1: And he was at Kozminski or-- Speaker 2: At Kozminski. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he apparently thought I was pretty bright. I remember a Mrs. Swann [ph.] who was this white teacher in second grade and we used to do show and tell. She seemed reasonably nice. I remember I, (laughter) I remember I was in 2B second grade, lower half and probably seven eighths of the class was in 2A but I didn't know it 'cause we were all in the same classroom. And the 2A people graduated or, or passed and went to 3B and I was stuck, so I thought, in 2B but I had actually passed to 2A and I remember crying 'cause I thought, and she said, "What's wrong?" I said, "I failed, I failed." She said, "No, you haven't failed," (laughter). "You're in 2B and you're gonna be in 2A. The other people that left are, were in, were in 2A. They're now going to 3B." I was like, "Oh, okay." Story_ID: 638358 Speaker 1: I remember being lost the first day in Kozminski [Kozminski Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. This is, this is, Kozminski was about three or four blocks from where I lived. And so my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt], first day of school at Kozminski walked me to school. I had to cross Hyde Park Boulevard, a rather large boulevard, I'm seven years old, walk up to Ingleside [Avenue] and walk down two blocks. And she took me in and she said, "So, think you can find your way back home?" I was like, "Got it." And she said, "Well, I'll see you at lunch." I, I knew my phone number. And they let us out a different door at lunchtime so I got lost (laughter). I was, I was like and I, you know, I went up two blocks and over and down and didn't know where the hell I was. And some white lady found me and I'm crying (makes sound), so well, "Where do you live?" (Makes sound) "But I know my phone number." So she took me in and I ate lunch with her, I guess, son. And, I guess, she gave me some raisin bread with cream cheese which I had never had before and I thought it was the nastiest thing I'd ever had in my life. And I don't know, you know, my fantasy now is that she was Jewish but I have no idea. She called my mother and my mother came and got me and that's where we figured out they had let me out a different door and I got lost. But yeah, I had that level of, my mother trusted me to have that level of independence. But I was horrible in school. Bowman [Valcar Bowman] assigned me to do a science project, independent study. What he didn't bother to tell me was at the end of independent study I would have to give a lecture to the class. And I was studying weather, so I did everything. I was making barometers, which apparently to make a barometer you needed a horsehair and I didn't have a horsehair so I used one of my own hairs 'cause I had long hair, you know, I. My mother had a social work friend, Mrs. Francesca (Unclear), who apparently was French. And this woman gave me a, a book, 'The Boy Scientist' [John Lewellen], or the boy something and it had all these things in there that you could make but I never had tools to make stuff so I would improvise. And I was making all kinds of junk which worked but was like, wasn't right, you know, it was rickety or raggedy or, you know. I remember, I remember never having store bought nails and I would always hammer out bent nails and straighten 'em and I'd, I'd use the bent nails to build. There was a thing you could build a, a, a box, a wooden box with a slide on it to make snow bricks 'cause I wanted to build an igloo. And but I didn't, you know, apparently, you needed a big box and I had like a little (laughter) and I would make these, I made these, you know, and it was like, you're talking about labor, and I built, I built an ice wall but it never got to the igloo. But it was stuff like that. So at the end of the, one day Bowman said, "So you're ready for your presentation?" And I was like, "What presentation?" He said, "Well, you're supposed to give a presentation to class." I was in the sixth grade, "You're supposed to give a presentation to class about the weather." And I was like, "You didn't tell me that." "Yes, I did." I said, "No, I'd remember that. You told me to go do, go and study science, weather," which I did but I wasn't taking notes, I wasn't writing anything down. I studied hurricanes, I studied tornadoes, I studied everything. So I had that, I was trying to cram remember all this stuff for the next day presentation, I did horrible, 'cause I, you know, I was unprepared. Story_ID: 638359 Speaker 1: When I got into the seventh and eighth grades, horrible at history. There was a woman Lily Way Rutledge Hayes [Lily Rutledge Hayes]. And her nickname was Wyatt Earp 'cause she was photophobic and she used to wear this wide brim hat to keep the sun off of her. And Wyatt Earp did not play. She was an elderly white woman, 'cause Kozminski [Kozminski Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] was, I think, predominantly white and then here come all these black people but they had maintained high academic standards. And so she taught us, that woman, boy, whew, whew, she would get you in the coatroom and jack you up if you were acting bad, she had this big purple ring and these little, we called 'em old lady comforters, which were these black high heel brogan shoes (laughter) and she would get you up against the hook and put a hook in the back of your neck and a hook in the small of your clothes hook and get you in there and kick you and hit you, she was like (makes sound) (gesture), you know, and, you know. And then, of course, you did not play with this woman 'cause she demanded respect or she would beat you up, not beat you, beat you, but she'd pop you one, you know, and it was like, so you did not play with Mrs. Hayes. For graduation we stole her hat (laughter) being bad little boys. She was mad. And I, you know, and, and the, the, you know, the thing is which I now understand, even though we were doing little bad stuff like that which was illegal and flat out wrong, and we, we could tell the difference between right and wrong but because your brain doesn't fully develop until twenty-six, twenty-three, we didn't know nuance or shade of grey or morality and that's something people still don't understand about children today. They don't understand that children don't become moral beings until they're twenty-six. And so they hold people to these high standards, children, to these high standards like they actually know what they're doing at eighteen. And yeah, you know, that you shouldn't be stealing this bicycle. I stole bicycles in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], but it never fully, I knew it was wrong but I didn't fully understand that somebody had probably worked to buy that bicycle and may have needed that bicycle to go to work and may have, you know, spent a significant amount of time buying that bicycle for their son and then here comes this jerk, me, stealing it. You know, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't have the brain software to fully understand that at fourteen and fifteen. I knew it was wrong, you can tell the difference between right and wrong but you can't understand nuances of morality and ethics. Speaker 2: It's not, no, no empathy at that age I guess for-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --or. Speaker 1: I didn't hear you. Speaker 2: No empathy at that, at that age, I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No empathy, I had empathy. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 638360 Speaker 1: I remember Butchie [ph.], Harry Wilson's [ph.] brother, who was a tough kid, and Butchie used to fight a lot, constantly. And I knew that even though Butchie and I were acquainted that one day I would do something to tick Butchie off and Butchie and I would get into a fight. And I knew that if I landed on the ground, Butchie would stomp me and kick me while I was down. At the same time I also knew that if I knocked Butchie down, which I fully expected to do, I was a little scared of Butchie, that if, when I knocked him down, I would not stomp him because something seemed fundamentally wrong about that, and this was eight or nine. So I had some empathy and morality in some areas but not around property. Speaker 2: So where the relationship ends, the, the, I guess, the morality ends in a sense, right? There's no-- Speaker 1: Well, there was, there was, there was that difference for sure. Back then and historically in psychiatry, psychiatrists used to differentiate between dissocial and antisocial. And antisocial were people who would rape their own sisters. Dissocial people were people who would rob you if they didn't know you but if they knew you, they would not rob you 'cause you were connected. And people don't differentiate those two very, very different levels. The, the, the dissocial people have the opportunity of growing up and developing morality and, and frontal lobe and the capacity to have ethics and empathy and, you know. But the antisocial people, they don't ever develop that. The problem is that you can't tell who's antisocial from dissocial until around twenty-six. So you, yeah, I mean, when we did Satcher's [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] youth violence report, Satcher being the sixteenth surgeon general, he, we, we made that, we tried to make that point that we should not be demonizing young people 'cause they don't know what they're doing. That's why they're children. You know, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We probably should talk about this later in the story but, but there's a, I know there's a move in Chicago [Illinois] in 2000 what had been a growing tendency to prosecute youth as adults-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --because of the severity of a crime. Speaker 1: Yeah. But they don't know what they're doing. Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: I've talked to, I've talked to many children who have murdered, who have grown up, who grew up, and they have tremendous remorse and sadness for killing somebody but back then you were just popping a cap in somebody. You know, that could have very easily been me, very easily been me. I think the difficulty is, is that most people don't like to admit those things because they view admitting it as a, as a sign of depravity but it's really just, it's just child development. Speaker 2: So they, they think it's their own personal depravity rather than something that's-- Speaker 1: It's commonplace. Speaker 2: It's common. Speaker 1: Yeah. All children, any child under twenty-three, twenty-six, Piaget's [Jean Piaget] research, Freud's [Sigmund Freud] research, all the research is very, very clear, all the developmental psychology is very, very clear, that children don't understand morality, you cannot, children don't understand deductive reasoning until fourteen, fifteen, sixteen. They can't, they can't deduce things 'cause their brains are not developed to have that capacity. Story_ID: 638361 Speaker 1: So I got, I got pretty lousy grades. I, when I, I, I read comic books. That, I loved my, when I was sick with scarlet fever or something, my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] made the mistake of bringing me home some comic books, and I (laughter) thought they were the greatest thing known to mankind. Speaker 2: Did you have a favorite? Speaker 1: Oh, I, Marvel [Marvel Entertainment Group, Inc.; Marvel Entertainment, LLC]. But I bought the first 'Thor,' the first 'Hulk,' the first 'Spider-Man,' which I kept. I, I started off with 'Looney Tunes' Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Entertainment, Inc.] cartoons. Then, of course, there was 'Superman,' the DC [DC Comics], 'Flash' ['The Flash'], 'Green Lantern' but I didn't like those 'cause those were not real to me. And then Marvel came out with, you know, Daredevil who was blind, Spider-Man who was never happy, Thor, who was a crippled physician, I was like this is real, you know, this other stuff is idyllic but this is real. So I read comics books. So when I graduated from grammar school [Kozminski Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] with my not so good grades, I had a sophomore in college reading score from reading comic books, which my mother would admonish me and tell me I was ruining my life, you know, "Why are you reading that junk? You're ruining your life." And I would go, "It's my life, right? It's not your life, it's my life, just so we're clear here. Okay?" And she would bow to my independence, you know, 'cause, I mean, you know, it's not that, and then when I was in, when I was in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I had teachers, I always had the capacity of being able to talk to people person to person although I could also be in the role of adult child, I didn't mind being a child, being a, talking to an adult. But if we were talking about getting cut and bleeding, that's a person to person conversation, that's not an adult child conversation. And I could, I could shift between those so I, I had good relationships with my teachers. Story_ID: 638362 Speaker 1: Now Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], what was Hyde-- Speaker 2: Hyde Park (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Park like for you, you know? Speaker 2: Back then? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was, it was interesting because the poorer kids would come over from, I remember there was a high rise building which I'm convinced was the first housing development because I had friends that lived in there and I'd go in there and the elevators never worked, it's like a thirteen story thing. Speaker 1: Where, where at (unclear)? Speaker 2: This was on 51st [Street] just west of Cottage Grove [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Just west of Cottage Grove. And I remember being up on the tenth floor, whatever floor it was, looking down at night and seeing sparkles from all the broken glass, looked like a Milky Way from just broken glass. And every now and again I remember when I went down to my [paternal] grandfather's [William Y. Bell, Sr.] house in South Boston, Virginia, and we brought back some BB guns and some friends of mine and I were playing around eight, nine, with the BB guns, we weren't shooting anything, ran out of BBs, and some of the, the boys from west of Cottage on 51st Street came by and robbed me. So then me and my brother [William Y. Bell III] went back over there 'cause they didn't know who I was, and we're looking for the guns but they had been broken and we knew who did it but so what? You know, what are you gone do? The guns are broken. So, I mean, it was, it was very heterogeneous, all types of different people. But as I said I would float-- Speaker 1: Between-- Speaker 2: --from the working class poor, middle class, Jewish, white intellectual, I was all over everywhere. Story_ID: 638363 Speaker 1: Was there any figure that emerged in high, at, at, at Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] that was like a mentor to you or, or-- Speaker 2: Milton Bins was my geometry teacher. And Milton Bins and, and Mildred Hawks [ph.]. Milton Bins was a black man, intellectual, Jiminy Cricket, body kind of guy. Speaker 1: B-E, is it-- Speaker 2: B-I-N-N-S [sic.]. Speaker 1: I-N-N-S, okay. Speaker 2: And Mildred Hawks was a white female biology teacher, and they were good teachers. And Milton treated me like a person and Hawks was just full of fire and energy and curiosity and adventure. She was sixty-five and broke her arm skiing, she was learning how to ski. I remember she came back with a cast on her arm and I was like, "What happened to you?" "I broke my arm. I was learning how to ski." I was like, "You're sixty-five. You're old. What's wrong with you?" But she was, she was just full of life, you know. And so they were, they were kindred spirits, I think. And I remember Bins, and I was actually, a friend of mine and I were planning on doing something, blowing something up or I don't know, we were gonna do something, we were gonna paint a gold statue black 'cause this was like in '61 [1961]. And-- Speaker 1: It's not the statue-- Speaker 2: The statue in-- Speaker 1: Oh, in-- Speaker 2: --Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: --Jackson Park, the one left over from the-- Speaker 2: The big gold statue ['The Republic']. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We, we were figuring out how to cut the lights and how to throw a rope over the arm and I was gonna pull the guy up, we had a spray can, we're gonna paint the face black. It was an Italian statue so we probably would have started a black, Italian race war or something. But Bins fronted me off, he said, "Mr. Bell [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell], are you going to be an idiot for the rest of your life or are you gonna learn geometry?" And I thought okay, I'm a kick your ass but I'm a do it in your home ground, on the geometry board. I was on that man, boy, "Mr. Bins, you made a mistake, isn't that--." (Laughter) Boy. And it was, I mean, 'cause he threw down the gauntlet, he challenged me, it's like okay. You wanna fight, I'll fight you but I'll fight you your way, I won't fight you my way 'cause if I fight you my way I'll beat you up, I thought, he probably would have beaten me up, but who knows, you know. And so through the, through learning geometry and scholarship I began to appreciate that learning was fun. Prior to that in grammar school, learning was disdained, education was quote, whitey's thing, end quote. And so I made it a point not to be too smart. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, so did you take like the college prep courses in, at, at, at Hyde Park? Speaker 2: No, I was, when I got to Hyde Park, I was in regular math. I got straight A's in algebra. They put me in advanced, history and English were subjects, science, whew, not a problem. I, I, I went to summer school each summer 'cause I, I liked learning. I enjoyed learning. Story_ID: 638364 Speaker 1: So you slowly, you know, got into the college level, I mean, the college-- Speaker 2: What happened was I went to summer school every summer 'cause I was enjoying what I was doing. And when I, in January of 1965, I was bored with high school. It's time to go to college, bored with high--I was supposed to graduate in June of '65 [1965] but I was bored and I had enough college credits to graduate in January. Speaker 1: Enough high school credits, yeah. Speaker 2: Enough, well, enough high school credits. It's funny because Minnie Riperton and I were in the same world history class with Sylvester Williams. And Minnie was in the, in the choir, Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] choir back then. And I think she liked me but I never, you know, never explored it. At any rate I graduated in January and didn't have anything to do 'cause I was accepted to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] for September '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Well, let me just jump back for a second, for those who are fans of Minnie Riperton and stuff, who are watching this, what was she like in high school and did you have any idea that she was gonna be like a superstar? Speaker 2: Minnie could sing, she had a voice on her. Nice person, how can I say this and be tactful? Speaker 1: Don't worry about it (laughter). Speaker 2: Nice person, good heart, like I said I think she liked me, I don't know, but had a, had a hard time getting a decent grade out of world history, put it that way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But a nice, you know, a nice person, nice person. Story_ID: 638365 Speaker 1: At any rate I found myself graduated from high school, not starting college 'til September of '65 [1965]. And had nothing to do so I did nothing from January to June. Sat around the house and occasionally went back to Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] to hang out. Although (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you knew, had you chosen a school? I mean, a place that was-- Speaker 1: I was accepted at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. So that was coming up in the fall? Speaker 1: In, in the fall. Speaker 2: Okay. So-- Speaker 1: But I graduated in January 'cause, you know, I didn't, I didn't really have a plan I just had to get out of there. Speaker 2: So you didn't have to work or anything? Speaker 1: I looked for a job. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was seventeen and I remembered going downtown and taking a job placement test and I remember the guy, a white guy, gave me the paper, he said, "Here, do these and then, you know, when you're done bring it back up." So I went and took the test. About ten minutes later I came back and he said, "What's wrong?" I said, "What do you mean what's wrong?" I said, he said, "What, what are you coming up here for? I told you to go take the test." I said, "I'm done with the test." He's like, "What? You can't be done with the test." I'm like, "What are you talking about? I'm done with the test." They had about twenty math questions on there, fractions (laughter) it's like. And he said, "Well, let me see that." He took it and he scored it. He said, "You got two wrong." I said, "Two? What, what do you mean?" (Laughter) I got, 'cause I had made some simple error on the, 'cause it was a simple test. And he said, "We'll call you," you know. And I, I remember sitting by the phone for about three or four or five days and never got a call. I mean, what's a seventeen year old kid gonna do, you know. I mean I didn't know, I didn't have any skills. And then I found out that I could go to junior college. And I figured out that I could graduate from college in two years by, 'cause junior college was on a trimester system and the University of Illinois had moved to the quarter system. And so I, I, I planned out how to graduate college in two years. And I remember showing Mr. Bins [Milton Bins] that, my geometry teacher, what I was planning on doing. And he didn't say I was crazy, he just said, "Oh, that's nice," you know. And that's what I did. I went to Loop Junior College [Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois]. I was in, I was in English and Spanish-- Story_ID: 638366 Speaker 1: --That was when my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] died, suddenly unexpectedly from who knows what, just alive one night, dead the next morning. Speaker 2: Hm. That would be like your second year of co-, I mean, of college [Loop Junior College; Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois]? When you were eighteen (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was my, well, I started in June so it was my second trimester for the summer. They had summer trimester, and then two fall semesters. And I got, I was in my second, I had done summer, and I had done a trimester, and that was about three quarters of a year of credits. I was humping. Speaker 2: Now, did your mother's death affect your studies in any way? Did, did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It pulled the rug out from under me but I kept going. I mean, I was like messed up but 'cause I, you know, it was like, what is this, people can die? You know, I was like, I was, I was shocked. I mean, it was very unexpected. Speaker 2: 'Cause she hadn't been ill or anything earlier? Speaker 1: Not that I knew of. Apparently she had been going to the doctor but as far as I knew she was healthy. So I kept on going. Story_ID: 638367 Speaker 1: I remember I got a D in Spanish but that's 'cause that teacher was a jerk, some white guy who didn't really care about anything. I had gotten an A from my first, I had taken Spanish two years in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and had had about two years of Spanish in grammar school, so I kind of knew Spanish. I got an A in Spanish the first semester, got a D in Spanish in this guy's class, and got an A the class after that. You know, he was, he wasn't right, you know. I got straight A's in English, transferred to Southeast junior college [Southeast College; Olive-Harvey College, Chicago, Illinois] 'cause Loop Junior College [Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois] didn't have what I needed. And I had gone through the book at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to figure out what I needed for a bachelor's degree. And some of the courses that you could take for an associate arts degree would not count at the University of Illinois. And I remember a college advisor telling me I needed to get an associate arts degree. I'm like, "I don't need an associate arts degree." He said, "Well you, you do need an associate arts. Why not get an associate arts degree?" I said, "Look I'm, I'm in a hurry here. I'm transferring to the University of Illinois, I'm graduating from college in two years." And he's like, "You can't graduate from college in two years." And I had that little index card I carry around in my wallet of courses to take, I said, "Sure here it is right here." I'm gonna take, well, you know, I had it all figured out. He was like, "No, you can't, you know, you need to get a," he said, "a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush." And I remember thinking, you don't know who I am, you don't know anything about me. I'm gonna do this, it's something I've decided to do, I'm gonna do this. Story_ID: 638368 Speaker 1: I remember some buddies of mine, Sydney Williams [ph.] and Reginald Lewis [ph.] when we were in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] had, 'cause we rode bicycles, I was stealing bicycles so we did bicycles, and I had a racing bike, a set gear [fixed gear], and we were gonna do a eighty mile bike trip to the Indiana state park dunes [Indiana Dunes State Park, Chesterton, Indiana]. And they, they must have gotten, we must have gotten forty miles out and they turned around and went back, and I kept going. And I remember riding my bike into a sewer grille which in Indiana they're long, they're not circular, and I tore up my inner tube about an inch, four inch cuts in my inner tube, and I had a little money, they took the tools 'cause, you know, we're going as a team. And I remember standing in the gas station in Indiana trying to get somebody to sell me some patches and to get some tools to fix my tire 'cause I was going to finish. And finally 'cause it was, I guess, I was in racist Indiana, I don't know, finally, when the guy figured I wouldn't go anywhere, 'cause where was I gonna go with a flat tire? I wasn't gonna walk home. He finally bought, sold me some patches and he let me use his tools. And I kept asking, I said, "Can I have some patches, parts?" He said, "Well, now what do you want?" I said, "Well, I don't have any tools. Could you loan me some tools?" "Hey, boy, I don't want you around here." I said, "Well, if you don't want me around here give me the tools. I'll fix my bike and I'll go, well, you know, otherwise what am I gonna do?" So I went to Indiana and came back. But I've always had that determination. Another time the three of us went riding our bikes up to Rainbow Beach [Rainbow Beach Park, Chicago, Illinois] and the entire beach surrounded us and was gonna kill us. Speaker 2: That's when it was an all white neighborhood (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's when it was all white. And the police came out and surrounded us, facing us, and then we left. A lot of little racial incidents. Story_ID: 638369 Speaker 1: At any rate, I did not take this junior college advisor's advice and I in fact graduated, I transferred to the University of Illinois after a year's worth of junior college as a junior and then I finished with a bachelor's degree in biology from the University of Illinois at Chicago Circle [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] in '67 [1967]. Graduated-- Speaker 2: So that, so you made the two year-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I did-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I made the two years. Speaker 2: So you went to summer school, you went to school all year? Speaker 1: I went, I took five majors, five, five, major courses. I mean, I was, I had a, I had a heavy load. I, I rented an apartment on 62nd [Street] and Blackstone [Avenue], sixty dollars a month. One of these, up the (unclear) it was a two room thing, the roaches were so bad I gave them one room. I said y'all have this room, I'll be in the bedroom over here. Speaker 2: So, so this is when 61st [Street] and Blackstone was, was, had the Blackstone Rangers-- Speaker 1: Oh, I was, I was-- Speaker 2: --and all and right, right in the middle of that area so. Speaker 1: --I was in the Blackstone Rangers. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You had to be in the Blackstone Rangers to go to high school because the Blackstone Rangers would post guards at Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and you had to have a password to get in the building. It was silly, it was just people being silly. 'Cause I remember I would go up and I'd, "What's the pass- ?" They changed the password every day, "What's the password?" "Apple pie." "No. That was yesterday." I'm like, "Man, you know, me." Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You've been, you know, "No, you gotta have the password." "Okay. Hold on." I'd go around to the other entrance, get the password from the other guy, go back, "Cherry pie." "Yeah, that's it, you can come on in." I'm like, who are these people? Speaker 2: Did you know Jeff Fort? (Unclear). Speaker 1: I may have. I knew some, because my brother [William Y. Bell III] was in all of that. Story_ID: 638370 Speaker 1: Was your brother [William Y. Bell III] one of the youths that went to 'The Ed Sullivan Show' and all that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, my brother went into the [U.S.] Army when I was in grammar school. I had, my brother was seven years older than I was, went into the Army. Went over to Germany, he was an MP, he was a military police kind of guy, 'cause that's what gang people do, they become policemen, right. And he came back from the Army and was trying to be Mr. Army with me 'cause he had been trained so he wanted to train me 'cause I was spoiled 'cause my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] never disciplined me, never, I got spankings from my stepfather [Marion Pratt] for breaking windows but he was gonna, you know, discipline me, you know, and I'm like, "What are you talking about, I'm in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], you know." But I, I remember I was in physics, he was at Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], 'cause I don't, I don't remember why he went into the Army. I guess, he had graduated high school and didn't know what he was doing and still being rambunctious and silly, so he went to the Army. And I was, I remember being at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I was a junior and I was taking physics and my brother was a policeman. And they got a call, 'cause I was staying with my uncle, my stepfather's brother, Bert Pratt [ph.], who was a lieutenant colonel in the National Guard so he had a lot of leadership. We had leadership conversations, nice guy, a real nice guy. But I got a call from physics that something had happened and having had my mother die six months before, I knew somebody else was dead. I figured it was my brother 'cause he was interesting, rambunctious. And he, apparently there was a robbery on 71st [Street] and somewhere, between Stony Island [Avenue] and Jeffery [Avenue], and my brother was taking his laundry somewhere and heard about this robbery and in plainclothes, not in uniform, uniformed policeman, was chasing the robber with these other policemen. Out ran the other two uniformed cops, trapped the robber in a building and a white cop shot him to death 'cause he, the white cop saw a black man with a gun even though my brother was a cop and was shooting at the robber. Then, of course, the robber somehow got killed. And, you know, I'm still not, 'cause I was seventeen, I guess, at the time so I didn't know, you know. Speaker 1: So this is 1965 or so, or, or-- Speaker 2: This was 1966. Speaker 1: Six [1966]? Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966] or '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: These are the early days, there, there weren't that many black folks on the police force-- Speaker 2: No, no-- Speaker 1: --in those days and-- Speaker 2: --no. It was, it was still very, you know, people were fighting and there was, you know, integration and (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, those were the days when [HistoryMaker] Renault Robinson and I guess-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Howard Saffold. Speaker 1: Yeah, Howard Saffold and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they came along later. Speaker 1: Okay. Maybe (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But this was, I mean, you know, it was civil rights stuff was going on at that time. But I didn't know it, I didn't know to go investigate or to figure out although people told me that basically this white cop had shot my brother in the back. Speaker 1: And this is a story though that the black police officers tell a lot. The (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --same kind of story of-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Tthat's one of the dangers of being a black plainclothes policeman-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --you get shot by the-- Speaker 2: Sure, you get shot. Speaker 1: --police department. Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 638371 Speaker 1: I remember my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.], my biologic father coming for the funeral [of Bell's older brother, William Y. Bell III]. And that was probably, like I said 'cause he was in San Francisco [California] but he and I hooked up 'cause I was a little older, you know, and we had, we, we spent hours talking and we sort of vowed that we would hook up, you know, 'cause he was my father and he loved me but whatever. Speaker 2: You say he had, you had met him several of the times he would come around (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He would, he would, he would come-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --by, you know, he'd be passing through Chicago [Illinois] every now and again and would stop by, see my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt], see my brother, and see me. But it was like well, "Who are you?" "Well, I'm your father." I said, "Oh, I know that but who are you?" You know. And he was passing through so it's not like he had time. And we would talk a little bit but not, you know, nothing in depth. So now I was older, I was in college, and we had a chance to talk. And we started communicating a little more closely. And then about four or five months after that he died of a heart attack. And I'm trying to go to medical school because I had a degree in biology. I had a, I had a major in biology, I had a minor in chemistry, and I had a minor in mathematics in two years and had a, like a B plus average. And I remember figuring since I had graduated from the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I could get into the University of Illinois [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] 'cause I had a B plus average, it took me two years. And when I applied to medical school they didn't let me in but they let Carl Ivey in. Carl Ivey is a pediatrician now, he lives up in Canada. And I had better grades than Carl Ivey. And I don't remember my MCAT score which is an entrance test in the medical school. But Carl Ivey had a minor in chemistry, I had a minor in chemistry and a full minor in mathematics. It took Carl Ivey four years to get out of college, took me two, so I figured I was guaranteed to get into medical school but they didn't let me in. I had enough sense to have applied to Meharry [Meharry Medical College] which cost a hundred dollars but that was a sure fire thing, black medical school, Nashville [Tennessee]. I hadn't even, I had never heard of Meharry, I had heard of Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. I don't think I applied to Howard, I applied to Meharry 'cause a buddy of mine I knew who was in science was saying, bird in the hand, Meharry. So I had, Meharry accepted me (snaps fingers) right away. Story_ID: 638372 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me go back a minute though-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I just wanna ask you about now, in a short period of time your mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] dies, your brother [William Y. Bell III] dies and-- Speaker 2: And my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.]. Speaker 1: --and your father. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, did you seek or did anybody recommend any counseling for you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --in those days and-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --how did you, I mean, now you're a psychiatrist now. You deal with people with, are dealing with stress and problems and would you think that, I mean, how did you get through that? Speaker 2: I just kept on going. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it's Winston Churchill who said, if you're catching hell or if you're in hell, keep on going. If, no, if you're going through hell, keep on going. Speaker 1: (Laughter) It sounds like good advice. If you're going through keep on going. Speaker 2: Well, I mean, if what I've, what I have learned as a psychiatrist in, in, in '82 [1982] I started as a psychiatrist seeing tons of children exposed to violence. And back then, but these were patients, these were children coming as patients, so we did studies on children exposed to violence and found 536 kids from our catchment area on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] had been exposed to shootings or stabbings. And 25 percent had been exposed to shootings or stabbings. It was also around that time I started doing public health work on prevention of black on black homicide. And the, I learned from those studies that the majority of homicide was interpersonal altercation between family and friends and children would be present. So as a clinician I'm seeing children exposed to violence, and as a public health research guy, I'm, I'm understanding interpersonal altercation violence. So back then I thought that children would be suffering from traumatic stress, posttraumatic stress disorder, and so I put out the clarion call that this was a huge problem in the black community and people needed counseling and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. But as I progressed in my studies, probably fifteen, ten years later, what I began to understand finally is that risk factors, brother getting killed, mother dying, seeing daddy beat up mother, which I never saw, but these are risk factors. Mother on crack [crack cocaine], whatever the risk factors are, risk factors are not automatically predictive of a bad outcome. And the reason they're not automatically predictive of a bad outcome is because in children's lives there are protective factors. There is a Mr. Bowman [Valcar Bowman], there is a Mr. Bins [Milton Bins], there is a mother who loves you, there's a stepfather who loves you, there's a father who loves you, there's a brother who loves you, there's pick up baseball games in your neighborhood, there's people in the neighborhood that you're connected too, you're learning skills, you know, I mean, those are protective factors. And so risk factors are not predictive factors because of protective factors. And society makes a huge mistake of demonizing children and thinking they can profile and identify the child at risk who's gonna be the child that ultimately winds up in prison and that's not at all true because that child who's having those risk factors are gonna have protective factors around them to, that's gonna buffer them and protect them from the risk factors, and that's what I had. Story_ID: 638373 Speaker 1: So, I mean, it wasn't, it wasn't a piece of cake, you know, when, when I went to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and sat with a dean and said, "Why didn't you let me in?" "Well, your grades weren't high enough." I said, "Well, you let Carl Ivey in." "Well, let me check." He went and checked. They, they, they had accepted three black students, and came back and said, "Well, your MCAT scores weren't high enough." I said, "They were higher than Carl Ivey's." "Well, let me check, let me go," and he went back, and came back in. He said, well, what did he say to me? He said, "Well, you weren't, you know, Carl Ivey was in, Carl Ivy was in extracurricular activities." I'm like well, "I was, I, I was a lifeguard." What else did I do? I think I took fencing, I don't, I don't remember. I said and I was only in college for two years so I didn't have, you know, Carl Ivey was in the band and in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], I said, "I didn't have four years to do extracurricular activities." In fact, they almost didn't let me graduate because they said I needed more gym. But I had, when I was in my last six months, my senior year, I had gone up to the registrar's office and said, "Now, you know, I'm graduating," you know, and, you know, "I'm graduating." I got, do I have everything I need, you know, I kept, and now I don't need gym 'cause I transferred as a junior, you didn't need to take gym if you transferred as a junior. And I went back once a month for three month, that last six months. Then I went back every two weeks for two months and then I was up there every week the last month I was supposed to graduate so they knew me. And then the week before I was supposed to graduate they call me and tell me, "We can't let you graduate, you don't have enough gym." I was like, "Oh, hell no." I came up here, "You know me, this is the rule," and apparently they had changed the rule midstream and I was like, "No, no, no, no, no, if you'd a told me six months ago to take gym, I would have taken gym," so they let me graduate. The, the crazy thing was that the guy when he told me I didn't have enough extracurricular activities and I gave him, I said, you know, "I took," he said, "Well, try again next year." I said, "Next year I'll be getting killed in Vietnam." But apparently the University of Illinois [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] had only taken three black students a year for the last forty years. Speaker 2: So it was a quota. Speaker 1: It was a quota. Story_ID: 638374 Speaker 1: But I went down to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. Scared me to death because Meharry, when I was at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, I was the man, I was, I had, I had keys to the science and engineering building, I wore lab coats, I was, you know, I was the man. And I played with electron microscope. I went down to Meharry, they had nothing. That stuff was old. They, they, you know, at the University of Illinois each student had a colorimeter and a balance beam to do science experiments and at Meharry there were six students to every color, colorimeter and balance beam. And I thought, my god. Plus everything was old, you know, it was from the '20s [1920s]. And I thought I had made a horrible mistake. Plus the tuition was five hundred dollars a semester. At the University of Illinois, it was $124 and I could afford $124. I could not afford five hundred dollars. I didn't have any money. I was going through college on my own after my mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] died. I had her social security, I, I was getting a social security check from her death which was two hundred dollars a month or something like, it wasn't enough to pay five hundred dollars tuition at, at Meharry. So I wound up at Meharry having to work the four years I was in medical school. Fortunately, at Meharry the black medical students there were trained in predominantly black colleges [HBCUs] and so much of their technology was old. I remember the first month in biochemistry we were learning how to balance pH equations, which I had done in high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] but these guys from these small, poor, black southern colleges didn't know how to do that so the first month in medical school, I put my foot up on a desk and smoked a pipe while the biochemistry teacher was teaching. And they said, "That boy is arrogant. That boy from the North is arrogant. We gotta grind him down a little bit, turn him into a good physician." 'Cause they, they wanted me to be, they wanted everybody at Meharry to be good physicians. So it, Meharry was probably the best thing that could have happened to me but at the time I was like, where is the lab? This can't be the lab, you know. Come on. Story_ID: 638375 Speaker 1: You had a story, you were getting ready to tell about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I, when-- Speaker 1: --some buddies coming down to visit you. Speaker 2: --when I was in, I go down to the South, Deep South, Nashville, Tennessee. I remember when I got down there the dorm, 'cause they made everybody live in the dorm, well, I took a cab to go horseback riding 'cause I had gone horseback riding in Chicago [Illinois], and was, you know, all over the place. At any rate, I finished my first year and my second year I was, I was going into my second year and I was holding a guy's apartment while he went back home to work to make money to pay, I guess, for his tuition, and I was looking for my own apartment. And some boys, some buddies of mine, David [ph.] came down from Chicago, he and Stephen [ph.], I didn't know Stephen. But David and Stephen were carrying .38s, they were drinking cough syrup, they were smoking weed, they were passing bad checks, I wasn't doing any of that. I was in medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I was, you know. I didn't think anything of it. And John Clark who was in the school with me was getting married and wanted me to be in his wedding and so I asked David if I could borrow his '68 [1968] GTO [Pontiac GTO] 'cause I knew that car was not stolen, they were stealing cars. Now again, I'm, how old am I? I guess I'm nineteen, twenty, somewhere in there. And I don't, I know they're not doing, they're, they're, they're stealing stuff but I'm not so it's not occurring to me that guilt by association, right, 'cause the judgment wasn't there again, nuances, wasn't twenty-three yet, twenty-four, twenty-five. But I knew I didn't need to be driving a stolen car across state lines so I asked David could I borrow his '68 [1968] GTO, he said, "Sure." The speedometer was broken. I went to the wedding, was in the wedding, was driving back coming through Tennessee, doing about a 105 [miles per hour]. I didn't how fast I was going. The speedometer was broken. When I, when the state police pulled me over to give me a ticket, that's when they, 'cause GTO doesn't rattle, it just kind of (makes sound), kind of goes. And he wanted to see proof of ownership and he wanted me to pay twenty some odd dollars for a ticket, and I didn't have any money, so John Clark came off of his wedding and paid the ticket. He wanted to see proof of ownership, took me to Pulaski, Tennessee, home of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], yeah, 1968, I guess, it was. Speaker 1: That's the year Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, I remember that too. That, that those riots were interesting in Nashville. But I remember calling David and saying, "David, I'm in jail you gotta get me out," on the phone, right. He says, "I can't come get you." I said, "Why not?" "The car is stolen." "What do you mean the car is stolen," (laughter)? "I thought this was your car?" He said, "No, the car is stolen." I was like, "David, you know me, you know I'm the wrong guy, come get me out of this 'cause I have not done anything wrong." This is the sheriff, the sheriff is sitting right in front of me. I said, "Get me out of here because if you don't, sooner or later I'm a catch up with you and you and I are gonna have a problem." And David knew me well enough not to risk that. And so what they did was they had taken the registration out of the glove compartment from the car that they stole in New York and typed in using a different font, geniuses, David's name, gave it to a Nashville police lieutenant, gave him fifty dollars, and he called in to Pulaski, Tennessee, to say, "I've seen proof of ownership." Story_ID: 638376 Speaker 1: I had called Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] to let them know where I was 'cause I knew I was in danger, home of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]. They had a statue when we drove through town, home of the Ku Klux Klan, it's ridiculous. Speaker 2: What was the statue? What did the statue look like? Speaker 1: It was in the town square, of a Klansmen. Speaker 2: That's about as close a call as you can have isn't it to-- Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I remember they locked me in the, the (pronunciation) Negro cell, which I went up to the bars and they didn't, I remember fleas jumping off the, there was feces on the ceiling, feces in the sink, feces in the toilet. I'm like, "I'm a medical student," you know, they didn't care. So I left, I got out, I remember Dr. Spockwood [ph.] who was a physician, black physician from Meharry came and he put a roll of twenty dollar bills on the sheriff's desk, slammed it down and said, "Sheriff, I understand you got one of my people in here and I want him out." (Laughter) And I thought I've died and gone to heaven. Although the, the fee had been paid and I was actually leaving. And Spockwood insisted that we go get something to eat and he took me in a restaurant in Pulaski, Tennessee, two black men. And he said, "Get something to eat." I said, "I'm not hungry, I just wanna go back," 'cause I wanted to go talk to David [ph.], "I just wanna get out of here." He's like, "No, eat something." So, so I had a chocolate shake, chocolate malt, and he kept looking at me 'cause we were sitting across the table in the restaurant, the only restaurant in Pulaski, Tennessee. And he said, "You don't get it do you?" "Don't get what?" "You don't get it." "Don't get what?" He said, "We're in Pulaski, Tennessee." I said, "I saw the sign, I get that." He said, "But you don't get it, do you?" I said, "Get what?" He said, "If you'd a walked in here by yourself they would have killed you by now." He said, "The only reason you can be in here eating is 'cause I'm the only doctor for two hundred miles and when they get sick they have to come see me so I get to come in this restaurant. I get to bring anybody in here with me." And I was like, "Okay. Like I said, I just wanna go home." (Laughter) "I just wanna go." So he made me spend the night in his son's pajamas. I had met his son later, some big round guy, the pajamas were interesting. Story_ID: 638377 Speaker 1: Got back to Chicago [Illinois] and told David [ph.] and Stephen [ph.], "Bye," you know, "I don't need you guys anywhere around me," they left. Three days later, there's a knock on the door and a guy, I open the door, and the guy says, "FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]," and I said, "They're not here." And he said, "Do you mind if I come in?" "Sure. I haven't done anything wrong," (laughter). It's, you know, youth, right. Guy came in, was walking around the apartment and happened to look in the garbage can and reached down in the garbage can and said, "This is one of the serial numbers of the thirty stolen cars that we're looking for." These geniuses stole the only 1968 Red Porsche in the entire State of Tennessee and parked it a half a block from where they stole it, in front of the house that I was house sitting for. Geniuses. I then, and I told the guy, I said, "I told you they're not here." He said, "Well, how do you explain this stolen car serial number with your name on it?" I said, "Look," I said, "as far as I know that car is not stolen. I got out of jail, they showed proof of ownership, so how do you know the car is stolen?" He said, "Well, we're FBI." I'm like, "I told you they're not here." And I told him where they could find him. He went and talked to David, David sent him back to me, I sent him back to him, and I called David, I said, "David, you know I haven't done anything wrong. Get me out of this or you and I are gonna have a problem." So the guy came back, I had, I remember I had moved, the guy came back to my new place that I had got and he came back with a partner, this time two of 'em came. And I swear they were telling me to confess, you know, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and I'm like, "Look, I haven't done anything wrong." And the one guy literally gets up and starts singing 'The Star Spangled Banner,' I mean, you know, patriotic, dah, dah, dah, I'm like, who are these people (laughter)? So finally I said, "Look," I said, "I haven't done anything wrong. I will tell you this, the car was stolen but I didn't know it until I got back from Pulaski, Tennessee." At which point they said, "We're glad you came clean." Now I didn't tell them that I had known that David and Stephen were stealing cars and were passing bad checks and all this other stuff 'cause I hadn't done anything wrong, I had, I had literally, no drugs, nothing wrong except hanging out with these two idiots. "We're glad you came clean 'cause we knew you didn't steal the car 'cause you weren't in New York when David and Stephen stole the car from this woman they met but, you know, we just had to make sure you weren't involved. We're gonna let you go." I'm like good so I can go be a doctor 'cause I'm in medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], good guys, you know. I remember they took David to interrogate him, the most fascinating thing I've ever seen in my life, six people in a room, you can leave any time you want, they grilled, they took every piece of information from David. David, David confessed to six savings and loans robberies. When we were driving from Nashville [Tennessee] to Chicago one night they had gone, they had stopped in Indiana and gone into somebody's house. I found out then, months later, they had shot somebody in the leg, you know, just, so I escaped that bullet. Story_ID: 638378 Speaker 1: Finished medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], (laughter) did well, worked through medical school, worked as a biostatistician. I was hungry a lot. I used to take the antacid samples to stop the acid from being in my stomach. I had, I, I remember I had fifty cents every other day for breakfast, lunch, dinner, transportation, entertainment. And I would go to the store and I would buy cans of ravioli and pasta 'cause they cost like twenty cents or something which meant I had a dime left over and I would save up my dime and after twelve days, I could buy a sixty cent pocketbook to read 'cause didn't have any money. All the, all the money that I, I would make from working went to tuition. And it was, it was, medical school was--I delivered fifty-two babies, delivered a set of twins. I, I had a great time in medical school. Didn't know what the hell I was doing. I graduated at twenty-three, I guess, 'cause I was seventeen when I finished-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --high school [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], nineteen when I finished college [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and four years of medical, it was twenty-three. Speaker 2: So this is 1971, right? Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 638379 Speaker 1: So did you, did you intend to become a-- Speaker 2: A psychiatrist (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a general practitioner or what did-- Speaker 2: When I, when I was in college [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I liked ecology 'cause it was systems. I liked biology, the only thing you do with a biology degree was teach biology. Nobody knew what an ecologist was back in the '60s [1960s]. And so the only thing you could do was go to medical school, so I went to medical school. I remember trying to get a scholarship from the national medical scholarship fund. And I went and I told them my grades, "Oh, great grades." I had a B minus average, B plus average. Told them my MCAT. Great MCAT. Told them I had graduated in two years. "Two years? Oh, we're gonna give you a full boat, we're gonna give you everything, by the way where are you going to medical school?" "Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]." "Oops, sorry can't give you a dime." "What do you mean you can't give me a dime? You're a black scholarship association." "No, we only give money to black students going to white medical schools. We," (laughter), "don't give money to black students going to black medical schools [HBCUs]." I'm like, they wouldn't let me in the white school [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois]. All my life, this is how I got into psychiatry, all my life people were telling me I was crazy, "Bell [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell], you crazy, Bell, you crazy, Bell, you crazy." Because I am rambunctious, I am adventurous, I am gonna go for what's on the other side of the mountain. If I could get in a rocket and fly to the moon I would try it. It's genetics. And so one day we were in surgery and I did something, I said something to the chief surgeon, and I, you know, a good relationship, wasn't fronting him off, wasn't trying to embarrass him but I told him he'd done something wrong. And I was eating lunch with a psychiatrist buddy of mine, Ziller Arthur [ph.], and a medical student colleague come and said, "Bell, you crazy, why you tell Dr. Walker [Matthew Walker, Sr.]," who was the chief of surgery, "why did you tell him that?" I was like, "It was the truth," and he, "Walker was about to make a mistake and accidentally kill a patient." And so Arthur said, "Why are you calling him crazy?" And the guy said, "Well, you know, Bell is just crazy. Bell is always doing something. He just crazy." Now, all of my life people have been calling me crazy, so I figured I was crazy. If you're a reasonable person and four or five people tell you you're crazy, they must know something you don't, so I figured, I didn't think I was crazy but people were telling me I was crazy so, and I knew you, most people can't see themselves, they see everybody else real well, so I figured I would go into psychiatry and get some help for myself 'cause I was crazy, right. So Ziller Arthur kept saying to the guy, "Why are you calling him crazy?" So finally the guy said, "Well, I don't mean he's out of touch with reality, he's psychotic or anything like that. Bell is, you know, pretty level headed, I just mean he's, he's arrogant." And I thought, oh, is that what people with their imprecise language have been trying to tell me all my life? I'm arrogant? Hell, I know that. Oh, so I dropped, I, 'cause I was going to go into psychiatry before that, I dropped psychiatry like a bad habit, I was like (makes sound) to hell with psychiatry. I'm a do what I was born to do which is be a surgeon. I'm a surgeon, I am a surgeon, I am a surgeon. 'Cause I'm aggressive, I like to fight, I like to win, you know. Story_ID: 638380 Speaker 1: So I was doing surgery and me and Big Matt [ph.] were hanging out smoking cigars, going fishing, you know, just having a good time. But surgery was limiting. It had a ceiling on it as did medicine, as did obstetrics, as did pediatrics, as did all of 'em, ophthalmology, radiology, they all had a, a ceiling. The only thing I didn't understand in medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] was psychiatry. And so I decided that I would do what I knew least about, I would go into psychiatry. I've always been counter phobic. I've always run towards what frightened me. I was recently in a lecture by a guy giving a lecture on resiliency and he was using Churchill [Winston Churchill] as an example, so I'm full of recent Churchill quotes. And one of the Churchill quotes, 'cause apparently Churchill was depressed, I guess, and he was going through the war [World War II, WWII] in England. And Churchill said something to the effect of: "If you are threatened or in danger and you turn your back on danger you double it. If you stand and confront your danger you cut it by half." And that's something I've always done. So I decided I would go into psychiatry. And came back to Chicago [Illinois] from Nashville [Tennessee] to do psychiatry because something I wanted to understand. 'Cause I could not understand how people could hear voices and be out of touch with reality. I just didn't understand that. I could understand how people could have brain damage like Alzheimer's disease and, you know, like I understood that, toxic brain damage. But schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, I didn't know what the hell that was. I did, I had no clue about what anxiety disorders were. I had been scared before. I had gone mountain climbing on the San Jacinto Mountains up five thousand feet with a guy I knew for three days on a six inch ledge looking over an abyss and I'm afraid of heights 'cause my brother [William Y. Bell III] dropped me standing on his shoulders when I was little playing around, so me and heights, but I'm, I'm a challenge my fears, you know, I've got this challenge mentality, challenge genetics. So I was, you know, clear that I was gonna challenge life and psychiatry was the biggest challenge. And even though I had, I had experienced fear on the side of that mountain, and I had some understanding of what anxiety disorders were 'cause I had been afraid, but I never got stuck with anxiety, you get afraid and it goes away, with anxiety you get stuck and it never leaves you, so I understood things, but I didn't understand how people could get stuck. And I had some understanding of personality disorders and in my world those were people with no home training. They were just always aggressive or always passive or always difficult and irritable and cranky or whatever, always a little bit quirky. But I, I really didn't understand what that was and how you could help people with that so that's why I went into psychiatry. Story_ID: 638381 Speaker 1: Did you study psychiatry at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]? Did you have to go to school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I took psychiatry courses at Meharry but after getting a medical degree, 'cause you gotta do everything: pediatrics, medicine, dissection of a cadaver, biochemistry, microbiology, physiology, everything, surgery, everything. You then do a residency in psychiatry and I came back to Illinois to do my residency and almost didn't get into residency because one of my psychiatrist professors gave me a horrible, horrible, horrible recommendation. Speaker 1: Now, what was the, what was the gist of it, and what was (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I was immature, arrogant, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. This is the same woman who wanted me to stay at Meharry to be her resident. So I don't know if she was just torpedoing my chances in Chicago [Illinois] so I would stay there with her which is pretty petty if you ask me. This is also the same woman who after I became a success would take credit for me whenever she and I were in public. I never blew her, blew her out of the water 'cause she's a older woman, you know, well, well respected but I never really lit her up. And 'cause I, I had made friends with the secretary in the psychiatry residency and she said, you know, "You almost didn't get in here." And I was like well, you know, I was wondering because I got decent grades in medical school but I didn't get in the University of Illinois [University of Illinois College of Medicine] here in Chicago [Illinois], same story, Northwestern [Northwestern University Medical School; Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], same stories within medical school, I didn't, I, they didn't let me in but I didn't know that this time it was a horrible letter of recommendation from a nationally respected female child psychiatrist who torpedoed my chances. But I got in the residency and did well. I won every honor the residency had to offer. I remember I was in my, in my last year of residency and the residency training director, Clifton Reed [ph.], came and he said, "Bell [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell], we're gonna make you the chief resident," which is like the high falutin stuff. I was like, cool. Went and told people, "I'm chief resident. I'm bad, I know I'm bad," you know. And then about two weeks later he came back and he said, "I can't make you chief resident." I said, "Really? Why is that?" He said, "Well," he said, "I could lie," it was a white guy, he said, "I could lie to you and tell you it's because you weren't qualified but you are qualified." He said, 'It's because you're black," this was in '74 [1974]. And I said, "Really, what is that about?" He said, "Well, I've been the chief, I've been the resident training director for six years and I've always recommended who should be chief resident but it's gotta be ratified by the executive council of the, of the, the institution. And when I brought your name forward after I'd already told you 'cause they had already, they ratified everybody else I brought, so I thought it was okay. And they said, 'No, we can't make him chief resident.' 'Why not?' 'Well, he's, he's won every honor the residency has had to give and you, he just, he's black, we wouldn't want him winning everything.'" And it was like, and he was like, "I know you're disappointed." I said, "Well, no, actually I'm not that disappointed." He said, "Why not?" I said, "Well, because I don't have to go home and wonder was it me that was unprepared or was it the institution that was racist because if the institution is not racist and I go home and thinking they are racist, that's a mistake and I pay for that ultimately. If I'm prepared but I think I'm unprepared, that's a mistake too. If on the other hand I am prepared and the institution is racist and that's the problem, then I wanna know that 'cause if I'm unprepared and I think the institution is racist then I never fully prepared myself and I'm shortchanging me. And you've solved this for me and so I greatly appreciate it 'cause you just made my life a whole lot easier." Story_ID: 638382 Speaker 1: And so I finished my residency and went into the [U.S.] Navy which was-- Speaker 2: So this is pretty much, well, okay. So, so how did you, I mean, was it, did you have an obligation of going to the Navy after-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. When I was in medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] the [U.S.] military people came and said, "Okay, we're here, you can, you have a choice. We can draft you when you finish medical school in which case we'll put you on the front lines of Vietnam, or you can sign the Berry Plan which says that we will let you finish your residency and then we'll draft you but you'll be an officer, a high ranking officer and you won't be on the front lines." And it was like, "Why are you gone draft us anyway?" "Well, we need, you know, we need physicians in, in the military." So I figured the war [Vietnam War] would be over by the time I finished my residency so I signed. Plus they drafted somebody out of medical school which they really couldn't do but when, when, when, when they came the first time, black medical school [HBCU], everybody said, "Hey, get the hell out of here. Hell, no, we're not fighting your damn war, 'cause, you know, we been through all this stuff." And then they drafted this guy out of medical school which you weren't supposed to be able to do and then came back a week later and said, "Well, does anybody wanna sign up now?" (Laughter) And everybody said, "I'll sign, I'll sign." So I was one of the people that signed. Speaker 2: So now this is '74 [1974]. This is the last year of the war in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And so did you, did they send you to Vietnam? Speaker 1: No, I went to Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois]. I was up in Great Lakes at the naval training academy. They attached me to the 7th Marine--the 3rd Marine battalion [3rd Battalion, 3rd Marines] but I told them, "Oh, no, I'm not, I'm not going to fight your war. Y'all can go to hell. Y'all can put me in jail or prison. I ain't doing it." So they let me stay in Great Lakes. I told 'em I wasn't leaving Chicago [Illinois]. And they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --let me do it. Story_ID: 638383 Speaker 1: Now this was a time when a lot of servicemen were coming back with all kind of psychological problems. I don't know if you had to deal with any of those or, or pe- people that had (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was, I, when I was in the [U.S.] Navy I was, I mean, the war [Vietnam War] had wound down plus it was the Navy so it's not like you were on the ground in the middle of combat. I was mostly screening recruits to, for fitness to be in the [U.S.] military, the Navy, or screening people for submarine duty or nuclear arms duty. Speaker 1: Now, what does that, I mean, what, what is, I, I know that during the war people would often feign mental illness to stay out-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --service. Speaker 2: The, yeah, now, when and, and if, these were like eighteen year old kids, didn't have any idea what they were doing, would sign up and then I gotta get out of it. You, they would let you out if you wet the bed in the Navy 'cause apparently if you wet the bed on a submarine, at some point somebody would throw you off the boat 'cause it was too small a quarters to be doing that stuff, you know. Or sleep walking or if you were homosexual and the, you know, guys would come in and they all homosexuals, we, we would see ten, twenty homosexuals a day and they all had the same story. They knew they were gay when they were six. They started, they met up with some man at eleven or twelve, grown man, and he would sort of turn 'em out and they, that's how they knew they were gay and, you know, you get that story, although that story could have been canned (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Passed down (laughter). Speaker 2: You know, passed around. But the Navy was interesting. The Navy taught me leadership, although I had been having leadership conversations with my uncle, step-uncle [Bert Pratt (ph.)] who was as I said a lieutenant colonel in the, in the National Guard. He was always talking about leadership, leadership, leadership. I was like, I don't know what the hell that is but okay. Story_ID: 638384 Speaker 1: So you were at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] and how, how long were you in, what year (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two years. Speaker 1: Two years, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Any, is there any real significant stories from Great Lakes, that? Speaker 2: Just leadership and being me which I didn't fit in. You know, I was walking around, I was, when I, when I got back to Chicago [Illinois]. I started studying martial arts. Speaker 1: Did it, I mean, was it because of something that happened in-- Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) there, or some kind? Speaker 2: I was always, I mean, grew up fighting, grew up boxing and martial arts was a good way to stay healthy. I, I swam in college. I'd swim like a mile a day but what do you do with swimming, you know, not exactly pragmatic or useful. It is if you're in the ocean and drowning but, but martial arts had, I mean, I'm, I'm dealing with potentially violent people although it's rare. So I decided I would take martial arts for health, all this, you know, all the, all the reasons. So I had a lot of time in the, in the [U.S.] Navy to do martial arts. I also learned a lot of leadership in martial arts. Found out later when I studied business that (Unclear) learned all their stuff from Japan which was all based on martial arts and samurai training. It's all business, modern business technology is Japanese martial arts. But, you know, back when I was in the Navy I was walking around with a bamboo flute and overalls instead of being in uniform. I mean, I was, I was like the, the 'M*A*S*H' kind of folk. When we went to see 'M*A*S*H' in medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] we didn't think it was funny, we thought it was a documentary, you know, 'cause it was, I mean, that's, you know, what doctors do, doctors, you know, doctors gotta be free. A doctor's gotta--being, being a doctor is like being a priest healer kind of guy. You gotta be free to do medicine, you know. And then when I started doing martial arts, years and years and years later, I realized that I had started out as a warrior, had gone to medical school and ghetto warrior, had gone to medical school and became a healer and then as I was learning martial arts increased the depth and breadth of my spirituality, and so I was this sort of warrior, healer, spiritual monk, priest kind of person, which is what I am. But no, no, I mean, we used to steal the ambulance in, in the Navy and drive over to the hospital. And, you know, I was surprised when the captain called me in and wanted me to stay. I said, "You really must not have any, if you want me to stay," (laughter). "You must not have," you know. But apparently as I've been coming along, 'cause I never really recognized any great potential of mine but apparently other people would, they would recognize my potential which I'm like, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not trying to do nothing special, I'm not, I'm just doing what I'm doing, I'm not, not trying to be nobody, not trying to, you know, I'm just, but I was apparently people saw something of me, saw something in me of value and so they would gravitate towards me. Story_ID: 638385 Speaker 1: Got out of the [U.S.] Navy, when I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is '76 [1976] then right, right, right. Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Got out when, before I went to the Navy when I was in my residency, I wanted to have black teachers in psychiatry because I didn't know whether or not I could trust white people and their understanding of black people. Speaker 2: Now, that raises an interesting question before I don't know, I don't have, I don't want, I don't mean to cut-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: --off the point you're going to make but we were talking off camera about some of the attempts to deal with black mental health in the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: What was the book 'Black Rage' by-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Price Cobbs [HistoryMaker Dr. Price Cobbs] and-- Speaker 1: Price Cobbs and William Grier [William H. Grier]. Speaker 2: --William Grier. Well, what did you think of that when it came out and what, what-- Speaker 1: Well, when it came out I thought it was great because back then psychiatry, psychology was very much unscientific, very much opinionated, very much value based. There was not a lot of science. As the field has progressed the science has become more rigorous and more specific and now these pop psychology kinds of understandings just don't apply. But back then they made sense, you know, 'Black Rage' made sense. Speaker 2: Oh, the Chicago [Illinois] psychologist, Dr. Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright]-- Speaker 1: Bobby Wright-- Speaker 2: --was publishing-- Speaker 1: --I knew Bobby Wright. Speaker 2: --quite a bit around the country. Speaker 1: Bobby Wright. I remember one day me and Bobby were somewhere and I always used to go in and I, I tend to be pretty low profile although people don't believe that 'cause I, I'm on television and radio a lot but I'm, I'm really, I'm not looking for fame is not something I enjoy. So I was in a room with Bobby Wright with some psychology students and Bobby was doing his black power thing. And Bobby said, this is a University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] trained psychologist, mind you, he said, "Well, I know that if my son got hit by a car and I took him to the emergency room and a white surgeon wanted to operate on him, I wouldn't let him." And I was like, and I had, I had been letting Bobby slide, right. And but I said, "Bobby, don't tell these young people that." "Well, it's true." "Bobby, it's not the truth. The truth is it wouldn't matter to you what color that surgeon was as long as he saved your son's life. Now you might have some concerns about him being a racist or doing whatever, whatever, but nobody cares, you know, what color somebody is if you're saving their life. Don't tell these people that." And that I think it's hard for people around issues of racism and race because it's both (gesture), and. You get a large number of black people in the room and you start talking about the problems of black people, they will split 50/ 50. Fifty percent will say, "If only the white man would take his foot off our neck we'd be fine." The other half will say, "To hell with the white man. We've gotta do self-help and self-determination." Both are right. But most people can't think both and, they can only think either or, and it's both and. The difficulty that black people have is that they can't tell the decent white person who accepts black people from the toxic white person who tolerates black people. How do you tell? You don't know whose who? Speaker 2: It's often been stated that in the North it's especially hard to figure that out. In the South it's more, it's clear (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, they're, yeah, they're, they're a little more blatant in the South, at least they used to be. Now the South is almost more integrated than the North. Story_ID: 638386 Speaker 1: So, I mean, it's, it's, it's difficult. There's a black psychiatrist, Chester Pierce [Chester Middlebrook Pierce], who was a scientist. He started the Black Psychiatrists of America, advised 'Sesame Street.' The first Black Psychiatrists of America office was Big Bird's dressing room. And Chester Pierce wrote about the confusion that black people have around racism. Chester Pierce actually studied white people and racism and talked about micro insults and micro aggressions and how white people are prone to stereotype black people. Speaker 2: Now, when did he form the association? Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 2: Okay. And 'cause it's not that there's, there's, there's also a Association of Black Psychologists-- Speaker 1: There's an Association of Black Psychologists. Speaker 2: --which was founded around the same time (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Could be. That was when everybody was being conscious. But Chet, Chet, Chet had actually done research. A lot of black people, not all, but many talk, a lot of rhetoric, very little action. Speaker 2: Now, did you join the association of black psychiatrists or, or psychologists (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Black Psychiatrists of America-- Speaker 2: Okay. Black (unclear)-- Speaker 1: -- is the official name. I joined the Black Psychiatrists of America in '71 [1971]. Because I went to a black medical school [HBCU], I was familiar with them at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] so I get in, I got in on the ground floor with them, so to speak. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Al Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Chester Pierce, James Comer [HistoryMaker Dr. James Comer], June Jackson Christmas [HistoryMaker Dr. June Jackson Christmas], Charles Pinderhughes, Charles Prudhomme, Mildred Mitchell Bateman. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, yeah, Dr. Poussaint is one of, more well known (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Al, Al-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he was one of the original founding fathers of the Black Psychiatrists of America. Chet was the researcher, Al was the PR [public relations] guy. Story_ID: 638387 Speaker 1: So when you came out of the [U.S.] Navy, what did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had already, I had wanted black supervisors 'cause I couldn't trust what white people were telling me. I didn't know. And so I asked for black supervisors and they, you know, they didn't know what they were, they, they sent me some guy who told he wasn't black even though he was darker than I was, or he was from the Caribbean, like, "I'm not black. I'm from the Caribbean." I'm like, "Okay." (Laughter) You are of no value to me at all in terms of ethnic identity, culture, and race. So I found this guy, Douglas Foster who was at Jackson Park Hospital [Jackson Park Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]. And when I was in medical school, I had, I learned about community psychiatry 'cause that was the going rage. In '65 [sic.], President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had signed the mental health centers act, community mental health centers act [Community Mental Health Act of 1963] and I thought that was a good solid public health way of doing mental health. The, the paradigm at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] was if a child walks in the office with a rat bite and you give him a tetanus shot, clean the wound, give him antibiotics, you're a good doctor. But if fifty children from the community come in with rat bites and that's all that you do, clean their wounds, give 'em, you need to have your medical license revoked 'cause you did not go out in the community to get rid of the rat. So Meharry had a very strong public health emphasis. And so community psychiatry struck me as a way of actualizing that public health goal of mine. And so I wanted to do community psychiatry and Douglas Foster who was at Jackson Park wanted to start community psychiatry at Jackson Park Hospital, and which is exactly what I wanted to do so I joined him. Speaker 1: Now, give us a little background on Douglas Foster. Speaker 2: Douglas Foster was trained at Menninger's psychiatrists [Menninger School of Psychiatry, Topeka, Kansas]. When I started with him in '72 [1972], even though I was still a resident, he had a thirteen bed inpatient unit and two private offices and so we built that up. But Douglas, Doug was very scattered, he had, he had too many hands in too many recipes and so he didn't keep his promises very well and the hospital finally they, they parted company. I was in the Navy. When I got out of the Navy, Foster was still there. I went and worked in the, I, I actually started the emergency room at Jackson Park but I didn't like the way they did business so I left. And after six months, you can't quit, I remember him telling me, "You can't quit, you don't have a job." I said, "I'd rather not have a job than work for you because the way you lead I, I can't trust you, you know, you're too busy." And Doug was a nice guy, decent, you know, but he was just spread, he spread himself too thin, didn't know how to pace himself. Story_ID: 638388 Speaker 1: So I left and I worked for the Board of Education [Chicago Board of Education], the Chicago Department of Public Health [City of Chicago Department of Public Health], another place with Vince Bakeman [HistoryMaker C. Vincent Bakeman] at HRDI [Human Resources Development Institute, Chicago, Illinois], that HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] did an interview with. Bakeman, Bakeman was always sort of styling and profiling so he, he'd be the kind of guy you'd be attracted to. Bakeman was big time, you know, he was like, dah, dah. I'm like hmm, beep, beep, beep. I'm a, I'm a try to be under the radar screen if I can. But I worked for Bakeman. I also worked for the Community Mental Health Council [Community Mental Health Council, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] 'cause myself and another woman Ruth William [ph.] who was at, Ruth was a lawyer, social worker type and she was working for the State of Illinois Department of Mental Health [Illinois Department of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities; Illinois Department of Human Services Division of Mental Health] and she wanted to see black people have a community mental health center 'cause that was, that was an answer to mental health issues in the black community. And so she and I were trying to get Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] and South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], 'cause you needed a population of two hundred thousand, and she was working with Foster [Douglas Foster], working with me, working with some other people, Ann Moore [ph.], other folk, to, to get South Shore and Chatham to merge as a planning area but the gold plated ghetto Negroes of Chatham did not wanna be connected to the recently moved from 47th Street urban renewal Negroes that were in South Shore, like Chatham folk didn't get addicted or have mental illness, you know. So we finally got 'em together and they developed this, they got a grant from the federal government to do a day treatment program. Back then there were five elements of community psychiatry: inpatient hospitalization, emergency room, day treatment, outpatient, consultation education. Consultation education was the prevention part so you would not, you would, you would consult with people to tell them to not paint children's toys with lead paint. Inpatient, emergency, day treatment, and outpatient was actual treatment, consultation and education was prevention. And so we got a day treatment grant for the Community Mental Health Council. Jackson Park [Jackson Park Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] had inpatient and emergency room and they were working on their outpatient 'cause they were trying to get this federal grant money. So that went on, '76 [1976], '77 [1977], '78 [1978]. Story_ID: 638389 Speaker 1: Finally, I guess in '80 [1980], Foster [Douglas Foster] had left, I had, I had since stopped being at the Board of Education [Chicago Board of Education] where I saw a lot of children. One of the definitions of being a community psychiatrist you gotta be able to treat anybody who walks in your office so I was trying to get skills. I'm not a child psychiatrist, I'm not a geriatric psychiatrist, I'm not a forensic psychiatrist, I'm not a neuropharmacological, you know, but I, I have all those skills 'cause I'm the only game in town. And I was cultivating those skills so that I could treat whoever came in. So when Foster left in '79 [1979] they hired Kermit Mellinger [ph.] another black psychiatrist. In fact, Kermit's daughter, Renee Mellinger is at the juvenile detention center in psychiatry, a child psychiatrist. Kermit was a nice guy but Kermit was not a business guy. Physicians make pretty bad businesspeople. You know, they just don't, they're trying to practice medicine not money so you don't learn business skills. So I helped Kermit out from '79 [1979] to '82 [1982] to then I had to leave Jackson Park [Jackson Park Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and went to work as a medical director at the Community Mental Health Council [Community Mental Health Council, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] 'cause I had been, since I was in residency, I was preparing where I was gonna wind up. I was creating my future, something I've always believed in, and so I was building this community mental health center. Jackson Park couldn't get it 'cause community didn't trust Jackson Park. So finally like I said in '75 [1975] they got a grant to do the day treatment program. And then in '80 [1980] they got the full community mental health center grant, this was a community board of directors of the Community Mental Health Council and they got the federal money. I was at Jackson Park at the time and I turned over the elderly outpatient, children, substance abuse program, all outpatient programs, to the Community Mental Health Council. I figured Jackson Park had inpatient and emergency room, Community Mental Health Council had day treatment and outpatient so it was a nice partnership. In '82 [1982], I got tired 'cause Jackson Park still their business stuff was not satisfying to me, so I left to be the medical director at the Community Mental Health Council. And then in '87 [1987], Robert Washington who I had gone to high school with [at Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], who I had gotten a job as executive director, he was the second executive director of Community Mental Health Council, first one was Lawrence Sanders psychologist. Wash- Washington was a psychologist, too. Story_ID: 638390 Speaker 1: Problem is psychologists don't understand biology and medicine so they don't fully understand that if someone is psychotic they need drugs, if someone is clinically, seriously depressed they need drugs. Psychologists think you can talk people out of stuff like that and you can't. That was a mistake Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] would have, would, used to make all the time that black people were schizophrenic because of racism, no, black people are schizophrenic because of biology. Black people-- Speaker 2: It's an unbalance of-- Speaker 1: Well, yeah, you gotta (gesture), again it's the both, and thing. Black people might not thrive because of racism or they believe the lies that white people tell them, some black people, not all. I don't have posttraumatic slavery syndrome, nobody I know does. I don't hang around with people like that. But again, you know, you get this pop psychology and people not understanding behavior even though they've got Ph.D.'s, and they make up this garbage that they believe and it sounds logical but has no validity to it. And so they're, they're prone to mislead people, unfortunately. When I was in residency, the question was, how does this white European Jewish middle class guy, Freud [Sigmund Freud], have any value for black mental health? Well, he did have something of value. He understood repression, unconscious, and that's true, I checked that out for myself. But he was also wrong about spirituality, so. Speaker 2: What do you mean by repressed unconscious? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: What, what, what do you mean by repressed unconscious? Speaker 1: The way that the brain works, the way that the mind works, excuse me, the way that the mind works and we're beginning to understand how to merge brain and mind. The brain is an organ in the body, the mind is this thing that we think of ourselves as, we think of ourselves as this being, this mind. And these two things have not been able to be synergized because you've got neurology and you got psychiatry. But as we've gotten into the brain and we're able to now understand the chemistry of the brain, because before you couldn't go in and look inside somebody's live brain, so all of your stuff was metaphoric and theoretical. Now, we're able to go in the brain and look at neurochemistry, look at neuroanatomy closely and we're able to understand where parts of the mind, memory, facial recognition, judgment, where they're at in the brain. We still don't know how it works but it's getting closer and closer and closer. One of the things that Freud discovered was trauma. And Freud and Breuer [Joseph Breuer] in 1905 studied hysteria which is a disease of trauma where women would be sexually abused and they would have amnesia or they would have a parallel, a paralyzed arm, neurotic symptoms as Freud referred to them. Freud's mistake was he thought these people were imagining trauma when actually they were actually being victimized by people. But Freud understood that if you are in a situation and it's terrifying for you, your mind will attempt to protect itself by fainting which is a defense mechanism or by repressing from your memory that event. The problem is if you repress something it's gotta come out, so it comes out in symptoms of anxiety, of panic, of paralyzed arm, of amnesia and that's the, so Freud, Freud actually did a very, very good job of understanding neurosis and how the mind worked. And it fits all people. It fits all people. Culture, race, and ethnicity, tweaks it or bends it a little bit but it doesn't change the fundamental core process which is probably in the brain somewhere and governed by chemistry and anatomy but again we haven't quite figured all that out yet. Story_ID: 638391 Speaker 1: You mentioned that Freud [Sigmund Freud] didn't understand spirituality or black spirituality (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: --or. Speaker 2: Freud, Freud, Freud thought spirituality was this oceanic feeling and he, he derided cosmic consciousness and expanded states of consciousness and satori and samadhi and, you know, peak experiences, he didn't understand any of that. He, he demeaned it to being something regressive as, as opposed to something enlightened. That's since been, those were, those were his two biggest mistakes, thinking that people who were hysterical who had anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder were, weren't really actually in harm's way, where someone had actually done something to them, he thought they were making it up. That was one mistake. The other mistake was that he demonized or dogged out spirituality. A big mistake. He called it magical thinking. And it's, it's a little difficult 'cause people who are schizophrenic have magical thinking. They think that God is talking to them. They think that they have an inside track to God but they're delusional, they're psychotic, it's not real. And the way you tell is that those people are the people walking down the street with no clothes on or are the people who walk down the street with twelve overcoats on in the middle of August or people who talk to themselves and they're special 'cause God has touched them. Nope, if God is touching you, he's touching you in the wrong way. Other people who meditate and who try to discipline their minds, who open themselves up to clarity and wisdom, and who open themselves up to spirituality and that special uncommon way of knowing, get information, they have foresight and insight, they have what religion refers to as gifts, prophecy, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Freud also was down on religion for the same reason he was down on spirituality. But those people are successful, they're flourishing, they're doing great and wonderful things, they're able to create their own future, they're able to have synchronicity, synergy plus alignment with events, so that they're always in the right place at the right time, being led by some internal compass that gets 'em exactly where they need to be. It sounds magical but it's not and the, the way you tell is that the proof is in the pudding. But see and then that's the other thing about psychiatry, most people think psychiatry just studies disease but actually psychiatry also studies creativity and wellness but we're not known for that 'cause nobody pays for that. They, people wanna get well, they wanna stop being scared, they wanna stop being psychotic, they wanna stop being depressed, they wanna stop being. Then you have this other conversation about, be proactive, begin with the end in mind, all these successful, you know, flourish, have a purpose in life, have a meaning in life, know who you are, know thyself, discipline your mind, meditate, cultivate, be CEO of self, create your own future. Hm, you start having those conversations with people they go, "Huh? What are you talking about?" Some people go, "Oh, okay. I got it." But most people don't understand that's a very, very good reason to go to a psychiatrist. But they, you know. I would say some of the work I do is ultra professional work, and I see like ultra professionals who are people making big money who are just so damn trifling, they're not stupid, my tendency is to call them stupid but they're not stupid, they just don't know any better, they're ignorant. And you try to, and then, you know, usually when they get to me, is when they've done something wrong. They're about to go to jail, "Can you help me? I'm about to go to jail." "Well, yeah," (laughter), "of course, you are 'cause you did this, this, and this. You got the wrong people around you, you're not right, you have no discipline, you haven't disciplined your body, you haven't disciplined your mind, you're not, you're not making an investment in your future, why do you think you wouldn't get in trouble? You've got all this money, what are you doing with it?" Story_ID: 638392 Speaker 1: Off camera I was asking you about David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] who was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Satcher, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, who was a surgeon general. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he made some pronouncements about black mental health or how we need to be, people need to be as much concerned about their mental health as they are their physical health is what he was saying. Speaker 2: Satcher, I met Dr. Satcher when he was the president of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. I think it was 1990 he had just gotten down there. And he had started the Institute for the Poor and Underserved [Institute on Health Care for the Poor and Underserved]. And I was a keynote, he, I don't, I don't remember this, it's something he said a couple of years ago, which I had forgotten, I was apparently the keynote speaker for the kickoff of this thing he was developing. And then I, that was, that, that was around the, maybe it was '85 [1985], it was '85 [1985] that we did this. And that was when I, he, he published in this journal my work on children exposed to violence, which changed the entire understanding of the United States and maybe the world. Freud [Sigmund Freud] had talked about children and trauma but he said it was in their mind. I came along and talked about children and trauma and said, "No, the trauma is real, children are being exposed to violence all over the place," and proved it, did studies instead of just (gesture) talking about it. And then people picked up on the work and started finding out that what this black guy on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], who is not in an academic institution except peripherally at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], was, knew what he was talking about. Surprise, surprise. So we kicked that off with Satcher. Then in '90 [1990], he had me as the alumnus of the year at Meharry 'cause I was doing stuff. And then when he became surgeon general, well, no, when he was at the Centers for Disease Control [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia], we went to Satcher 'cause I do a lot of, back in '93 [1993], I started doing correctional healthcare, trying to provide inmates in jails and prisons with physical and mental health 'cause they're catching hell, they don't, you know, not getting any care. So we developed standards in jails and prisons. Took this to Satcher as head of the CDC and said, "If you're concerned about the country's health you need to get a real look at jails and prisons." And he was like, "Well, you know, CDC is supposed to be protecting the borders not going inside." And I'm like, so then (unclear) said well, "Maybe jail is like being in another country." So he started doing some stuff around jail. When Satcher was being confirmed for surgeon general by the [U.S.] Senate he had six points and one of the six points was jails and prisons. And the Senate was like, what, "Who cares about those people, they're criminals." And Satcher was like, "Yeah, but they're coming out of jails and prisons with Hepatitis C and drug resistant tuberculosis and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], and they're threatening the country's public health. We need to be concerned about them." So they let him be surgeon general, but we almost, it's my fault. I almost got Satcher unconfirmed as the surgeon general because of that. Another time Satcher was trying to get money to study the Ebola virus in Zaire [Democratic Republic of the Congo], going to [U.S.] Congress to get money and Congress was like, "Who cares about those people? Those are, those are people in Africa. We don't care about those people. This is U.S. taxpayer dollar. Why should we give you money to study a virus?" And, and Satcher was like, "Germs don't need a passport," again public health. So when Satcher became surgeon general he knew it might work and so I worked with him on his mental health report ['Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General'], his children's mental health conference ['Report of the Surgeon General's Conference on Children's Mental Health: A National Action Agenda'], his culture, race, and ethnicity report ['Mental Health: Culture, Race, and Ethnicity'], his youth violence report ['Youth Violence: A Report of the Surgeon General'], his suicide report ['The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Prevent Suicide']. That was also the time I, I actually got into the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] White House and worked with Janet Reno and Donna Shalala 'cause apparently Clinton had seen his stepfather [Roger Clinton, Sr.] beat up his mother [Virginia Clinton Kelley], child exposed to violence, risk factor, but apparently had protective factors which kept him from being a drug addict although he obviously had a sex thing. So he told Reno and Shalala to do something about women's against violence--prevention of violence against women, so I joined them and Satcher was a part of that. So we worked together for about five years or so, still working together. And I got a lot of respect for him 'cause he understands public health. Story_ID: 638393 Speaker 1: The thing that people don't understand which I'm trying to, I'm on another mission, when I was doing children exposed to violence in '82 [1982], even though no one had ever heard of it, people were like, what are you talking about? What, and then other people came behind me and replicated my research and found that I was right. But back then I was under the impression that traumatized children had all these psychiatric disorders and they were bound and determined to have psychiatry disorders 'cause they had been exposed to trauma. So back then my notion was risk factors were predictive factors, again, kitchen table psychology, kitchen table psychiatry. Well, if you've seen your mother get killed, certainly you're gonna grow up messed up. No, gotta have protective factors. When we did the Institute of Medicine's [National Academy of Medicine] report and started doing that in around 1999 or 2000, we did a, a report on suicide prevention ['The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Prevent Suicide']. Twenty thousand out of a hundred thousand people get depressed, one fifth of all people get depressed. About eight thousand people attempt suicide. People who actually complete suicide, the average is twelve, twelve per one hundred thousand. So what's protecting 99,988 people who are depressed from completing suicide? What's keeping seven thousand and 1,988 people who have attempted suicide from completing suicide? Well, there have to be protective factors. So we're starting a whole new thing around public health and trying to say to people, rather than profiling, identifying, demonizing children exposed to violence, there's a study adverse childhood experiences study that looked at sexual abuse, physical abuse, emotional abuse, domestic violence, mother mentally ill, parent in prison, parent using drugs, seven adverse childhood experiences. Everybody has at least one of those. Six percent of this white middle class population studied in San Diego [California], 50 percent, college graduate, jobs, health insurance, have at least one adverse childhood experience, 50 percent have at least one, 6 percent have four or more. Your immediate assumption would be if you've had four physical abuse, child abuse, mother on crack [crack cocaine], whatever, you're doomed, it's horrible, you've had a horrible childhood, you're doomed. No, protective factors. It does turn out if you've had four or more, you're twelve times more likely to attempt suicide, ten times more likely to be depressed, three and a half times more likely to have sexually transmitted disease, traumatized stressed out children grow up feeling unloved, they trade sex for affection, get venereal disease, HIV [human immunodeficiency virus]. So they get all these psychiatric problems. But in addition, the 6 percent that have four or more adverse childhood experiences have twice the rates of cancer, twice the rates of heart disease, four times the rate of lung disease 'cause they smoke, they drink, they overeat, they got more obesity. The problem is that's just looking at the deficit, you don't really study the people who have been exposed to adverse childhood experiences but are resilient and who have protective factors. And it turns out people are more resilient than they are weak. So I'm trying to flip the paradigm to a resiliency conversation and we're coming out with another Institute of Medicine report in 2008 which hopefully will do that. The Bush [President George Walker Bush] White House tried to have the New Freedom Commission report [President's New Freedom Commission on Mental Health] come out which spoke about protective factors but they got shot down. So now we're trying again because other countries spend half as much money and have twice the healthcare and the wellness. This country spends tons of money and their healthcare is horrible so I'm trying to shift that paradigm. But Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] was a part of that 'cause in his youth violence report ['Youth Violence: A Report of the Surgeon General'], he came up with this notion, although we argue back and forth, he says it's my idea, I say it's his idea, that risk factors are not predictive factors 'cause of protective factors. The violence report shows that you cannot profile or tell that a child's gonna be violent despite everybody's kitchen table psychology, psychiatry. Oh, that kid's rotten, you know, first grade teachers, I can tell the bad kids. I know who they're gonna be. No, you can't. It's kitchen table psychology. It's not true, behavior is multi-determined and complex, you just can't do it. Story_ID: 638394 Speaker 1: Two things I was thinking about here to ask you about, one is the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] study that was based here in Chicago [Illinois] for, for many years. I don't know if they're still doing it but the-- Speaker 2: Felton Earls [HistoryMaker Felton James Earls]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Felton Earls. Speaker 2: Chicago project [Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods]. MacArthur-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Foundation [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] funded it. Found that there were, he studied forty-nine equally poor black neighborhoods, found that six as in most cities, go to any large city, six communities mostly black, some Latino, are responsible for 75, 80 percent of the homicides. In Chicago there are forty-nine equally poor black communities, six are responsible for 70, 80 percent of the homicides, the other forty-three are not. And the reason they're not is 'cause they have social fabric, neighbors who know one another. Tony Earls, Felton Earls called it a collective efficacy. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: For the last twelve years I've been doing research, hard, good science research on prevention of violence, prevention of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], prevention of pregnancy, prevention of drug abuse. And it turns out you need seven things to change behavior, this is not pop kitchen psychiatry, this is real research psychiatry. You've gotta have social fabric or a village, you've gotta have access to modern technology, you've gotta have connectedness 'cause people connected are not violent, you've gotta have opportunities to develop social skills, you've gotta have opportunities to develop self-esteem, self-esteem being a sense of power, a sense of uniqueness, and a sense of models, you've gotta have adult protective shield or safety, and you've gotta have a way to minimize your trauma 'cause as I mentioned from the adverse childhood experiences study, 50 percent of people get traumatized but that doesn't automatically mean they're ruined, as we used to say, they're ruined. They've, their protective factors will protect them. So when we did our HIV prevention work in Durban, South Africa, that was what we put in place and that's what prevents HIV. Education doesn't really change behavior. That's a middle class value. We'll just educate 'em or teach 'em about AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. That doesn't stop risky behavior. It doesn't stop smoking, a big sign on the back of a pack of cigarettes, "This will give you cancer," it doesn't stop people from smoking. So you've gotta have a life makeover strategy to change behavior and those seven field principles, rebuild village, access to modern technology, connectedness, binding and attachment, social skills, self-esteem, adult protective shields, safety, and minimizing trauma, we're giving a sense of, people's sense of mastery. Those seven things all together change behavior, that's a lot of work. A ton of work. Story_ID: 638395 Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s], I know there was a, there was a phenomenon, I, I suppose it's changed since then of young, well, black teenagers committing suicide at a rate that was unprecedented. I mean, it was, it was something that wasn't-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Nope. Speaker 1: --around before; is that still true? Speaker 2: Nope, nope, that's wrong. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. Speaker 2: Wrong, wrong, wrong. Speaker 1: All right. That was in the, you know, people were discussing it like that in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: --those days and I thought it was true. So-- Speaker 2: Pop psychology, again. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Suicide. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Prior to 1965, black people had one fourth the suicide rates of white people. In 1938, Charles Prudhomme predicted that as black people matriculated into middle class, their suicide rates would go up. In 1965, Kenneth Clark who did the doll study with Thurgood Marshall, who was friends with my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] and, you know, all these people, did the Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Kenneth Clark did a study in New York [New York] which showed that the rates of New York suicide among black folk in New York were one-fourth that of whites. But in the middle class community of Harlem [New York, New York], suicide rates was equal to whites. And so this notion that as black people became more middle class the suicide rates would go up, it apparently had some truth to it. After 1965, the black suicide rates went up from one fourth the white suicide rates, to one half the suicide rates. There was a period in the late '90s [1990s], '94 [1994] to '96 [1996], when there was a peak in the youth black suicide rates, that peak was not very high, if you disaggregate suicide rates by age, that is you're looking at the young children, teenagers, young adults, adults, and elderly, you find that the rate at which they complete suicide differs. The average runs about twelve per one hundred thousand. If you get to be eighty, those rates might go up to forty or fifty per one hundred thousand. Find those fifty people in that one hundred thousand population, can't do it, looking for a needle in a haystack. Find the twelve, if you're a teenager your rate is twenty per one hundred thousand, you can't find them. So the, the young black male suicide rates '94 [1994], '96 [1996], '96 [1996], '98 [1998], I forget those two years, jumped up from being one half the white rates to about equal to the white rates and then they went back down, no one knows why. They hypothesize that it was due to the guns being used in the crack [crack cocaine] epidemic, having guns is a risk factor for suicide. They thought that, people thought it might have been crack, no one knew why, they thought that when the crack epidemic went away in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and the way, the way they figured that out is 'cause the number of overdoses, crack overdoses that would come to the emergency room began to drop off, so they figured the crap, crack epidemic was going away. The problem was, was that the guns that was needed for crack business were still around so the suicide rates stayed high but then they dropped off. And, in fact, when we did the Institute of Medicine suicide report ['The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Prevent Suicide'] in, that came out in 2002 [sic. 1999], that peak that occurred in ninety--I think it was '96 [1996], '98 [1998], was gone and the black rates of suicide had dropped back down. And again the lesson we learned from suicide is that risk factors are not predictive factors 'cause of protective factors. You'd expect of the eight thousand people, and Sean Joe just did a study on Caribbean and black suicide attempts, found that they were running about 8 percent in young black Caribbean and African American males. Again eight thousand out of a hundred thousand black people attempt suicide. For black women the suicide rates are the same. Black women have the lowest rate of actual suicide of everybody in the entire country; it's two per one hundred thousand. So most people don't have the sophistication or the nuance to differentiate between a suicide attempt and a suicide completion. Black women attempt rates of suicide the same as white women, about 8 percent, 10, eight thousand per one hundred thousand. Black women's actual rates of suicide completion are two (gesture) per one hundred thousand. No one knows why. Story_ID: 638396 Speaker 1: When we did Satcher's [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] culture, race, and ethnicity report ['Mental Health: Culture, Race, and Ethnicity'], Dr. Satcher, one of the things we found out was that no one has done research on black populations, black people are allergic to research, we don't volunteer, we're scared of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male]. And as a result and, you know, you try to talk to black people, well, "It's a plot, you know, it's a genocidal plot to put all black people on medication for attention deficit disorder. It's a genocidal plot to put all black people on fluoxetine," which is the generic form of Prozac. And it's like black people, has there ever been a time when black people have gotten the benefit of modern technology? No. One time, one time, that was DNA. Black people were scared DNA test was gonna put all black people in prison. They thought it was a white plot to be able to catch black criminals easier. And surprise, surprise, it let seventy-two men off of death row in Illinois alone. But for the most part black people do not get the benefit of heart transplants, liver transplants, kidney transplants, modern medicine, bypass heart surgery. And they don't get the benefit of modern psychiatry 'cause they're scared of people like me 'cause there was this group of anti-psychiatrists out there, some of whom belonged to this strange church that is populated by actors, and they're telling black people it's a genocidal plot to put black people on medicine. It's a plot to do lobotomies on black brains, black people weren't getting lobotomies. We didn't get the benefit of modern technology which was wrong technology but you say to black people, "When have we ever gotten the benefit of modern science?" We, we're not in those lines, we don't get that benefit. And so I'm trying as the modern technology for prevention, we used to have a disease called cretinism which was a form of mental retardation for not enough iodine. Now, there's iodine in all the salt. There used to be syphilis which caused dementia. Now everybody gets tested for syphilis who goes into a psychiatric hospital. There used to be phenylketonuria which was, is a metabolic genetic disease. Now on the back of every diet cola it says, "Warning phenylketonurics. This contains phenylalanine and if you have, if you're missing the enzyme to metabolism, metabolize it, you're at risk for becoming retarded." Black people got the benefit of that. Everybody's talking about health disparities: black people have the worst health of everybody. Well, I would almost bet you that when there was polio black people were not in iron lungs but they developed a polio vaccine and eventually, eventually, black people got polio vaccine. And so now you don't see black people or white people or anybody in iron lungs so that the, the cure for health disparities and poor healthcare based on international experience is prevention and health promotion. The problem is, is that you've got physicians in this country who make money off of disease so we have a illness care model instead of a healthcare model, a wellness model, and as soon as Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] becomes president (gesture) tomorrow, he is going to push prevention, health promotion, intervention, for America's healthcare problem. And I plan on being in the front of the line telling him what to do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If he'll listen (laughter) which I think he will 'cause we've done work together in the past. And he ought to know my work. He's been in Chicago [Illinois] long enough to have heard me and my propaganda. Plus it's, it's good science, it's not, it's not, this isn't kitchen table psychology. You know, it, if traumatized children grow up to be people who smoke, drink, and overeat, and they got twice the cancer, twice the lung disease, four times lung disease, twice the heart disease, if we can get to those children, give them my health behavior change model which has now been replicated in Atlanta [Georgia], in North Carolina, in New York [New York], in Durban, South Africa, then we can apply those models to American healthcare and have the same outcomes. Story_ID: 638397 Speaker 1: You mentioned some of the, the fears that black people have towards-- Speaker 2: Research. Speaker 1: Yeah. Any kind of health, you know, research or, or prevention or resistance to, to, it. How, at the Community Mental Health Center [sic.] do you, I mean, are, are we taking advantage of that facility as a group or is it tough to get people? Speaker 2: Well, let me correct you making the common mistake everybody else makes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Community Mental Health Council [Community Mental Health Council, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Council, all right. Speaker 2: It's fine. It's community mental health centers so it's, you know, that's fine. We don't do prevention per se. We're the, we're in the iron lung business. I run a $21 million comprehensive community mental health center that has ten, thirteen psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, case managers, nurses. We hospitalize people, we do psychiatry emergency services, we do outpatient services, we do children, we do elderly, we do substance abuse, we do day treatment, we do residential, we do vocational training, we do research, we're like the model, we're one of the models in the country. We're the only community based organization that got an R01 research grant out of the National Institute of Mental Health. You've gotta be doing platinum science to get that kind of grant. The other thing we do is the consultation, education, where you go out and you try to tell people, "Look, there's prevention, there's health promotion, there are manualized family therapy interventions," because we recognize 60 percent of children of depressed parents get depressed. If we run those children through this manualized family therapy intervention, they will never get depressed. That's prevented. Why you wanna wait 'til somebody's in the iron lung? Up until ten years ago our quality of science, maybe '94 [1994], they first came out with the prevention mental health report ['National Research Agenda for Prevention Research,' David Reiss and Richard H. Price] in '94 [sic. 1996], and they had some science, they were beginning to get some glimmering of how to prevent psychiatric disorders. Now in 2008 we've got a lot of information based on good science. So we're doing that quality research in the black community and I plan on bringing it to black folks somehow. The problem is, is that no one pays for prevention. I can't get paid for prevention. The only reason I'm able to go around and do all the stuff I do is 'cause I've got a illness care system, Community Mental Health Council, $21 million, that's taking care of all these sick people who are by metaphor in the iron lung. My plan is to shift that paradigm and develop a wellness institute. Now, who needs a wellness institute? "I'm not sick, I'm not hurting, I'm not in pain. I'm okay. I'm only drinking a forty [ounce], four times a day. I don't have DTs [delirium tremens] yet, so why do I need wellness to not become an alcoholic? I'm not in pain. Oh, I'm addicted, I got DTs, Bell [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell] can you help me?" "Well, yeah, but I'm really not interested in helping you. I'm interested in getting you before you get that sick." But there's no real political will yet to do that, that's why I'm hoping Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] gets in and maybe we can get that done. Story_ID: 638398 Speaker 1: They're more at risk but the rates are twelve per one hundred thousand. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's rare. There are tons of black middle class people. They're not stressed out from being middle class. I mean, those people are depressed that commit suicide. What happens is you get middle class and you get away from your support system and you're isolated and you're alone and you're Leanita McClain, Clarence, what's Clarence's last name? He's at, he's in D.C. (Washington, D.C.) now, [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page's wife, and she commits suicide 'cause she doesn't belong in Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois] where she grew up and she doesn't belong in the white editorial office [at the Chicago Tribune] so there's no support when she gets depressed and that risk factor is depression, but there's no social fabric, there's no village, there's no mastery, there's, you know, and she's stuck and she commits suicide 'cause she's depressed. Story_ID: 638399 Speaker 1: Just following up on what we discussed before, you see the, you're hopeful that the future, that the political changes can improve the way you deliver-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm hoping that the community, I'm hoping I can blow the Community Mental Health Council [Community Mental Health Council, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] up, and not completely destroy it. I mean, I, I, I've gotta go back and find the history for the iron lung people and figure out how they transformed their business. Some of 'em probably failed 'cause they were still making iron lungs. Some of 'em were probably going out spitting in vaccines and breaking needles 'cause they were more interested in money than they were in people's health, which the medical profession has some problem with. I found out the auto industry didn't put seatbelts in cars until thirty years after they had discovered seatbelts. Don't get me started, I'll start cursing on tape. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: I find that reprehensible. But there are some of us in the medical profession who are not, and partly it's because we don't understand prevention especially around mental health, we don't understand the relationship that trauma has for physical chronic disease. Again, you're traumatized as a child you get twice the cancer, twice the heart disease, four times the lung disease. And so we don't know how to change behavior, we don't know how to create and cultivate resiliency and wellness. So I'm hoping that it'll shift. I know for a fact already 'cause I can tell that what's gonna become real is that the science is gonna become so tight, it's gonna become unethical not to do certain things. It would be unethical not to have iodine in salt, it would be unethical not to give polio shots. Or you got these crackpots running around talking about measles vaccine 'causes autism, there is no evidence for that anywhere on the planet Earth. In fact, thiomersal is no longer in, in vaccines and people are still blaming, you know, vaccines. There are people used to kill people over putting fluoride in the water, hm. So, you know, there are always, there are always these fringe crackpots out there who don't trust, don't believe, are scared, have conspiracy theories. But that'll, that'll all shift and we'll see more prevention and better healthcare. The main thing is, you know, there are risk factors, that's clear. And one way of ensuring someone's health is to minimize their risk factors. I don't know how you do that 'cause life is risky business. But there are also protective factors and rather than trying to identify, 'cause you can't predict based on risk factors who's gonna wind up dead or diseased but you can predict that somebody's at risk 'cause you'll see it and you can give them more protective factors to mitigate and moderate their risk, to protect them. Hey, I drive real fast, I always have my seatbelt on, driving fast is risky. I got on my seatbelt, I'm okay. I got air bags. So that's, that's my current push. I-- Story_ID: 638400 Speaker 1: I'm sixty-one so I've got fifteen years left of life I figure. I'm, I'm, I'm hoping on longer but you never know. My mother [Pearl Debnam Pratt] died at forty-eight, my father [William Y. Bell, Jr.] at fifty-two, so I figure, but my grandfather died at seventy-five so I figure I'll make it to seventy-five, although my grandfather was one of those skinny, eat anything you wanna type people, who I hate, they don't attract fat so they don't get cancer. What are you gone do? But I, I'm taking care of myself so I figure I'll live to seventy-five. But I wanna do something, I wanna, I wanna do something, you know. I had a guy walk in my office, he said, he sat down, 'cause I'm not seeing patients anymore, I just, people call me up, I'll see 'em, I'm not their doctor, I'll just talk to 'em for free, I don't care, the council [Community Mental Health Council, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] is paying my salary, I do anything I want. And he said, "Bell [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell]," he said, "I need to talk to you." I said, "What about?" He said, "Well, I'm not happy." "Okay. What's wrong?" He said, "Well, you know, I made $20 million a year for the past twenty years." And I'm like, "Well, why don't you give me a couple of million to run to, why don't you give me some money for my wellness institute?" I didn't ask that. I said, "Yeah." He said, "Well, I'm not happy." I said, "How the hell you," well, actually I think I thought this, how the hell you make $20 million a year for twenty years and not be happy? I, you know, help me. Well, I happen to know that money is not everything. I think I was telling William Yancy IV [Bell's son, William Y. Bell IV] about wealth per Dennis Kimbro [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro], being work habits, relationships, money, creativity, passion, a spirituality, you know, wealth is more than just money. But this guy didn't know that. And now he was seventy something and learning it. And I was like oh, you poor guy, I mean, you know, how, why, how could you be so smart and so dumb at the same time? And maybe it was when I was doing martial arts and being a samurai and knowing that if I had to I would die for a reason that, I would go to these Japanese movies and I saw an Akira Kurosawa's 'Ikiru' which was about this Japanese bureaucrat who was not doing anything but sending people around in circles until he found out he had cancer and that's when he got serious about having a meaning and a purpose in life. And maybe it's 'cause I saw that movie when I was twenty-four that I realized, oh, hell, no. And, and, and actually I think it was before that 'cause the old heads in the hood would say, "Young blood, if I only knew then what I know now." And I thought, okay, I'm never gonna be you saying that. I'm gonna do it, I'm gonna do it to death, I'm a, you know. I'm a live my life to the absolute 100 percent maximum fullest. And I've messed up, languished a little bit, let some opportunities slip by that I probably should not have. But for the most part I've been on it, you know, 'cause I just, life's too short. You know, I saw death in medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. I know what death is. I'm very clear about what death is, personal experience and medical school. And I just don't wanna waste my life, you know, I don't look back, that's why I don't have dates. I don't care, nobody care, nobody cares. People say, that was a good job. Another one of my favorite expressions, accidents happen. I, you know, I can't take credit for this. I work hard. I'm not the smartest guy in the room but I'm not the dumbest either and I work hard. I got a guy, Hayward Suggs, one of my vice presidents, M.B.A., and he's got three requirements for work: make some money, save some lives, and have some fun. When he first said that I was like, fun? What the hell are you talking? This is life or death business we're in. You can't have fun. And I, I hired him anyway. About three years later I said, you know, "I almost didn't hire you 'cause of that have fun, make money, save lives. I'm okay with make money, saving lives but the having fun stuff." He said, "Bell, as much as you joke around and fool around," one day I got on the floor and I crawled on the floor to my secretary's desk and I grabbed her ankle with my hand, I said (makes sound) (laughter). She said, (makes sound) (laughter). Oh, I'm, I'm a, I'm gonna have, I'm gonna have some fun, you know, I'm (laughter). Yeah, I still mess with her. I still, she (gesture), you, I'm like, "I'm sorry," (laughter). But you gotta have fun, you know, this ain't, this ain't all work, you gotta have fun. But he said, "How dare you, you, as much fun as you have." I'm like, "Yeah, I know." I'm gonna have fun, you know. I'm, I'm on an adventure. So we'll see, I mean, I don't know, I can't predict the future, I've got a good idea what's gonna happen. Story_ID: 638401 Speaker 1: At this juncture in your life when you look back on everything you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: I would have been more scholarly and academic in grammar school 'cause I wasted a lot of time with this whole, I mean, you know, I mean, just stupid, just stupid, just not wanting to learn anything, 'cause I thought if you learned anything you, you were a jupid [ph.]. I didn't know you could be solid down to earth real and be scholarly as well, didn't know. Speaker 1: Do you think you had a choice then? I mean, in terms of-- Speaker 2: You always got a choice. Speaker 1: Yeah. But I mean, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, the choice that I made was I didn't do certain things, I wouldn't stomp anybody when they were down. I had a, I had a basic problem with hurting people. I did, now if you were trying to hurt me I, you know, there's an, there's an old martial arts saying that I live by, break my skin I'll break your bones, break my bones, I will take your life. Try to hurt me I'm a defend myself. Sorry. But I don't believe in hurting people for hurting people, no. I sometimes, I sometimes lament finishing college [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] in two years because if I had waited four years I could have gone to a better resourced medical school. I could have gotten in a better resourced psychiatry residency training program. I would be where I am ten years earlier 'cause I'd a had more connections, people would have believed me more, I'd a been more, I don't know, acceptable. I had to work from nothing to be a national, international expert, whatever the hell I'm supposed to be. Which I don't believe my own press. But had I been at the right place at the right time it'd a been easier. If-- Speaker 1: As-- Speaker 2: --I had been an Al Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint] at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it'd a been easier for me. But then I suspect had I done all of that I would not have been as down to earth and as good as I am. The only other thing is that I, you know, I always try to be on TV or on the radio or in the paper, not 'cause I wanna be but because nobody's gonna read my four hundred articles that I've published. But if I've been on TV, I'm an expert, even if I'm a fool practicing kitchen psychiatry, I'm on TV, you must be an expert. No, they could have just needed somebody that day and I happened to be the fool walking by. So I try to be on TV to have influence over people. Story_ID: 638402 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your experiences on radio or television 'cause, you, you were on WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois], late night at one time you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've done 'Nightline'-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I've done, I mean, the only, the only interesting thing I was quoted by The New York Times. They asked me, I was doing a violence prevention lecture in New York [New York]. And (unclear) I said, "If you were a king, what would you do," I said, "to prevent violence." I said, "Well, I would prevent mothers from having unwanted children 'cause unwanted children are hurt and hurt people grow up and they hurt people." A lot of research on that. The next day in The New York Times it said, "Dr. Bell [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell] in favor of forced abortion" (laughter). And I was like, "How he'd get that out of that," you know, it was interesting. I didn't understand that at all. Speaker 1: Is-- Speaker 2: I've, I've had other, I've had, I've had a lot of funny lecture experiences. I was, when I lectured at Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts] they assigned me two bodyguards (laughter) 'cause somebody was doing a Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] lecture and somebody tried to burn him up with a balloon and gasoline and a match. A lot of interesting people out there. So I, they assigned me two bodyguards. I've lectured as many to as three thousand people as to two. One time I was lecturing with two people. I, I if you call me I'll come for the most part, and one of 'em fell asleep (laughter). But they had had a fire the night before so they had been up all night dealing with the fire and I was supposed to be talking to thirty kids and these two counselors but the two counselors were the only ones available. Had, you know, I've, it's, it's been, been interesting. It's been interesting. Story_ID: 638403 Speaker 1: Got a lot of funny stories, you know, about life and how life works. The, the only thing, I guess, that has struck me as I've gotten older which I find fascinating, 'cause I, you know, I've done a lot of reading around spirituality, Dao (Unclear), not so much the Bible, it's a Christian country so you get that regardless. Daoism, you know, trying to, Zen Buddhism, trying to find out higher states of consciousness, meditation. So there's that and there's science, right. And what I'm, as I get older discovering is that the ancients knew as much as the modern scientists. The difference is, is that the ancients didn't know why stuff worked. They knew what worked and they knew how to work it but they didn't know the mechanisms, the why. Modern science has a better idea of the why. Plus there was a lot of stuff the ancients thought that was just flat out mythology and just wasn't true. But they were also right about a lot of stuff too. So I'm finding that these things are merging for me as I get older. You know, they're kind of like (gesture). And so here I am this scientist, you know, at the National Institute of Mental Health, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, right. And all these old guys back in 4000 B.C. (laughter) knew just as much as I know but not the same, they know why. So, you know, it's like the more you change the more things stay the same. Story_ID: 638404 Speaker 1: Out of the four hundred plus articles you've written is there, is there a dominant theme (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have had five times, this will be six, that I've changed the nature of the entire research on the planet Earth. The first time was children exposed to violence. The second time was something called sleep paralysis. Actually it's sleep paralysis which black Americans have forty times, 40 percent of black Americans, you fall asleep, you're waking up, you're paralyzed, you can't move, and there's frequently, there's a witch sitting on your chest. Black people prefer the witch is riding you or the hag, it's a sleep disorder of sorts. Black people have more of it than white people. And it's, when you have, when you come out of this paralysis, 'cause you're wide awake, when you come out of this paralysis you're having a panic attack so there's some relationship between frequent sleep paralysis and panic disorder anxiety. Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: Misdiagnosis of manic depressive illness. Black people have bipolar disorder manic depressive illness but they get misdiagnosed as being schizophrenic. I was in on that. Cultural sensitivity issues, this whole notion of race dialogues. When you go to your average white person and you say you're racist, white people say, "No, I'm not. I believe in the American ideal which is that you should judge people by the content of their character." And most people in America believe that. The problem is that's not black people's reality. So when you talk to white people they trot out the ideal, which is the ideal, it's, it's the goal, that's where you wanna be, but black people's reality is, that more black people get arrested for drug use, even statistically there are more white people that use drugs. If you speed in Chicago [Illinois] and go to the traffic court you'll see black and Latino people. White people don't run stop signs? Of course they do. So there's this differential. I already told you that black teens, males under eighteen do just as many felony crimes as black teens, white and black teens do the same number of felony crimes under eighteen but black kids are prosecuted for them, white kids are sent to therapy. So there's this disparity although the majority of white Americans believe in the ideal but the reality for black people is separate. Should Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] get elected, everybody will have voted for the ideal 'cause they'll be judging this person by the content of his character and not the color of his skin as an electorate. They've done that before, [U.S.] Congress has done that before and they passed civil rights. So I've, I've teased stuff like that out. What else? Oh, how to, how to manage violence is another area of research that I've done that has shifted stuff. It's funny when I did the sleep paralysis, we did that in '84 [1984] but no one paid any attention, in '94 [1994], and now there are about five or six different places doing it. The other one is violence prevention and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] prevention research, which has been my largest focus. I have now dropped that and now I'm doing health emotion and prevention. That's my next area. Trying to get people to understand risk factors are not predictive factors 'cause of protective factors so let's increase everybody's protective factors 'cause they're doing it internationally. Story_ID: 638405 Speaker 1: So when you look back right now at all this body of work, what today would you, would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: What would be my-- Speaker 1: Legacy. Speaker 2: Hell, I don't know. I wanted my, on my tombstone, I want it to say, "It was fun while it lasted." I'm just trying to have fun, trying to save some lives. I'm okay with the money. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As Suggs [Hayward Suggs] said, "Sometimes two out of three isn't bad." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I want my life to have meant something. I want people to be sad I'm gone. I don't want people to say (makes sound), "I'm glad he's gone that asshole," (laughter) you know. I want my life to have meant something. And if it doesn't, well, it doesn't. If it does, it does. I don't, I don't know what I'm doing. I don't have a clue as to what I'm doing. I'm following something inside me that I found or found me, either way, and I follow that but I don't know what that is. It's something spiritual I think. People tell me I'm very spiritual even though I'm not a member of the cult of the Jewish carpenter. That'll take a minute to sink in. Although I'm not anti-Christianity, you know, I mean, Christianity has a, a purpose and a place. But the Zen Buddhist saying is, "Don't follow the master. Follow the path the master took." I don't mind following people. As a patient once told me, "I wouldn't mind being an Indian [Native American] if I could find a chief I could trust." And I'm like, "I hear you." And I, I, I've been, I've found some chiefs. They weren't always right. So it's, it's again both and, you wanna be part of something but separate and individual from it at the same time. And people have a difficult time navigating that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, I have no idea what I'm doing. I don't have a clue. I'm not trying to be famous. I'm not trying to be rich. I'm not trying to be successful. I'm trying to be of value. 'Cause I, I don't know. I've got charity in me. I should be dead, I should be on drugs, I should be in prison. I'm clear about that. I'm a black male in America, very clear about that. I'm not any of those things. And since I've got extra it would be stingy of me not to share. Story_ID: 638406 Speaker 1: Tell us about, now, you, you mentioned your son, right? Speaker 2: William Yancy-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --Bell IV [William Y. Bell IV]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who is-- Speaker 1: Do you have a (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --named after my grandfather [William Y. Bell, Sr.], father [William Y. Bell, Jr.], and brother [William Y. Bell III]. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your family and, a little bit about your family. Speaker 2: I've got a wife, her name is Phyllis [Phyllis Bell (ph.)]. She was the daughter of a woman who worked in hotels as a maid. Grew up on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois]. She got her Ph.D. from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. I have an older daughter, Cristin [Cristin Bell Carol]. Cristin is thirty-eight. I have a grandson although I don't think like that 'cause I'm not that old, therefore when he comes over and says, "Grandpa," I say, "Hey, kid watch it. Call me Carl [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell]. Call me Dr. Bell. Call me, 'Hey, you.' Call me anything but not Grandpa," what is that? (Makes sound) I'm just not, I don't think of myself as old. On my sixtieth birthday I put my fourteen year old daughter on my shoulders and I did sixty deep knee bends, and then I took William, my twelve year old, and did sixty with him, that's martial arts. I have a daughter, Briatta Anaray Bell [Briatta Bell]. She's sixteen now, and she's a nice kid, having trouble in school for some reason that I'm not sure of. I do know that our children are terrorists. Of this, I'm convinced. Speaker 1: In what sense (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's sort of it. Speaker 1: In what sense are they terrorists? Speaker 2: They cause terror, they visit terror to their parents. Are you kidding? They're, they're terrorists. They're, they're like, they don't grow up until they're twenty-six, you know, and then they're doing stupid stuff 'cause they don't know any better. They're children, you know. And it's hard not to knock 'em in the head 'cause, you know, you wanna correct 'em, you wanna save 'em but that's not helpful 'cause it creates a bad relationship and you need to have a good relationship with your kids 'cause if you don't, they are not gonna come to you when they get in trouble. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: But I mean, I don't know, I try to, I try to be an honest broker. I try to do leadership for people, try to, for some reason I'm able to go into situations, family and external and say that's the right way to go. And you don't have to go that way, I'm fine, (laughter) it's not my problem, which is how I am. I, I know the right way people ought a go. I tell my daughter, "You need to," I tell William, "You need to," and they're like, "No." "Okay, have fun," (laughter). "Good luck. I hope you survive." I'm somewhat of a daredevil. I was in Kauai [Hawaii] in February and I jumped off a sixty foot cliff into the water (makes sound). I saw some other people do it, I was like, "I gotta try that," (laughter). (Makes sound) Fastest two seconds of my life, boy. You fall at thirty-two feet per second (snaps fingers). I was in that water, I was like, and I had to swim back to shore, it's hilarious 'cause like I was two feet from shore in about two feet of water but I didn't wanna stand up 'cause I didn't have on my glasses so I couldn't see and I was worried about stepping on some coral and a wave hit me and I almost drowned. I'm like, this is crazy, I jump off a sixty foot cliff into the water, I swim in fifty yards in the shore and I almost drowned in two feet of water, two feet away (laughter) from the shore. What is life? You know. It's crazy. But it's fun. Story_ID: 638407 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't talked about that I need to ask you before I ask my last question that comes to mind right now? Speaker 2: There's lots of things you didn't talk about but I wasn't gonna tell you those anyway-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --so it's fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Well, the last question is, it's similar to legacy. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As Carl C. Bell, M.D. [HistoryMaker Dr. Carl Bell]. I don't care. Don't nobody care. Don't nobody care. Who remembers who invented paper? Don't nobody care. The earth eats everybody. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Okay. It was a pleasure to meet you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean nobody-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --nobody cares...