 Story_ID: 36332 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Leo Austin Brooks, Jr., L-E-O, middle name A-U-S-T-I-N, last name, B-R-O-O-K-S, Jr. Speaker 1: Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My birthday is 15 August, 1957, and I was born in Anchorage, Alaska. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am the vice president of the National Security and Space Group in the Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] office of the Boeing Company. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's the 23rd of July, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Currently, we're in my office at 1200 Wilson Boulevard in Roslyn, Virginia. And you're listening to the sound of a Boeing plane flying over. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, it sounds like it, it sounds like it. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 36333 Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I love chicken tenders. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: No? Okay. Speaker 2: Probably some place, favorite location, specific location would probably be the Shenandoah Mountains. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I love the saying, my grandfather used to say this, "I'll help you if you let me." Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 36334 Speaker 1: So I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side and your father's side separately. Then we'll put 'em together. We'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother is Naomi Lewis Brooks, N-A-O-M-I, maiden name L-E-W-I-S, last name, B-R-O-O-K-S. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Alexandria, Virginia. Her date of birth is 14 April, I wanna say 1934. Speaker 1: Okay, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace that side of the family? And I understand it goes back pretty far. Speaker 2: It goes back quite a ways. So there's two lines there. So my paternal side, my grandfather's side. My grandfather was James Lewis, and he was from the Haymarket area of Virginia. He, his father worked at the seminary up on King Street and Quander--and Quaker Lane, the theological seminary up there. I believe he was a gardener working up there. My grandfather--I saw him, I remembered, the only time I can remember him actually is when I was at his funeral when I was a very small child. The, my mother's maternal side, my grandmother's name was Eunice Quander Lewis. And the Quander family is a, has a very well documented history here in the United States, going back from their arrival here as slaves, and then--as a matter of fact, there's a Quander buried at Mount Vernon [in Fairfax County, Virginia, near Alexandria, was the plantation home of the first President of the United States, George Washington]. And that family settled off of Route 1 in, very near Mount Vernon actually. And there's actually a road down there called Quander Road, and so my grandmother was from that area. So southern Alexandria area. My father's side, my father's [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] father [Houston George Brooks] was-- Speaker 1: Oh, wait a minute. We're not gonna ask about your father's side yet. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 1: But just something about, more about the Quanders and since that--I think they came over, if I'm not mistaken-- Speaker 2: From Ghana. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: They came from Ghana. At one point, I know there was actually a display in the Smithsonian Institute featuring some of the artifacts and things from the family and the family tree because there'd been so much work done on it to actually trace back the roots of the family. That family to this day still has a major reunion every year. It rotates between Virginia and Pennsylvania where another big, large group of them, Quanders live. And so that's, really well-established family. Less, I know less about my grandfather's side, other than my great grandfather. I know that when I was a little boy my grandparents lived on Quaker Lane, just South of the intersection of Seminary and Quaker, about a quarter of a mile South of it. And there was a parcel of land there where my grandfather had his house, which was right on Quaker Lane, and then deeper on that piece of land, which is now where--there's a Lexus dealership in there, is where there was a house that was my grandfather's house. I could remember going out into that outhouse still. I still remember that from when I was a little boy. And so that's where those two families lived. Speaker 1: Okay, I think the, there's a piece on public radio for those watching this that wanna know about the Quanders, there's a, they have this huge family reunion. I think they go back to 1619-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And actually, so, the, because these--there's such a large Alexandria-based family, I actually have Quanders on both my father's side and my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36335 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your grandparents [James Lewis, Jr. and Eunice Quander Lewis] do for a living? Speaker 2: So my-- Speaker 1: On your mother's [Naomi Lewis Brooks] side. Speaker 2: On my mother's side. So my grandfather was a chauffeur almost, most of his life. And he was the chauffeur for the president of the United Mine Workers for many years, decades. In fact, he did that, I think, even when he got to the age where he couldn't really even drive, I'd say he was over eighty years old, they still kept him on the payroll because his life was work. And he, and he became the special assistant to the president of the United Mine Workers. Speaker 1: So this is the famous John L. Lewis. Speaker 2: That is, he--that is correct. He, his most memorable and long time was with John L. Lewis. There's a, the Lee Fennell House which is right down off of Washington Street in Alexandria [Virginia] is where he used to work out of. That's where the, John L. Lewis lived. The, and every year, my mother reminds me about how they would pack up in the car, and they would drive to Florida because John L. Lewis would spend the summer in Florida, and that was his driver. And he would--John L. Lewis hated to fly. And so he would drive John L. Lewis to Florida. Then have, get his family, bring them down there. And then they'd stay in Florida, you know, in the summers, you know, because John L. Lewis was the kind of man--and candidly, that man's work ethic has affected me in terms of how I look at work, all of my family, who has a dedicated, hard working, positive, upbeat man. The other thing he did was, he was a deacon in his church. And his church was Oakland Street--or Oakland Baptist Church which is right at the intersection of Seminary and Quaker Lane, right next to T. C. Williams High School. That's the church my mother grew up in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother basically was a domestic, stayed at home, took care of the family at home, took in laundry and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that's quite a story. And I think your brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] was telling us that there's no relationship biologically that he knew of between John L. Lewis and James Lewis, your grandfather. Speaker 2: Right. The dedication, though, that the two of them had and love that they had for one another is very apparent. My grandfather, I can still remember him talking about--when I was a little boy, just how much he respected John L. Lewis. And John L. Lewis would do things for him, and sometimes they'd be small, but, you know, to him they were significant. Speaker 1: Right, because John L. Lewis, basically, is the grandfather of the unions-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --in this country for the most part. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah, and, so-- Speaker 2: Matter of fact, when my grandfather died, the thing I will, the only things I will always remember is, this is a man came from incredibly humble beginnings, that was a chauffeur all his life, and when he was being eulogized, there were like two or three former presidents of the United Mine Workers sitting in that church. And it just goes to how much that man touched people's lives. So it doesn't, you know, the lesson for me was, it doesn't matter where you're at, you can affect people's lives by your attitude and by your dedication to what you do. Speaker 1: That's right. Story_ID: 36336 Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks] say about growing up? Did she, I mean what did you learn from her about what it was like to grow up during her time-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in Alexandria? Speaker 2: So, my mother grew up in, you know, segregated Alexandria [Virginia], went to Parker Gray High School, which doesn't exist anymore. Parker Gray was one of the high schools that ended up being a feeder school that ended up becoming what is now T. C. Williams [High School]. The famous movie, 'Remember the Titans' was about several high school, black high schools coming together to go to the, intermingle with the white high school, T. C. Williams. And Parker Gray, and I think it was Hammond High School combined, and then that high school then went to T. C. Williams. So that's where she went to school. By the way, that group of people are still to this day, they stay in touch with each other, these original Alexandrians. She, my parents, my mother talked about the fact that--matter of fact, my daughter, one of my daughters actually got a partial college scholarship from the Parker Gray alumni. I mean that, the legacy just continues. They continue, that group--it's not a big group of people. But they wanna continue to give back to the next generation. So they created scholarships. And, you know, people have to apply for 'em, and one of my daughters, my youngest daughter actually received one of those, which is very touching to me and my grandparents--or my parents to see that. Speaker 1: That's a great story. Speaker 2: The problem they obviously had was, they had to travel long distances to do anything. My mother was a very accomplished athlete. She was a great basketball player. But for her to play basketball, they only played against other black schools. They had to travel all the way down to, you know--when you think about it now, you may travel around just a few miles to another school within your district. And back then, they might have to travel all the way out to Warrenton [Virginia]. They might have to travel all the way out to, you know, travel to Manassas [Virginia] or Fredericksburg [Virginia], just in order to compete with schools. They always had, we've all heard about "separate but equal." Of course, it was nothing equal about it. And I remember her telling me, even recently that she never had a textbook that had a cover on it the entire time she was in high school because everything she got was a hand down, hand-me-down that came from the schools of the white majority kids after they were done with it. She never had a textbook that didn't have writing in it, you know, from where kids were taking notes and things of that nature. So that's the experience that she had. She, but, you know, her--she grew up in the church. As I told you, my grandfather [James Lewis, Jr.] was a deacon, so very rooted in church. She played the piano in the church. So my grandfather had her and her siblings all very involved in the activities that occurred in the church. They were really strict on her about dating when she was growing up. You know, I can recall her telling me about how they were just ruthless because, unfortunately, well, one of the plights that we are still seeing, especially in some of our underserved communities, around here even, is, you know, youth getting pregnant, having babies, not having a--and then their future sort of collapses. And my grandparents, neither one of them went to college. Matter of fact, I don't think either one of them graduated from high school. And, but they were determined to make sure that they created an opportunity for their kids. So they were very strict and strong on the power of education. And I think they saw the only way you're gonna, you know, break the cycle, is through education. And so my mother is the oldest of her siblings, and so she went off to Virginia State College, and, you know, graduated in four years, met my father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] while she was down there. And the rest is history, as they say. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your mother major in at Virginia State? Speaker 2: She's an education major. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And throughout her life, she was, she has taught school, generally, elementary school throughout her life. Story_ID: 36337 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna go to your father's side, and then we'll put 'em together. Can you give us your father's full name and it's the same as yours, right? Speaker 2: Leo Austin Brooks [also a HistoryMaker]. Speaker 1: Senior. Speaker 2: Senior. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is 9 August, 1932. Speaker 1: Okay, and what can you tell us--he was born in-- Speaker 2: He was born in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. Speaker 1: Okay. But he was raised in-- Speaker 2: He was raised basically in what we now know as Del Ray [Virginia], right in, you know, northern side of, the southern side of--well, by Four Mile Run, just South of Four Mill Run, off of Gleebrook (road? ph.). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What can you tell us about-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Avenue, specifically. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I'm sorry. I stepped on it while you were talking about it-- Speaker 2: No, that's all right. Speaker 1: --what avenue did you say it was? Speaker 2: They lived, the vast majority of their life growing up on a street called Elbert Avenue-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which is in, like I said, the Delray area of Alexandria. And it is sort of near where the railroad yard, what used to be the railroad yard, is in Alexandria. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your father's side? How far back can you trace his side of the family? Speaker 2: You know, actually, it's harder to trace him, at least my knowledge of him. So my, I knew my grandfather. I can't on my grandmother's side. On my grandfather's side, my grandfather, Houston George Brooks, grew up as, doing work, like he was a painter. He did carpentry work. He, his father, Pap, you know, I should know Pap's first name, but I've always known him as Pap, my great grandfather, was actually a vaudevillian. And in addition to that, because obviously, that was not something could sustain yourself on for life. He again did things like painting and carpentry and things of that nature, handyman kinds of work. Story_ID: 36338 Speaker 1: Now, what kind of act did he [Brooks' paternal great-grandfather, "Pap," who was a vaudevillian] have? Speaker 2: You know, I believe it was, he was a musician, played the trombone if I'm not mistaken, which, and that permeated throughout my family. My father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] was, for example, and I (unclear) know where I get that, but my father was a music major in college, you know. And that's an extension of that passing down, I'm sure, from my, his grandfather, my great grandfather. Speaker 1: Right, and a trombone player too. Speaker 2: And a trombone player, exactly, as was my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] a trombone player. I was a trumpet player. Speaker 1: All right, all right. So your mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks] plays the piano-- Speaker 2: Mother plays the piano, right. So, you know, matter of fact, we talked about the Quander reunion earlier. I can recall vividly, as a little boy, having a little trio, my dad and my brother on trombone, me on a trumpet playing an old hymn, "Rise Up Oh Men of God." I can still hear it because my dad like, was--drilled us for weeks practicing this song. You know, I was probably fifth grade, in preparation to play at the Quander Reunion. I can still remember it. Speaker 1: "Rise Up Oh Men of God"-- Speaker 2: "Rise Up Oh Men of God," that was the song we played. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so-- Speaker 2: At the Quander Reunion. Story_ID: 36339 Speaker 1: Okay, so Pap [Brooks' paternal great-grandfather] was a vaudevillian, and-- Speaker 2: Pap was a vaudevillian. Speaker 1: And, well, what else about Pap? Speaker 2: You know, I know he and my grandfather [Houston George Brooks], as I know it, had an on and off relationship, you know. It wasn't what I would call the traditional full, loving relationship. I think it was strained at times. I know that my grandfather was partly raised by somebody that wasn't his mother or father, a Ms. White. And she's buried in the southern part of Alexandria [Virginia]. I don't know much about Ms. White, but I know, I know that was somebody who was an influence in his life, that helped raise him. One of these kind of things where somebody kind of takes in the kid that's, you know, doesn't have somebody to raise 'em. That's how my grandfather was raised as a young boy. He grew doing this handy work kind of thing, the carpentry and the painting, and then he end up forming his own business and doing that. And that's what his, he did with his children as well. And then he, again, God has played a significant role in our whole family's life, both sides. He then became a minister and was, and then that became his full-time vocation. And he used the painting business or whatever just to supplement his income, and wallpapering. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: He used to have a car. I still can remember the old car they had was just covered in splatters of paint, with a ladder. They used to have a ladder that they'd tie up on the roof of the car. I can't even describe what it was, but it was one of these old like, you know, 1950s vintage cars with a big metal or wooden ladder tied to the roof, tied on front and back, and, you know, just splatters of paint from where they had spilled paint or had the car parked too close to the house they were painting or where the paint can emptied or something or fell over while they were driving or whatever. But I can still remember that old car. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: They were one of the first people also to have indoor plumbing in their little neighborhood-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of people there. Story_ID: 36340 Speaker 1: Now, what did your father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] say about growing up in Del Ray [Virginia]? Speaker 2: So, I think he had a very fun childhood. He is one of five siblings. He had two older brothers, an older sister and then a younger brother. They all played together. They had--to this day he has friends who I know who live in his, lived in his neighborhood, grew up on his street that he still interacts with. You know, he's over eighty years old. And so I, much more seemed like fun kind of relationship. When he was a teenager, he used to tell me he used to go across the bridge over here from Roslyn [Virginia] and, you know, go play like in the clubs as a musician, in high school, you know. So he was not into athletics. He was into music. He was musician. My mom [Naomi Lewis Brooks] was more the athlete. He was more the musician growing up, you know, followed my grandfather around because as he was becoming a journeyman pastor as a young, young pastor, you know, he'd move from church to church as that, you know, churches might have a vacancy while they're trying to fill a permanent role. And maybe he would be there preaching. So my parents grew, well, my dad grew up being packed in the car with his siblings and driving out to some church. Some of 'em are, you know, as far down as Frederick [Virginia] and out in Warrenton [Virginia], and the one out in Leesburg [Virginia], are churches where he was, where he pastored. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Same kind of experience in terms of racial prejudice growing up, of not having the same things that others had in terms of, you know, books and things of that nature, very focused. And that's a common theme between both my mother and father's parents was they both saw, again, two people, my grandmother and my grandfather on my father's side, neither of them graduated from high school either. But they knew the importance of education, and they knew the importance of if we're gonna ever break the cycle and give--and have an opportunity, we gotta make sure our children go out and do that. And, you know, and if you know the history of my, the siblings of my--both, well, each of my parents and their siblings, I mean they're incredibly accomplished in terms of, you know, their academic accomplishments. Speaker 1: Right, there're several Ph.D.s and-- Speaker 2: Ph--yeah, exactly-- Speaker 1: --lawyers and-- Speaker 2: --so, you know, my father's older brother is a Ph.D. in chemistry. His next older brother was a--and taught at Rutgers [University]. The next one was a Ph.D. in theology or I think psychology, and was the dean of the School of Psychology at Andover Newton Seminary in Boston [Massachusetts]. His sister, Ph.D. in education, was a superintendent of Fairfax County Schools, one of the biggest school systems in the country. He's got an MBA in business from G.W. [George Washington University], in addition to going to Virginia State. And his little brother graduated from Norwich University, you know, the oldest military college or, you know, civilian military college, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program, in the nation in Vermont. So, you know, very--and a member of the State House of Representatives to this day in Vermont. Speaker 1: That's Francis. Speaker 2: That's Francis, Francis. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: So, so very accomplished. And on my mother's side, my mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks] has a master's degree in education. Her sister, her next oldest sister has a Ph.D. in education, taught at George Mason [University]. Her brother has a master's degree in, I believe it's education, was a pro basketball coach for the Mystics and to this day still, is assistant coach for the LA Sparks, women's pro basketball. My mother's youngest sister had a, has an MBA [master's in business administration] in counseling--or not MBA, but has a master's in counseling and was a counselor of prisons in, mostly up in Pennsylvania. And they have one other sister who did have some, had some mental challenges. She was bipolar, that didn't go to school. But all the rest of 'em, incredibly accomplished. Speaker 1: Yes, it's an incredible record there, you know. Story_ID: 36341 Speaker 1: So your father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] majored in music at Virginia State [College]? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: And there he met your mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks]? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Now, is there a-- Speaker 2: They knew each other in high school, but they didn't date. Speaker 1: Right, right, he was telling me that. That's at Parker Gray [High School; Virginia], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, at Parker Gray, right. Speaker 1: And, well, what is the story they tell of how they got together at Virginia State? Speaker 2: You know, I should know that. I should know that. That's my parents. I don't even know how they, when and how they met. I know that they dated for two years. I know that after my dad was, my dad was the Class of 1954. My mom was the Class of 1955. So my dad was a, commissioned as a quartermaster officer, logistician. The headquarters for the Quartermaster School was located right next to Virginia State. And so they were focused on making sure that my mother got her degree. And so after they did not get married, although they were engaged while they were in school, they waited--my dad was basically assigned, you know, five miles away from where she was in school. And they, you know, as soon as they graduated, they got married. Story_ID: 36342 Speaker 1: --Just talking about your mother's [Naomi Lewis Brooks] brother-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Jimmy, yeah. Speaker 1: --being a basketball player. Speaker 2: Oh, he was, he was really good. I mean, you know, when he went off to West Virginia, first of all, it was like one of the blacks, first blacks to go off to the University of West Virginia, okay, played for Bucky Waters [basketball coach] there. And then he, his love of basketball, you know, he stayed in basketball and became a--went into coaching, went with that coach. When that coach ended up going to Duke [University], so he went to Duke and was a coach for him down there at Duke, and then he just kept--went to several different colleges where he coached, ended up becoming a pro coach. Speaker 1: So this is Jimmy Lewis? Speaker 2: So that's Jimmy Lewis. And then so, I'll tell you a real interesting thing, make you proud. So, about a month ago, the City of Alexandria [Virginia] unveiled a wall that's the, Alexandria African American Hall of Fame. And they inducted in this first group of people in the Hall of Fame, about, I'd say maybe thirty people. And these are Alexandrians that have made a significant difference in the world that are African American. And out of those thirty people up there, you know, and this spanning time, three of them were my relatives. My father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker], my father's older sister, who's the Fairfax County School superintendent, and my brother, Jimmy, for athletics. So, and in fact, they had one, they had one of the honorees speak for all of them at, you know, to represent them. And the one that they had, that they chose to do that was my Aunt Nellie Quander. And so she just, standing ovation for about four minutes, eighty-three [years old], as spry as she can be. Speaker 1: Okay, so your Uncle Jimmy Lewis was, now, this is--I was just pointing out, I guess, on the side that Alexandria is also the home of Earl Lloyd [also a HistoryMaker] who was the first black-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --basketball player to actually play in an NBA [National Basketball Association] game. Speaker 2: Right, and he was inducted too. Speaker 1: Right, (laughter) okay. Speaker 2: You know, his family, yeah, he was represented too, right. Speaker 1: Right, right, and we've interviewed him. Story_ID: 36343 Speaker 1: Your folks [Naomi Lewis Brooks and Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] get married, and your father, you know, starts a career in the military. You know, he thought he was gonna be a musician-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, he starts a career in the military, which leads to him becoming a brigadier general and then--did he retire as a brigadier or-- Speaker 2: Okay, so the way that works is, you have to maintain, once you're promoted as a two-star general or as a general officer, you have to maintain three years in grade serving in that grade in order to keep that record, that title in retirement. So my dad was selected for major general. He did serve honorably as a major general for two years, but then he got this opportunity to serve as the managing director, city manager, of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And his parents [Evelyn Brooks and Houston George Brooks] were getting, you know, elderly. He didn't, they were talking about him going to Europe as an assignment. He had this great opportunity to work for the city. He enjoyed living in Philadelphia where he was assigned up there in his military capacity. And so just the cart--you know, the stars aligned, and he got--and he retired. So because he retired at two, you know, two years in grade, his official rank in, you know, in retirement is brigadier general, retired. But he was a two-star general. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 36344 Speaker 1: Now, your father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] was on assignment in Anchorage, Alaska when you were born, right? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I, well, not too much about Alaska. You know, my--both my parents [father and Naomi Lewis Brooks] were--my dad was assigned to the 23rd Infantry Battle Group. Back then if you were assigned to what I will call a service, a combat service support kind of organization like quartermaster or logistician, very often, they would take those new officers, and they would actually give them duties in, say, a combat unit, infantry unit or Army unit. And you do that for, say, your first couple of years, and then you have some kind of understanding of the kinds of people you're gonna support when you get older. Well, my dad did that. So he was an infantry platoon leader and company executive officer in the 23rd Infantry Battle Group in Alaska. And then, so where I was born actually at Elmendorf Air Force Base in Anchorage. I don't recall it, although I've seen lots of pictures (laughter), you know, about standing in front of an igloo or having a moose come and eat out of the trash can in the backyard, which is, when you think about it, for my, both of my parents who, I mean, you know, they never traveled far in their life at that point. Little, a couple of kids from Alexandria, Virginia going all the way up to Alaska, and serving up there was quite a trek, quite an adventure for 'em. Speaker 1: Yeah, he got there before Alaska became a state. Speaker 2: I was born in Alaska before it was state. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a U.S. territory when I was born. I think my--it was a state when my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] was born. Story_ID: 36345 Speaker 1: Tell us about, you have a younger brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] and a sister, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you're the oldest of the-- Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of the three. I was born, as we know, 15 August, 1957. My brother is fifteen months younger than me. He was born in October, October 24, 1958. And then we have a sister that is six younger--six years younger than me, Marquita Karen Brooks. Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell Marquita? Speaker 2: M-A-R-Q-U-I-T-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Middle name, Karen, K-A-R-E-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and she's an attorney, right? Speaker 2: She's an attorney for a firm called O'Melveny & Myers, big law firm. Speaker 1: Okay, and your brother just made four-star General? Speaker 2: My brother made four-star. You know, I graduated from West Point [United States Military Academy] in 1979, you'll--I know we'll talk about that later. He graduated a year behind me in 1980. And now he, on two--on 2 July, you know, he was promoted to general, four star. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36346 Speaker 1: All right, now, you grew up in a variety of places-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and I know your brother's [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] first memory was of Xenia, Ohio. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is that your first-- Speaker 2: It is, it is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Xenia's my first recollection. So my father [Leo Brooks, Sr; also a HistoryMaker] was assigned after Alaska to Xenia, Ohio where he was an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] instructor at Central State University. And I can recall living there pretty vividly, actually. Speaker 1: So this is like 19--you're about how old at this point? Speaker 2: Probably about three. Speaker 1: So this about 1960 then? Speaker 2: About that, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so Xenia, I was just pointing out--I don't know if you'd have been aware of it at the time. You probably weren't, but, you know, Xenia's got a lot of history in terms of black officers. Speaker 2: No, I don't know that. I did not know that. Speaker 1: You didn't, okay. Yeah, Martin Delaney is buried there like four miles from Wilberforce [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: He was the highest ranking officer in the [American] Civil War. Colonel Charles Young, you know, of which-- Speaker 2: A West Point [United States Military Academy] graduate. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he's, his house is right there on 42 [Route 42], you know. Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that. Speaker 1: And, of course, he was a mentor to Benjamin O. Davis who was also, you know, was in charge ROTC at Central State [University] at one time too. So, this is--and then your father's there, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And you future generals are there (laughter). Speaker 2: We were there, as (unclear) kids (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So it's a lot of history. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It may be even more, but that's pretty good, you know, I would say so. That's a historic place in a lot of ways. So, what are your memories of Xenia? Do you-- Speaker 2: Well, I remember several things. One, one of my favorite pictures--my parents [father, and mother, Naomi Lewis Brooks] may have it, is a picture of my brother and I sitting up on a wall. And it's either--my dad's an Alpha [Phi Alpha; fraternity], and it was like an Alpha symbol [cough], excuse me, an Alpha symbol on the wall. And we were like sitting up next to it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can recall playing in the woods. Where we lived, there were woods right behind our house. My brother and I, you know, I can tell you one of the things that's very interesting. As we grew up, we spent a lot of time playing outside and playing in the woods. We were not, we didn't grow up sitting in front of television. We grew up doing, in a very active way. So I played in the woods. I can recall the time my brother went next door. My neighbor had his lawnmower sitting there with a gas can on top of it. And my brother, Vincent, drank gasoline out of gas can. And then rushing him to the hospital to pump his stomach, I can remember--I vividly remember that. I remember one time there was a, we had a storm door, and the storm door had, the bottom half of it, a quarter of it was metal. And the upper parts were glass. And I can recall running like a lot of little kids would do, to go outside, and normally, I would just hit the latch, put my shoulder against it, push, go out the door, and was going too fast. I went to the latch. I missed. I hit the shoulder to the glass and I was a little kid and then I went right through the glass, went completely through the glass, landed outside on the back stoop, concrete stoop, barely got a scratch, you know. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I think about that 'cause I had a couple other really close scrapes in life where, you know, it's like God had something for me to do. Story_ID: 36347 Speaker 1: Did you live in the village of Wilberforce [Ohio] there near the school or did you live in Xenia [Ohio], itself? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I don't remember. We lived in a little brown house on the, that was on a dead-end street. That's what I remember. I don't, I'm not sure that was. Speaker 1: You don't know if that was on the campus of [Central State University]-- Speaker 2: It was not on the campus. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It was not on the campus. Speaker 1: So it might have been in Xenia. Speaker 2: And I remember also, you know--that's my first recollection of doing things like preschool, you know, daycare kinds of things because my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] was teaching, and my mom [Naomi Lewis Brooks] was doing something. I think she was either going to school or teaching or--she wouldn't have been teaching. I'm not sure what she was doing during that time period to be honest with you. But I can remember being there in the afternoons a lot or in the mornings, and then being picked up in the afternoon. It's funny the things you remember. I remember crackers, always looking forward to getting saltine crackers and an orange drink in the afternoon at this daycare where I was staying. Speaker 1: Okay, nutritious food (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, there you go. Speaker 1: All right, so how long were you there in Xenia? Speaker 2: I believe they were there for two years. Story_ID: 36348 Speaker 1: Then I recall, I recall going from there [Xenia, Ohio] to Arlington [Virginia]. My dad went to Vietnam [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker], and I have very--there are certain memories that I have about that, that are really strong. You know, my dad went to Vietnam before there was any major troop buildup. He was one of the initial advisors-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Vietnam. So I was in first grade when he was in Vietnam at that time. And so, and there were several monumental things that happened. We lived in Arlington. We lived up on top of a hill. And from the things that stick out in my mind were my dad was there when President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated. And I can recall vividly watching the ceremony on TV, the funeral, seeing the missing man formation fly over Arlington National Cemetery and hear the jets going over my house at the same time because we lived that close to it, almost simultaneous and running outside, and looking up and seeing the jets fly over. I remember, it was during that time also, I'm not sure which flight--but that was a big initial time for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. And I can remember watching several space flights go up, you know, during that particular time. I don't know if it's, when the first--I don't know how many years straight, but I can recall vividly watching that and being just mesmerized by that. And to now think I'm, you know, a senior leader in a company that actually is responsible for manned space flight, pretty awesome. Speaker 2: Yeah, the first, yeah, do you remember the seven astronauts, initial astronauts in those days. Speaker 1: Gus Grissom and, you know, yeah, exactly. Speaker 2: Alan Shepard. Speaker 1: Alan Shepard. Matter of fact, look up on my wall up there, you see a picture with me, John Glenn and Alan Shepard right there--or not Alan Shepard. That's Scott Carpenter. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Me, Scott Carpenter and John Glenn right there, where I actually got to host them at an event that Boeing was sponsoring. Speaker 2: Okay, so you spent a, from what I understand, you spent a nice portion of your childhood at Arlington, around your-- Speaker 1: Arlington, Alexandria area. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, it's funny. So one of the things I'll never forget is, we were--my sister [Marquita Karen Brooks] was born when we were living there, in Arlington. So one of the things I remember, and my dad was in Vietnam, my mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks] was having a hard time with us, my brother [Vincent Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] and I 'cause we were acting up for her. My grandfather, my paternal grandfather, Houston George Brooks, came one day and picked us up. And this is a strong Christian man, a minister. And he put me and my brother in the front seat of the car, took us for a drive. And my grandfather said to us (laughter), he goes, while we're driving along, he goes, "Boys, you've been giving your mother a hard time. And I'm not gonna put up with it. If I hear you ever--if I hear about you ever doing it again, I'm a shake the crap out of you." And he didn't say "crap." (laughter) And so I mean, I mean I, just to have my grandfather say that to me was definitely an eye-opening experience. Story_ID: 36349 Speaker 1: But we lived there [Arlington, Virginia], then my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] came back from Vietnam, and then we moved to--that's where I went, again, to first grade. Then we moved to Baltimore, Maryland. My dad was stationed at what was then, Fort Holabird, which doesn't exist anymore. And he was doing things to support the Vietnam War, again, in the very early stages, but before there were a lot of ground troops over there, based on his duties, having been over there as a advisor earlier. And I recall that. We lived in Lincoln Park, and I have definitely, that's where I really started to have, you know, have some really good friendships with people in the neighborhood. That's where I started, you know, I can--played a lot more outside in the woods, again, we lived near a park, spent a lot of time out in the woods as a youth, while we lived there, in third grade. We were only there for a year, and then we picked up from there, and we moved to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. My dad was in the Command and General Staff College [CGSC]. That was a very interesting experience for me because when we lived, when we lived in Xenia, Ohio, lived in generally an all-black neighborhood, as I recall. When we lived in Arlington [Virginia], we lived in an all-black neighborhood 'cause you had to. And when we lived in Baltimore, we lived in primarily a black neighborhood. There was a few, but it was primarily a black neighborhood. But when we moved to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas--now, think about this. This is the first time--my parents [father and mother, Naomi Lewis Brooks] really kind of made an effort. They didn't want us to grow up just on military bases. We, they always chose to live in the community instead of trying to live on post all the time. And so when we moved to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, you know, the military is the most integrated place there is. And so now, I'm living in a neighborhood where I, it's the first time in my life where I was really a minority, you know, and--because there were very few, at that time--well, it's not all that much better now--but, you know, where there are a lot of African Americans that were attending the Command and General Staff College, which was generally for majors in the United States Army. So my dad was selected as a resident student. He was obviously doing really well, and so I grew up with people there. And what I learned was, I really learned then--I did not, never looked at color. I never, I grew up not looking at color unless somebody made me. So I didn't look at things, like I had barriers in front of me. I assumed I didn't have barriers, unless somebody made me, which, you know, I had repeated cases of that in my life, you know. Or my parents would make sure I didn't forget that there--they existed. But, in general, I operated like I didn't have barriers, in terms of who I played with, what I did, the kind of sports I chose to participate in, the classes I took. I operated like, you know, it's like the old, 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner' movie, one of the famous lines in there that I--with Spencer Tracy and Sidney Poitier, you know, Sidney Poitier is talking to his father. And the father's telling him, you know, you can't date this white woman. And they were having an argument about it, and he, Sidney Poitier saying, why not? And in essence, what Sidney Poitier says, "you see me as a black man. I just see me as a man," you know, in terms of, I don't--I'm not allowing barriers to be imposed on me because of the color of my skin, is the essence of what he's trying to say in that. That's what, I operated. Speaker 2: Okay, and that movie actually came out when you were ten [years old; 1967]. Speaker 1: Yeah, was that--I don't know what year it was, but I know it's old with Spencer Tracy. Speaker 2: '67 [1967], '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You were about, you're nine or ten. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 36350 Speaker 1: But, now, do you remember the assassination of Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Okay, so, we were living in Bryn Mawr Park, Virginia. So this is after my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] came back from the Command and General Staff College [CGSC] at Fort Leavenworth [Kansas] that year. We moved back to Alexandria [Virginia]. We moved to 6320 Phyllis Lane in Bryn Mawr Park, which is off of Edsel (ph.) Road, in Alexandria [Virginia]. And I'm building a watch on you here, but my, the thing I remember about that, we were the first black family to live in that neighborhood. And I don't know if my--if you heard this from my father, but it was, you know, the way he, just the way he got that house is they didn't realize he was black until it was too late. He didn't get it through a real estate agent. I think he worked it through the Pentagon or something to, a direct buy from a previous owner that happened to be military. So I had good friends there. I had a wonderful experience there, but I also had a cross burned in my yard. And I was there, fifth grade, sixth grade, seventh grade--well, I was there fifth grade through my sophomore year of high school. And then I moved just across the road to another place, you know, in that house. And my dad went to Vietnam again, came back several times. Story_ID: 36351 Speaker 1: But when Martin Luther King [Jr.], I can still recall it [his assassination in 1968], you know, because there were all these riots, 14th Street riots, down in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia]. I can remember getting in the car with my family and driving down and seeing it, you know, the aftermath of it, seeing the stores burnt out, seeing the plywood put up over the glass and then spray paint said "Soul Brother" on it. That's what people would put on there to try to tell them this is a black-owned establishment, don't destroy it. Sometimes they did obey that, and most of the time they didn't. So it was a really tumultuous time. I remember how it affected me in school because generally speaking, you know, when I went to that, the--I went to Bryn Mawr Park Elementary School. I went to Oliver Wendell Holmes Intermediate School. Generally, speaking, real small number of black kids, mostly white people in those two schools. And, generally, everybody would--got along well there. But when things like that happened, it just really, just raises awareness of the, the issues that still exists in our society, the disharmony. It was very disturbing as a young kid who had, who was operating as if color doesn't matter, to have that happen, and then that's a shocker. Yes, it does, you know. So that's what, I do remember that vividly. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so-- Speaker 1: So that was--was that '68 [1968], seven [1967]? Speaker 2: Yeah, 1968-- Speaker 1: '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: April 4th, yeah. Speaker 1: So, I was, yeah, so I would have been ten [years old], no eleven at the time. So that would have probably put me in about--I'm trying to remember if I was in fifth or sixth grade. Speaker 2: Probably fifth, yeah. Speaker 1: I definitely remember I was at Bryn Mawr Elementary School. Speaker 2: Did the school do anything special to commemorate? Speaker 1: I do not recall them doing anything special. Matter of fact, I'm sure they did not, in fact. Speaker 2: Now, that's an interesting thing, when you reflect back on that time that some, you know, in the black community, things were done that were special, and colleges, most colleges did something, you know, whether they were all white or mostly-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --they did something. But a lot of the schools, I mean the regular public schools or other institutions that didn't feel an affinity for-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Dr. King, didn't do anything. Speaker 1: I did not, I don't recall anything of that magnitude, anything being done of any kind of significance, other than people just being--I can recall everybody being worried, black community and white community, that, you know, that, man, I hope, I mean here's this man that was really making a difference and galvanizing people in a really positive way and, and getting international support for the changes he was making and causing the president of the United States to pay attention to the agenda that he was advocating for, which was equal rights. And, in fact, my Aunt Nellie, the one I told you about, my father's older sister who was inducted into the African American Hall of Fame for Alexandria, she was at the famous speech down there on the Mall. She was there. She took my two cousins and she knew it was something important she had to be at. Speaker 2: The 1963 March on Washington speech? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, and, I mean so, I mean I still, I remember her--she actually talked about that in her presentation, in her remarks at the Hall of Fame thing, about how important that was and to be there and be part of that. But, yeah, I--that was a really tragic day. Story_ID: 36352 Speaker 1: When you think about the early days of growing up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: One of the sights--one of the sounds is my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] whistling. My dad was a, is a man that loves using his hands. My brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker], my sister [Marquita Karen Brooks] and I, all of us know how to use a toolbox. We know how to use tools. We're all handy. I mean it comes down from my father's father [Houston George Brooks]. I told you he was a carpenter and painter and as was his father. And so, my dad loved doing things himself, a wood project, making a picnic table. I can recall him making a picnic table and painting, and I can still hear him whistling because when he was enjoying something and maybe he was in solitude working on it in the backyard with his tools. And he was in his own element, he would whistle, and he'd just be whistling a tune out there, and I can still hear him doing that. I can, my mother [Naomi Lewis Brooks] always made a mean macaroni and cheese. I could smell her macaroni and cheese. I can smell my grandmother Brooks [Evelyn Brooks], my father's mother, my grandmother, made the most incredible apple pie with cinnamon, I mean just unbelievable. I can recall going fishing a lot. My dad used to take my brother and I, especially fishing. We'd fish the Potomac [River], we fished the Chesapeake Bay. It's something he grew up doing, and it's something that we did a lot too, growing up fishing on the water. Story_ID: 36668 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about sights and sounds and smells of growing up. So we've covered a lot of places. One thing your brother [Vincent Brooks, also a HistoryMaker] emphasized was that, is the proximity to Alexandria [Virginia] and all the relatives in that part of Virginia that you had access to growing up. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, that's well said. I mean another one of the things I--it's still to this day. We are a very supportive and tight family. We have always had family around, and now that we've gotten older, family will go to support another family member when there's something to celebrate or something to support in mourning or whatever. And so you're right. I can recall, you know, going to these Quander reunions and just having a ton of relatives around, going to my--on my father's [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] side, going, we would go down to my Aunt Nellie's house. They had a house with a lot of land around it down off of Route 1. And in the summertime, we'd have, all my father's siblings, all their children and just have the best time with the cookout and food and potato salad and fried chicken and hamburgers and I--that is some of the best times I've ever had now that I think back about that. Those, those kinds of family focused events as a young kid. We used to, I have a cousin who is a year older than me, who lives in Alexandria and very often we would, in the summer, my brother and I would go stay at his house for a week. And then he'd come stay at our house for a week, and we'd get into all kinds of mischief, doing stuff together as kids. And so I have real fond memories of that. And we would take 45 records, have a stack of 45 records. We'd each have a hair brush in our hand, and would be acting like we're 'The Temptations' singing to 45 records down in the basement of his house. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fond memories of that. Story_ID: 36669 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in school, I mean did you like school? Speaker 2: I always enjoyed school. I had, you know--the first teacher that I had that really had a very significant impact on me was a lady by the name of Adeline Waters. And Ms. Waters was at Bryn Mawr Elementary School [Bryn Mawr Park, Virginia]. She taught me fifth grade. She was very hard on me. I probably spent as much time standing in the hallway being punished as I spent sitting in the classroom. And I, and what I'll never forget about it, one time I (laughter), I had to go in the hallway for being--'cause I was sort of the class clown. And one day I was put in the hallway, and as I'm standing in the hallway, I look across the hall, there's my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] standing in the hallway from his class (laughter) at the same moment. But Ms. Waters, I actually used to have 'em, I actually found my report cards from when I was in, as far back as second grade. And my, I--you know, as an older student, high school student, junior high school student, I was a very good student, all As and Bs. All, and I ended up getting into West Point [United States Military Academy]. When I was in fifth grade, fourth, fifth grade, not the case. You know, I was a struggling student. I turned around in that time period, I think, because Adeline Waters gave me focus, gave me, you know, let me know I wasn't just--she wasn't gonna allow me not to live up to the potential that I had. Speaker 1: Now, what was going on in your family then 'cause your brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] told a similar story, that he was clowning around until maybe the same age. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, so I think that a couple of things. So my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] had been in Vietnam one year. Then he was in school a year. Now, we're coming there. So, you know, so he was gone a lot, you know. So my mom's [Naomi Lewis Brooks] having to do all this by herself. She's a teacher. So we were latch-key kids, you know. So we're kind of doing our own homework on our own a little bit there during that time period. She certainly would come home and help, but, you know, we were kind of growing up in the afternoon on our own. The, my sister [Marquita Karen Brooks] would--my mom would take my sister with her when she went to teach, leave her at a place where, after her little preschool or whatever it was. Then, you know, they turned it into a daycare thing until she could bring her home. And then, but one, that school, I mean, and that particular teacher, they would--she was just very focused on that. And here's the, here's just a providential thing that happened. So I loathed Ms. Waters 'cause she was so hard on me, you know. I mean I was like, oh, God, I can't, thank God, I'm finally done with fifth grade. I go back, my sixth grade year. Ms. Waters has changed grades from fifth to sixth grade, and I got her again. And my mom will tell you this story. I actually cried 'cause I was gonna have to spend another year with Ms. Waters. But Ms. Waters got me in shape. And-- Speaker 1: Did you realize that at the time, you know? Speaker 2: No, no-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was, that was somebody being mean (laughter). But, but it, in reflection, by the time I was say, maybe eighth [grade], I did realize it. But that lady had a, she was a really strong teacher. She's deceased now, but really strong teacher, strong influence who was not gonna allow me--I like to think that my class clown kind of attitude, you know, if you think about it, so I kind of put it on my father's side, right. So I got a vaudevillian great grandfather ["Pap"; Henry Brooks]. I got a grandfather [Houston George Brooks] who's a preacher, so I'm not saying that's a class clown, but that's somebody who is comfortable talking and being around people, all right, and I got my father who is a military guy--his nickname by the way when he was in college was "Rev," you know, 'cause, you know, so he was always a gregarious, outgoing person, you know. So I mean I think that just flowed to me and my brother in terms of how, the kind of way we interacted with people. And, you know, we liked to get attention in the classroom, I guess, a little bit too much. But, but that was a very, very important time for me in terms of getting focused. Story_ID: 36670 Speaker 1: Now, then my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] was in--when I was in seventh grade, let's see, it was either seventh or eighth grade--I'm getting the years mixed up. But my dad was either there in the Pentagon or he had gone to Vietnam again. And the thing I remember about that time period, that's Oliver Wendell Holmes Intermediate School, was now I'm seeing the height of Vietnam. We're at the height of Vietnam now. This is probably '69 [1969], something like that and listening to all the kids who were just kind of going along with all the protests and things of that nature. They're formative ages, 'cause they're young, pre-teens, and I know my father's over there, you know. And these people are basically opposing what my dad is doing, which I remember the struggle of--internally, of dealing with that. It was sort of in this time period too when I got into athletics. Like, I can recall when I was, I--my very first organized athletic activity was T-Ball in Bryn Mawr Park [Elementary School] in fifth grade. I was forced to do it. I didn't wanna do it because I loved playing out in the woods and doing individual things. Fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth grade, end up playing baseball, end up playing football in youth leagues. I can recall really enjoying both of those sports, baseball and football, football more than baseball. And then when I went to high school, then, so it was natural for me. I wanted to play football. Speaker 2: Okay, so did you have an idol in football? I mean anybody that was a pro or-- Speaker 1: Absolutely, my idol, unquestionably, was Larry Brown, Number 43, Washington Redskins, running back. I was a running, you know, when I was in high school [Thomas Jefferson High School], I was a running back. I wore Number 43. I, I had Larry Brown's poster over my bed in my room, big three foot by four foot poster. And as an adult, matter of fact, as a vice president in Boeing, I actually hosted, co-hosted a golf tournament, and Larry Brown was playing in it. And so at the end of the golf tournament, which is a fun thing to support D.C. [District of Columbia] College, it's call D.C. College Access program which was what it was, and this organization provides scholarships to D.C. youth. And so a lot of D.C. former athletes help support that golf tournament, so celebrity golf tournament. Larry Brown was there. And I was making some remarks, and I told him, I said--in front of all these people, I said, Larry, you don't know it, but you and I have slept together (laughter) because, you know, his poster was above my bed. And he got the most bizarre look on his face, like okay, what--(laughter). What's that all about? Anyway, so I was a big Larry Brown fan. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember Larry Brown having a lot of determination. A couple of games, he just, he played through an injury or something and really was just-- Speaker 1: Well, the guy--and I really tried to, I wanted to try to emulate that guy on the football field. So if you ever look at highlight reels of him, he was just, what you call, reckless abandon. He just go after it hard. He would attack a linebacker that was twice his size and run right, try to run right through 'em. He'd, you know, he--one person couldn't tackle Larry Brown, you know. He, like you said, he was a tough running back, who, you know, could deal with, you know, fighting through adversary, pain. And he was so talented and gifted. So I always loved Larry Brown. Speaker 2: Okay, your father said you were a running back. So that's what you, you patterned yourself after Larry Brown. Speaker 1: Yeah, yep, absolutely. Speaker 2: And became pretty good. Speaker 1: Yep, so, in high school, I was a football player and I ran track. Those are the two sports I played. Actually, one year, I actually wrestled, my sophomore year. I, and I only did that because they were just starting indoor track in Northern Virginia. They didn't have it when I was a sophomore, so I wrestled, and then my junior year, I ran indoor track and outdoor track, plus the football, but-- Speaker 2: So this was--I'm sorry, this was the Jefferson High School? Speaker 1: This was Thomas Jefferson High School. Story_ID: 36671 Speaker 1: So I graduated, when I finished Oliver Holmes Junior High [Northern Virginia], that school fed into Thomas Jefferson High School which is now a big science and technology magnet school. At the time, it was a regular high school. And so I was, it was interesting. I, I can vividly recall my weights as I grew in size, which is kind of astounding when you think about it. When I was a freshman, I was ninety-nine pounds on the roster. And so I was a little light, tailback, but I was fast and played freshman football. Then moved up to the JV [junior varsity] towards the end of the season. And then the one story I'll tell about my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] that I will never forget was when I was a sophomore, I was playing JV football. And they were gonna move me up to the varsity. And I had a quiz in health, regular old quiz in health. It wasn't even worth a whole lot. My dad who came, who was in the Pentagon and came home from the Pentagon and something caught his attention, i.e., is that I had not done my homework or practiced for--or studied for this quiz. And he told me--this was a great honor for me to get elevated to the varsity from JV--and he told me I'm off the team. It was the last game of the season. I was being pulled, he was pulling me off the team because I did not have my priorities straight, that studying was more important than thinking only about this thing, wasn't gonna let me play. And I was devastated. I missed like one practice 'cause my, you know, when he said you're out. So I got mad about something. So I took the quiz, whenever it was given at school. I got a hundred [100]. I can remember calling him at work, saying I got a hundred on that quiz, and he said, okay, all right, well, maybe I overreacted. You can play. Well, but I've already missed a practice and everything, and I'm the little kid coming up, you know, so I--what they were gonna have me do which was return kick-offs and things of that nature, you know, I didn't get to do, but I got, you know, I got to get in for a few plays anyway. So, that was a traumatic thing for me when I was a sophomore. I, I'll never forget that. The, then as a junior, I was a running back and I became pretty accomplished then, was going well for the team, doing well as a running back, got mentioned in several news articles with, you know, and then my dad--one of the things I'll never forget is my father--and I don't wanna just talk about my dad because my mom [Naomi Lewis Brooks] was always supportive of me too, but my dad, as an [U.S.] Army officer, with all the things that they had to do, he missed one game in my four years of high school football. My parents, both of 'em, incredibly supportive of things that I did, and my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] too and my sister [Marquita Karen Brooks], right. So that was, my passion was football. Now, they were on me about, you know, the most important thing for you is grades, academics. But they knew that my passion was football. Story_ID: 36672 Speaker 1: And, and so the thing that devastated me then was is I found out in my junior year [at Thomas Jefferson High School, Northern Virgiia], towards the end of my junior year, spring, I'm looking forward to a senior year. I'm thinking about going to play [football] in college and doing some other things in that area. And my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] gets orders to go to Sacramento, California. And I also was a triple jumper and a high hurdler in track. I had placed fifth in the region, Northern Virginia region, in the triple jump, as a junior. I had won gold medals in AAU [Amateur Athletic Union], and I was really looking forward to, you know--most of the guys that were ahead of me were graduating. I was gonna be "the" man, you know, and then I had to move to California. I can remember vividly opposing that. And it was a big struggle in our family because, you know, one could make the argument, I had gone from fifth grade through my junior year of high school in the same spot, unheard of for a military kid, right. I grew up with all the same kids, fifth grade through my junior year at high school. And I said, I had friends whose parents were willing to let me stay with them to finish my senior year, which to me made sense. And I can remember that debate going on for a while and my dad saying, we're not gonna break up our family any faster than we have to. And so, you're going. And it ended up being a blessing in disguise because what ended up happening is, just like anything, right, I ended up going to Sacramento, California. There, the public schools were not very good academically, at least the one I would have gone to, which would have been Hiram Johnson High School. So the person my father was replacing recommended that we look at going to the local Jesuit High School, and a couple things happened out of that that were really important. So first thing that happened was is, the rumors started floating out to Jesuit High School, like I was a good football player. But I wasn't an All-American or anything of that nature, right, but the rumors were floating around out there like, hey, we got this All-American coming out here from Virginia, you know. So-- Speaker 2: So you-- Speaker 1: --so I came in with a, you know, good credentials as it were to play at their--the second thing that happened to me was, is when I was in Virginia, I was solely an offensive running back, you know. That's what I did. When I got to California, I--maybe initially because they thought I was, you know, this super hero or whatever, they were training me to play both ways. I was the outside linebacker and I was a running back, tailback. And the thing that I remember about that was, is in the end, I actually--I mean I spent all that time being a running back growing up. I loved being an outside linebacker so much more. It was so much fun. I enjoyed it, and actually won a big award for it, which, you know, it's still out there. I actually went out there as a brigadier general in the [U.S.] Army and spoke at that high school, and saw my--the award with my name on it, called "The Iron Man Award" for being the toughest, hardest hitter, right. Story_ID: 36673 Speaker 1: And so that was a, that was an interesting time to move out there at that phase of my life, to a, again, a very homogenous environment. There were, I think, three black people in my entire school [Jesuit High School, Sacramento, California], two of them being me and my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker], you know. I'm now being exposed to something I'd never been exposed to. For example, I grew up a Baptist. I'm going to a Catholic High School, so I'm going to Mass before football games and things like that. I'm learning about another faith that I had never really been exposed to. It was very eye opening, very enlightening for me. And it was a really good experience, and it was really good also in terms of, that was a college prep high school. Almost everybody that went to that high school came out of there and went to college. And the other thing that happened, at that high school is, it was a--just like a lot of big named parochial schools, they were, they used to dominate at sports. And so I went from Thomas Jefferson [High School, Northern Virginia], which was mediocre in sports. You know, we were, you know, we were mediocre in football as a team, to going out to there where, you know, you're playing in, you know, big games, things that count on a really good team out there, so both in track and in football. Story_ID: 36674 Speaker 1: So when you look back on your sports experiences in school, do you think, how do you think they influenced your life as a career military officer? Speaker 2: Oh, significantly. So, again, my primary sports were football and track. Football is a team sport. Nobody can do anything just by themselves. And the events I, the positions I played totally depended upon that, you know. I can't shoot a gap and go after somebody if a defensive tackle doesn't do what he's supposed to do to, you know, to--if I charge in to try to stop an option, I gotta count on a quarterback that's gonna come up behind me to take the pitch man if I go for the quarterback, all those kinds of things. I mean you learn to trust, depend upon your teammate. I learned out there, I'll tell you what, that was tough football in Northern California. And fighting through adversity, fight--you know, the summer, the blood, sweat and tears of working to becoming a champion. I mentioned to you that I had, I was in a program in Virginia which really wasn't all that good as a sports program. And in California, I was in a very good program. The difference in terms of the intensity of our commitment to win was totally different. Out there it was, you know, well, yeah, we're gonna win. It's just, you know, we're, we're honing our skills so we continue to maintain a winning tradition as opposed to in Virginia, it might have been, I hope we can win some, you know, this year. In track, it was more individual, you know. Again, I was a high--triple jumper. I was long jumper, and I was a high hurdler. And, you know, that's, that was my individual skill solely, and it's on display. You know, if I win, I win, and everybody sees it. If I come in last, everybody sees that. So, but again that total dedication of, you know, it wasn't just some skill in terms of can you catch or whatever. This is, I had to hone my body to be able to be, you know, either faster, have more endurance, have more strength, more power, in order to dominate whoever else I was gonna complete against in those sports, in those events. I've--sports were very important in my life, still are from that aspect. Story_ID: 36675 Speaker 1: What about coaches and such? I mean were they mentors or-- Speaker 2: So, so when I was in--I'll go back, if you don't mind, I'll go back a couple of coaches when I think of coaches. I had a coach when I was youth league. His name was Buddy. I don't even know what his last name was. But anyway, Buddy, when I was probably sixth grade, used to tell me that I wouldn't, I wouldn't amount to much. He was very negative. And I can always recall feeling down and like I couldn't, like you know, every--the world was on my shoulders and that I, you know, I'd never be successful because Buddy said I wouldn't be. And then something happened that was very interesting. So when I got into high school, I had this guy. He says, ah, you're not gonna make it, you know. When I got into high school, again, I was very fast, small, I was ninety-nine pounds [weight] when I started high school. By the time I was, in my second year, I can remember vividly, I was 126 [pounds]. As a junior, I was 152. As a senior, I was 165. So my senior year, I was 165 pounds (unclear). So I grew sixty-six pounds from my freshmen year football to my senior year football, in those four years. So anyway, I had this real negative experience with that guy. It wasn't reinforcing. And when I was at Thomas Jefferson [High School, Northern Virginia], I had a coach by the name of Rayburn, Coach Rayburn. Coach Rayburn was a good influence on me as a man. We weren't, wasn't, I won't say we had the best, wasn't the best coach, but he was a, he had a good influence on me in terms of being a good, decent human. Now, you're talking that time period, remember this is 1971-ish, '72 [1972] time period, a lot of racial strife. Some of that manifested itself in my high school a little bit. We had a small group of African American students, very, you know, maybe fifty, you know, out of a population of 1,000 or so. That group tended to sit together in the mess hall, I mean in the cafeteria or wherever, right. Well, I'm an athlete. So I'm sitting with my friends, you know, my teammates. I can recall vividly one time where my coach had heard a rumor that somebody had called me an ethnic slur, called me in and asked me. He says, hey, did someone call you a chocolate drop or something like that. That's exactly what he said. I can still hear him saying it. I go, Coach, what are you talking about? And what somebody had said was is, said, you're a reverse, says we got a reverse Oreo here. One white guy was on one side of me and one white guy was on the other side of me. And I'm black in the middle, and says, we got a reverse Oreo here. He heard that. That rumor got back to him and he was, you know, he wasn't having anything to do with that. So he was like really on, making sure we didn't have, you know, we were focused on team, individuals being collective as a group, not racial stuff. But so he was a decent influence as a human, not a great coach. Bob Seveari (ph.) was my coach in, when I was in Sacramento [California]. Speaker 1: At Jesuit. Speaker 2: At Jesuit, Jesuit High School. That's where I learned about being a winner. Story_ID: 36676 Speaker 1: And also my track coach and I'm drawing blanks on his name, but I'll tell you a story. My brother, Vince [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker], can fill you in on this 'cause he's the one that told me about this. So, I told you I was a triple jumper. I was a long jumper, and a high hurdler. Well, they were gonna have, they started to have the 330 intermediate hurdles. It was sort of a new event back then. Now, they got the 400s, but now it was 330s. And so my coach said to me, hey, I want you to run that. I said, I've never run that in my life. He goes, ah, it's just a regular dual meet, you know, between us and another school. But why don't you run it? And so, I mean that takes a lot of, you're basically running a quarter mile and jumping over, you know, a bunch of hurdles. So the thing I'll never forget about it was the two coaches were standing there in the infield of the track, near where I was. I was in Lane 1, and I started out, when the gun went off, I took off way too fast. And I made up the stagger on virtually everybody before I even got in the turn, you know, before I even got 200 yards. I came out of the turn, and my, the coach--one coach said to the other coach--my brother was there watching this 'cause he was on the track team too. He says, he's going too fast. He's going out too fast, and then the head coach said, but he's winning. And I ended up winning that meet, but the last two hurdles, I was like crawling, but I had made such a distance that as people started to close on me, you know, I mean I was able to get across the finish line, you know, and win even though, you know, I had done that. And so the next thing you know, I'm running that in the regionals (laughter), you know, that particular event. But, but-- Speaker 2: But you run it at a different pace (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, and starting out at a different pace. And then, you know, literally, what I recall is then is, 'cause I was brand new at it, but I did well in it, and I qualified to run in the regionals in that event. I just naturally fitted. It, and I'm a senior. So I didn't really get the prep for it. They would literally put a coach at about 190 yards out, and he'd say, you know, when I got near him in the race, he'd say, now, now, now, now, you know, telling me, now, accelerate, you know. He said, just keep pace with the pack when you get there, and then accelerate, you know. And so I could--that's how they trained me to be a 330 hurdler. Story_ID: 36362 Speaker 1: Now, what about academics? You say you kind of turns the corner, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in junior high school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And started making much better grades. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So were you taking the hard sciences in high school? Were you-- Speaker 2: So, in high school, I took the--I didn't really take a bunch of AP [advanced placement] courses that I recall in high school. But I then, but I started again, as a result of some of the work of Adeline Waters with me, and the realization instilled in me by my parents [Leo Brooks, Sr. and Naomi Lewis Brooks] that, hey, you know, if you're gonna go to a good college, you're gonna have to have some grade and having a bunch of Cs and Ds isn't gonna get it. And so I, it was really motivation partly, I would say of my parents instilling in me that, you know, all this stuff we did in elementary school doesn't count. It's a freebie. Once you start ninth grade and you start building your transcript for college, that counts. Okay, that, and so I don't think I ever got a C the entire time I was in high school. I don't recall getting a C, certainly not end grade, maybe, you know, a quarter in one thing, almost never. So I just really put my nose to the grindstone in terms of focusing on, on my eye on the prize. And my eye on the prize was being able to give myself the best possibility of going to a college I wanted to go to. You know, when I was in high school there in Virginia, you know, I wanted to go to Ohio State [University] 'cause I wanted to play football. You know, and back then, you know, everything was, Ohio State was national champions and everything was Ohio State, and that's where I wanted to go. Speaker 1: Was that the age of Archie Griffin and-- Speaker 2: That was before Archie Griffin. Speaker 1: Before Archie, okay, all right. Speaker 2: You know, and I just loved Ohio State, and my parents were Ohio residents at that time because when they moved to Xenia [Ohio] earlier, they kept that residency because they didn't have state tax or whatever. And, you know, I mean I was Ohio resident almost until I went to college. And so I focused on good, on getting my grades. I got, I did well in school. I always struggled--it's interesting, I always kind of was mediocre in math. Part of the reason I think I was mediocre in math then, and I ended up being, it ended up being a strong thing for me later in life. But it was because my head football coach was my math teacher. And I can recall, and this is in Virginia, when I was a junior, and when I should have been buckling down on my math work, I can recall vividly having my friends say to me, hey, get him talking about the game next week against Woodson. And if I were to say in the classroom to the head football coach who lived and breathed football, if I were to say to him, "Coach, how are we gonna defend against that Vere (ph.), you know, that Vere offense next week?" Instead of doing math, he'd be drawing, you know, football symbols on the board and we'd spend forty minutes talking about that and five minutes talking about, you know, trigonometry or whatever. So I literally was not well prepared. Then I went to Sacramento [California; Jesuit High School], and now we're talking about a really strong college prep program. I mean that's, it was just focused. And there, I mean those folks, they took a dull knife, okay, I was a good student. Again, I got all As and Bs, but I would say the rigor in that program was good, but it--in Virginia, but it wasn't top notch rigor. The Jesuits, that was, that was top-notch education, focused, and, you know, specificity and demand for excellence. And, you know, I excelled there. I just needed to be pushed. And very, very much that was an important thing for me, educationally. Story_ID: 36363 Speaker 1: I applied to West Point [United States Military Academy]. I applied to several other schools in Ohio because my parents [Leo Brooks, Sr. and Naomi Lewis Brooks] were Ohio residents. Speaker 2: I think Bowling Green was one. Speaker 1: Bowling Green, Bowling Green State University, Ohio University. I had a couple of colleges looking at me for football, Boise State [University], University of Hawaii, Rice [University], [United States] Air Force Academy, West Point, all were looking at me for football. So I had all those things kind of in the mix. I applied, so what is interesting is, I had a, I got accepted to West Point. And I, and when I did, my parents were just doing back flips, you know, like, ah, this awesome, this is great and everything. And I wasn't sure I was gonna go. I just wanted to apply--my dad said, why don't you just apply to see if you can get in. It was sort of like a measuring of how well you are academically compared to the rest of the nation. Speaker 2: So you weren't, it wasn't your childhood dream to be a general or be-- Speaker 1: Not then. Speaker 2: --in the military? Speaker 1: Not then, not when I was in my senior year [in high school]. And I also had, you gotta remember, I had the influence of--I'm going to a Jesuit High School in California, very liberal. And I can recall one of my teachers who was a good man that really liked me as a person, right. And he said to me--I can still remember this conversation. He goes, you're such a free spirit. You have such a wonderful soul and it's free, and it's open and you're engaging, and why do you wanna go to the military and have 'em put you in a box and make you constrained and rigid and was actively trying to get me not to do it. And I, I actually told 'em at one point that I'm gonna decline. And to this day, I'm not sure what happened, but I had, I mean I had said I think I'm gonna decline. Then after thinking about it a day, called 'em back, and said, hey, I don't wanna--I'm not gonna decline. And, you know, I still got my, you know, appointment. Speaker 2: What was the deciding factor? Speaker 1: I was thinking all that. So I had kind of decided for myself, I was thinking about some of these other places. I thought about Boise State serious, but I, you know, to me it was too isolated for me to go to Idaho, okay, and do that. But, you know, it has a good, even then, decent football program. University of Hawaii seemed exotic, but it was way too far away. I was very seriously thinking about Rice [University]. The Air Force Academy, one of their coaches actually came to my high school and so I was, I was very enamored with that because this guy came to my school and wanted to talk to me and told me he'd fly me out to the Air Force Academy to see the grounds. His name was Spike Holstrom (ph.). I still remember his name. And anyway, the, and my dad said, don't make any commitments, don't make any commitments. So I don't know he just wanted me to focus on West Point and (unclear). He said, don't make any commitments. And he says, let's get an Air Force--'cause there are two Air Force bases near where we lived in Sacramento. He says, let's get an Air Force guy, colonel, to tell you about what it's like to be a Air Force pilot because you wear glasses, and you're--and you can't be a command pilot. And that guy, whoever he got, basically told me, he says, you can go to the Air Force Academy, and you're gonna, you know, and you will graduate, and you'll great things, but you're gonna be a navigator or, you know, or something in the support side. And the people that run the Air Force are command pilots. And you can never be one because of your glasses. And, and so he said, so, instead of going to the school that is totally focused on creating pilots--at least how, it was explained to me, why would you do that. So, you know, so I chose not to do that. The West Point thing, West Point had somebody come see me too, two people actually. The track coach came to see me and another recruiter came to see me and came to my home. So I think that personal attention had something to do with it too, you know, that they really wanted me to, you know, come play football, run track there. Story_ID: 36364 Speaker 1: But in the end I didn't think--probably maybe because of Mr. Novak [at Jesuit High School], I didn't think I wanted my free spirit, as it were described, as it was described to me, to be, you know, contained 'cause I was enjoying myself as a senior in high school. And I did like my friends, and I did have solid friends, which is another story about my friendships there in one were strong than the ones I had with all the kids I grew up from fifth grade through junior high school. We can talk about that in a minute if you like. But the, the bottom line is, we had such--when I had an appointment, I said I'm gonna go to Bowling Green [State University]. It's in Ohio, it's in my home state. They wanted me to play football there too. It would just be easy, and, you know, I'd be playing at a level there, in a league that would be sort of along my capabilities of how I was as an athlete. And then the more I thought about it, my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker], you know, my father kind of influenced me a little bit. He goes, you know, I am not gonna--he always said, I'm not gonna try to influence you. And he really didn't. But one of the things, he did do what he's done all his life is, and that is make sure you understand the ramifications of your choices. And he says, okay, just make sure you understand what you're giving up, you know. And I thought about that a little bit, and then I kind of changed my mind and said, nah, I'm gonna go to West Point [United States Military Academy]. And so that was a, the best decision I ever made in my life. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so this is 1975? Speaker 1: 1975, June, 1975. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 36365 Speaker 1: So, now, did you graduate from high school [Jesuit High School, Sacramento, California] with honors, I mean from high school with honors? Speaker 2: I was, yes, okay. So I did graduate with honors, you know, from high school. I had, so I had my West Point [United States Military Academy] appointment. I had the, I was--in sports, I had the Iron Man Award, and then I was an honor student as well, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And I did, by that time, so once, so you could see an article--if you were to go back and research an article in the 'Sacramento Bee' about me, this was an interesting thing, I didn't know that I was gonna serve a lifetime, but I did have tremendous respect for what my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] did in the military and his example, right. And I, it was very comfortable with the military because I witnessed it all my life. And I, so the high school, the article I remember from high school about me going off to West Point, said, and when asked what he wants to be, he said he wanted to become an Airborne Infantry Officer, which is what I ended up becoming. And that was in, you know, 1975, before I even went. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so West Point, did your whole family go out to West Point with you? Speaker 2: That was (laughter), you know, I had been on one airplane in my entire life, and it was when I was an infant, so I don't even remember it, prior to that. And so my family took me, I mean here I'm going to this very scary thing going off to West Point. They pull up, and took me down to put me on the airplane. I flew, I guess, I think it was out of San Francisco [California], I flew out to--my parents put me on the plane, and I left everybody and went off by myself, flew out to Newark, New Jersey where my dad's oldest brother, Houston, picked me up to drive me up to West Point. I was scared to death. I still remember the plane. It was a terrible, bumpy ride or at least it seemed that way. The plane had to do a go-around when it came in to land 'cause I thought it was almost over, and it had to come back around and land again. So this was my flight in like, you know, 12, 13 years or 14 years, and I'm seventeen [years old]. And then my uncle on the drive from Newark to up there is about, you know, about an hour and ten minutes, hour and fifteen minutes, my uncle, as he's driving me up there, he had served in World War II at the end of the war, you know, as a private, you know. And my uncle would say, giving me all this counseling, "Now, let me tell you how to do this. Don't take any crap off those people," you know, that kind of stuff. So that was the kind of counsel I got from my uncle. So he drove me up, took me to where I got inducted, and dropped me off and left (laughter). I was on my own. Speaker 1: Now, is this your father's brother, the-- Speaker 2: That's my father's oldest brother. Speaker 1: Oh, the chemist? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: All right, all right, okay. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So he experienced what it was like in the old Army before it was integrated, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely, so he came in--he was drafted. I mean so, I mean here's a guy, I mean he's a Ph.D. He had a Ph.D. [degree]. He got drafted as a private as a Ph.D. I mean he had, I mean he was a, I think he even already had it or he was in his last phase of his doctoral work, and he got drafted (laughter). It was towards the end of the war. I wanna say it was like '44 [1944], '45 [1945]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36366 Speaker 1: All right, so, well, what was West Point [United States Military Academy] like? What was the initial reaction to West Point? Speaker 2: Completely overwhelming. I mean I'm an athlete. I know I can physically do anything all these other people could do. But the, and I'm used to team sports and things of that nature. But it was so overwhelming. Everything was, I wasn't used to the exact precision that they were demanding. I wasn't used to the total negative motivation that, back in those days, they would try to do to try to, you know, build your character, build your spine, right, in terms of yelling at you and making you hold your neck back and doing things of that nature. It was all games, but at--to the person going through it, you don't think it is. So one of the things I remember doing very, very, right away is, one you have to really bond close with your teammates, or you'll never get through it. Speaker 1: Now, this historically, has been, had been very difficult for blacks students at West Point-- Speaker 2: You bet. Speaker 1: --just recently, before the time that you arrived? Speaker 2: You bet, when I-- Speaker 1: Historically, the-- Speaker 2: When I was there, I mean obviously, there were numerous black graduates before me, but, you know, we're not talking large numbers. When I was there I think maybe there was eighty in the class of 4,000, I'm guessing, somewhere in that, somewhere in that neighborhood. And because young people can be abusive, when not always supervised, just like at night and things like that, there was stuff that was totally wrong, you know, that happened up there. And I mean, boy, it was really hard. And one of the things I did, I really grew my faith up there. I always grew up in the church. But I was more of a, you know, I mean I went, you know, I worshiped on Sunday, you know, with my family. I might have gone to Sunday School or something like that, you know. I wouldn't say I was totally into it, you know, in terms of being focused as a Christian. When I got there, you know, I mean I was looking for strength from anywhere, you know, and so I turned to church which was really good for me. And I met one of the most influential people in my life there, Chaplin Richard Camp, and Chaplin Camp was the associate, wasn't the head. He was the associate pastor up there for the Corps of Cadets. And that guy, I can recall him always being there to give encouragement. They would always be out in the field watching you train and things of that nature. I can recall getting in Bible studies there, you know, as a fresh--plebe, as a freshman there. I can recall the community putting their arms around me in that regard. And that was very helpful to get through that first year which was very hard. I, it was so hard, and to me, in essence, you know, I told you I went there to play football and run track. It was so kind of overwhelming to me I said, you know, I don't think I can take on sports in terms of football as a freshman and get through here and my main objective is to graduate through here. So the track coach took me, put--'cause again, I was recruited for that. They put me on the cross country roster in the fall, even though I did not run cross country. They put me on a cross country roster so I would have athlete status so they could work with me in terms of building muscle mass and workout and things like that as a soph--as a, in the fall. That was a hard thing for me because when you're an athlete, fresh--you know, especially, freshmen, when some of your teammates are getting, your company mates in your company are having to do all kinds of things, playing a lot of these games that they would put you through, you're not there 'cause you're down at the track. So then you come in later that evening, okay, 'cause you're an athlete, when you're in season, you know, they don't want you eating these little square meals and having games played with you, how you eat. They want, you know, they're putting protein in you and things like that. So you get to eat normal. Well, your teammates--or your classmates, resent that, that you got that privilege, even though you're representing them inter-collegiately, right, but they tend to resent that. The upper class, if they're not athletes, they don't like it 'cause they didn't get a chance to, you know, haze you more during the day. So then what that would cause is, is at night, extra attention on Leo Brooks and the other kids that were athletes or freshmen the barracks. That's where we'll go get even, you know, for not being able to get 'em during the afternoon or whatever, which really made me question if I wanted to stay there for a while as a freshman, you know-- Story_ID: 36367 Speaker 1: Did the athletes [at the United States Military Academy at West Point] have a bond themselves in terms of-- Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --matter of fact, I'll never forget, I had one guy come in and was very abusive. You know, he didn't physically do anything, but just the way he was yelling at me and everything like that and then turned to another guy, my roommate and said, hey, man, how you doing? You know, like nothing, right. And I hate that man to this day (laughter), you know. But I remember there was a track athlete that would--that guy that did that to me was a sophomore. I was a freshman. And I can recall going to a junior on the track team who was in my company and saying, hey, this guy, you know, did "x", "y" and "z." A lot of it was racial in its undertones in terms of the kind of stuff he said. And the guy I said it to was black. And he was superior to this guy. That guy's name was Cranny Butler--I don't mind saying his name. So Cranson Butler, Cranson Butler looked at me, and he was totally professional. It wasn't like he was giving me some break because I was black or because, you know, I was on the track team. He looked at me, and he just had this look on his face. He didn't even have to say anything. He was like, he was like infuriated. And he looked at me, and he goes, "Mr. Brooks, that will never happen again." And I can recall saying to him, "Oh, don't say anything, don't say anything. I don't wanna get in trouble." He goes, "It will never happen again." And he goes--and I implored him again, you know, "Don't, don't, don't get me in trouble." And he says, "You just stay straight. It will never happen again." And he walked out and slammed the door. And it never happened again (laughter). That guy stayed away from me the rest of the time. So, and it's just like that, I--there's, matter of fact, a guy who's a four-star general right now, in Africa, Dave Rodriguez, Dave Rodriguez was a senior in my company when I was a freshman, that same company. Dave Rodriguez was an athlete. He was a football player, and so Dave Rodriguez would just come by checking on the freshmen, but you know what he would do, I'll tell you. That guy, I could tell back then he was gonna be a really strong leader because he would walk in a room, and he might barge in for theatrics, like all did, you know, it's just part of the game. But then he'd kind of look around with this kind of scowl on his face, and he goes, "Brooks, how you doing?" You know, and you'd be scared to death 'cause he's a big tall guy, 6'5" [height], whatever. And I'd say, "Sir, I'm fine", and he goes, "You better be," and he'd turn around and walk out. But, you know, it was more of a, messing with you, but at the same time, showing a little compassion in there, real good guy. So anyway, so I think the athletes did kind of look out for some of the freshmen that were, that were athletes 'cause they probably had the same experience themselves when they were freshmen. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36368 Speaker 1: Another person, very influential, so when I was a freshman, I had a tact, tactical officer. Every company has a, you know, has a tactical officer. And I will tell you when I was a freshman, my tactical officer was a major, and my ratings in terms of leadership potential, (unclear) things of that nature, were low. And they were low for all those reasons I said, you know, my, I got--you know, you have peer ratings and things. People penalized me for not being there, not suffering the same things they suffered for 'cause I was out running track, and I actually went from the cross country roster to the indoor tract roster in the winter, to the spring track roster in the spring. So, you know, I still had to come back and serve and do things that everybody else did on my table--sitting at company tables. But I spent more time away from my company than most of the other freshmen that weren't inter-collegiate athletes. Speaker 2: So what were the-- Speaker 1: I was in season all year long. Speaker 2: So were they drilling or something or doing some other kind of activities than you were? Speaker 1: Yeah, so I didn't do, I wasn't in parades, for example, because I was at track practice. They'd be in parades, having to go to parades. People did, having to deliver mail or deliver laundry and stuff like that. And a lot of times--and the people that do that are freshmen. I couldn't do it all the time because I was not physically present, right. And I, understandably, as I look back on it, you know, I mean--and later, even when I became Commandant of Cadets, I always paid attention to that kind of thing. Understandably, you know, some resented that, that why are you getting to get a break. Well, okay, you don't see--it's easy for me to say this, and athletes all know this. But, you know, it's easy to say, but, you know, yeah, well, how'd you like to go down and run, you know, six 440s, you know, under sixty-two seconds, you know. And if you--and puking your guts out? How'd you like to do that instead of delivering mail? But they don't see that, right. So it's not their fault. They don't see that. And you're doing this to represent them, you know. So, so but they can't see that. All they see, you know, my--you know, and so that was a problem. So consequently, my rate, in the ratings, my tact said, this guy is marginal. He's not gonna make it, you know. You know, I don't think he's gonna be, you know, I had low ratings from him, this--and the tact is the guy who's taking assessments from the direct reports. You know, the, my squad leader who was a junior, my platoon leader who was a senior, his own observations, his own counselings, they were all negative. I'll never forget that. They were negative. I went to, that summer, that first summer, after you finish your freshman year, you go to this thing called Camp Buckner. And when you go to Camp Buckner, you go as an individual. You're scrambled. My whole class went out there. We went to, you know, we're all intermingled. So I'm not with the same people I'm in my own company with, which was Company I-1. We, I went to, you know, a company mixed with people from across all four regiments. And I was just doing my thing, but I loved being outside I loved, this is living out in the environment, right. I loved doing the military skills. I loved shooting weapons. I loved the physical challenges. I was naturally good at that. And I demonstrated leadership. When I got put in a leadership role to do things, I did really well at it. And I had a tactical officer there assigned to me, okay, who was not the same person I had during the regular year, right, because they're randomly chose to do that too. And so here's what happened. I'll never forget this. So I start my sophomore year, and, you know, and I get a new tactical officer in my permanent unit, my permanent company. And that tactical officer, his name was Peter J. Ammons, I'll never forget that guy, very influential in my life too. Peter J. Ammons says, I don't get it. Here's a rating from your whole freshman year that says, basically, you're a dirt bag, you're not gonna make it. You don't have any leadership skills. And then here's a rating for the summer that says, you're the best thing since sliced bread. You're a natural-born leader. How are these two things, how is this the same person? He goes, I didn't even think it was the same person. Story_ID: 36369 Speaker 1: So, you know, the, I had this, so I had this experience where as a freshman [United States Military Academy at West Point], I'm told that I'm no good, okay. And I have no leadership potential. My sophomore summer, beginning of my sophomore summer, I'm told you're just a, you know, this outstanding cadet with great leadership. And then what happened, that was very fortuitous was, for me, was at the end of my freshman year, I was there during the big honor scandal, okay, of West Point. Two monumental things in the history of West Point happened when I was a cadet--three actually, happened when I was a cadet. The first one that happened earlier in my freshman year was one of my classmates was found to have violated the honor code. And then through some kind of administrative oversight, that ruling of being found guilty was overturned. And so that cadet then was shunned by the whole institution because he had violated the honor code. He was found guilty of violating the honor code by the, his peers, cadets, and an honor-- Speaker 2: This was a white cadet, right? Speaker 1: This was a white cadet. And then, his name was Stephen Veer, and then that then brought upon the wrath of all cadets because they said, look, you--we don't let people because, when they violate the honor code. But there was some kind of administrative procedure that allowed it. That then led to literally, a 'Time' magazine cover about West Point and the honor code, and the honor system. And whether it was legitimate or not that cadets are ruling on whether or not another student should stay or not, right. And so, and it was the end, it always had some kind of oversight process, legal oversight process, but they're now more things that help govern it than there used to be. So that was one monumental thing. So we were in the front, we were on the cover of Time Magazine about our honor system and our honor code. It was in the Washington--it was in the 'New York Times', every other week for months when that happened. And then the next thing that happened--and that guy, that guy did eventually leave. Then the next thing that happened was they made the announcement that women were gonna come to West Point. I'm the last all-male class of the United States Military Academy, Class of '79 [1979]. And so we were going from an all-male institution to now this other monumental change where people are having to grasp with how they're gonna accept women coming into the academy. Some were fine with it, some were adamantly against it, both administration and student body, some didn't know how to process it. I was sort of, you know, I was sort in that vein. I was fine with 'em coming, but I, you know, I didn't know how to process it. I didn't have deep roots at West Point where, you know, of five generations or whatever of legacy where any change would be viewed as wrong. And I also kind of viewed it like, well, you know, people were probably saying the same thing when they first admitted blacks. So, you know, so I kind of looked at it like that as well. So then that occurred. Story_ID: 36370 Speaker 1: And then in the spring of my freshman year [at the United States Military Academy at West Point], right before the year ended, we had a big, we had a major honor scandal, dealing with an electrical engineering quiz. And it implicated initially several hundred students. A smaller number were found to be guilty, but it was a sizable number that actually caused the institution to have a special commission established to look at the system and how that all worked. It was led by Frank Borman, astronaut. They called it the Borman Commission, actually. So I can recall vividly as a freshman, freshman had to come outside and stand in their spot in formation before everybody else. And I can recall going out and standing in my spot in formation--where I would stand, and there'd just be a few freshman standing around. And I could see out of the corner, as I'm standing at attention, out of the corners of my eyes, there are officers all over the place, commissioned offers. And I was, in my heart I was going like, oh, my gosh, we're gonna have the most incredible, unannounced inspection. This is gonna be terrible, you know, but, you know, whether you didn't shine your shoes or something. And what happened was, everybody came out, got in ranks. They took attendance, everybody gave a report of where they were for, you know, who was present. And then after they gave that, these officers descended down on each of the companies. In my case, there was a battalion of three companies in this area where we lived. And they just started walking up and pulling people out of formation. Would you come with me, please? Would you come with me, please? Didn't say why. They just pulled them aside. They were all juniors, so we knew something was going on. This is the Class of '77 [1977]. They took all and locked 'em up in the Earth, Space and Graphic Science auditorium 'cause there was that many of 'em. And then they told 'em that they were all being, you know, that it had been alleged that they'd all violated or cheated on an electrical engineering take-home quiz. The rest of us had no clue what was going on that day until at lunch time, there was an announcement in the mess hall, which basically said, everybody was gonna have to report to, I think it was a major ballroom, a major auditorium. And it was at, in that auditorium where we were all told, you know, hey, there's been a major honor, you know, there's a major honor investigation going on. It involves a large number of people, blah, blah, blah. Story_ID: 36371 Speaker 1: So, so that, and so the result of that was, at the end of that year [at the United States Military Academy at West Point]--before we didn't, at that time when I was there, we didn't do what they call "scrambled." You entered in as a freshman, and you graduated as a senior in the same company, with that same group of people, you know, freshman, sophomore, senior, junior year. Because of that honor scandal, they decided they were going to, the senior class graduated. So they were gone. The junior class and the sophomore class--this is at the end of my freshman year, they scrambled them. They mixed them up and put 'em in different companies random all over the regiment. So those who were implicated, but maybe found innocent wouldn't have any taint on them, tainted view of them, you know, because they were found innocent. And, and it sort of gave everybody a fresh start. Well, it also gave me a fresh start, okay. I wasn't obviously involved in that, but it gave me a fresh start because all these people who would normally be the same group of people who my peers and the people right above me would have said, this guy's a dirt bag like he was last year, you know, they're now all scrambled and gone. There's a whole new group now in my company. And, you know, it says, some divine providence that that happened. And, I got a brand new tactical officer, who happened to come in and be assigned. And this is the guy that looked at my freshman ratings and my summer ratings at the end of my freshman year, I mean at the beginning of my sophomore year, and said, wow, I can't believe this is the same guy. And that year, I absolutely excelled as a cadet. And so my tact, his name was Peter J. Ammons, Captain, was missing a leg, had his leg blown off in Vietnam, so still serving at that time. He was intrigued with my turnaround. And he was very encouraging of me. I also had got through my freshman courses, and I started focusing on now, you actually had to go through as a freshman some remedial training in math because I spent all my time talking to my football coach in high school instead of focusing on the hard rigor of the kinds of things I needed to be prepared. I was naturally good at it. I just didn't know I was good at it. And then I actually end up majoring in engineering, you know. My focus, my area of concentration was mechanical engineering. So I went through my sophomore year. I got, continued to get more involved in church-related activities. I was still getting spiritually grown and, through the mentorship of Chaplin Dick [Richard] Camp. I got a fresh start in life with Peter J. Ammons in terms of being a tact who's looking at my old and new and saying, okay, hey, I'm giving him the benefit of the doubt. I'm taking what he's doing now. And I had a whole new, fresh set of people who were looking at me because, and that--therefore, I could get a fresh start, objective look at me from all peers. I ended up toward the, I excelled in physical things and as well as school. Story_ID: 36372 Speaker 1: In the, towards the end of the year [at the United States Military Academy at West Point], you have to choose what you're gonna do at the end of your sophomore year for training. And we were, at that time--they don't do it anymore, but they used to send about fifty cadets a year to Ranger School. That's our hardest military school. You know, and they would give one slot per company, and then one for each battalion. And that equal about fifty. Okay, so it was thirty-six companies, and then one for each battalion, it's like 12, 12 battalions. So, you know, you'd have about fifty students. And I went to Peter J. Ammons and said, I wanna go to [United States Army] Ranger School. And that's normally you're, you know, you're picking one of your best people to do that because it's so challenging. And then I heard rumor--and he says, well, I'm gonna put you in for that. And then I heard rumor that there was a cadet who was not in my organization, but that he was gonna give up his vacation and that he was gonna try to do [U.S. Army] Airborne School which is three more weeks. Ranger School's like eight, nine weeks, you know. Airborne School's three weeks, so this guy was gonna give up his summer vacation--normally, you'd go to Ranger School. If you made it, you'd finish. You'd have like three weeks to recover, and then go back to school. Or you'd get three weeks to recover, to have vacation in the front, and then go to Ranger School your last eight to nine weeks, and then come back to school as a junior. In my case, I said, I'm willing to go to Ranger School and the day I graduate from Ranger School, I wanna go to Jump [Airborne] School and give up my vacation and come back to school 'cause I heard another cadet was doing it. It wasn't even true, the rumor. But he said, are you sure you wanna do that? This guy believed in me. I go, yeah, I do wanna do that. He went to my regimental tactical officer, Colonel Bob Day, and Day said, okay, we're gonna give him the shot and let him do it. And so, and the summer of 1977, I left the day after I finished my last final exam. I flew, got on a bus, went out to catch a plane with a bunch of, about, you know, twenty-five other guys who were going through their very first segment of Ranger School, went to Ranger School, went all the way--straight through it, had all kind of, I had several big things happen to me that were good. When I was in Ranger School, they have a competition called the "King of the Pits". They do hand-to-hand combat, and they put every, they start the whole class, one against each other. And they keep whittling it down till there's one left. And I was the King of the Pits, you know, for my Ranger Class 1-77. And I won our Land Nav [Navigation?] course. I was first in our Land Nav course. So I mean it, so, so, you know, this field craft stuff was just naturally, it, you know, I took to that. I graduated from Ranger School at ten o'clock. And at one o'clock, I was signing into Airborne School, same day. And then when I went to Airborne School--Ranger School was incredibly hard, you know. And I didn't have the, I'll call it the soldier hardness 'cause I'm a student at West Point, right, of hardened feet and things like that, like a good soldier would have that's been training for years to go to Ranger School. So I had some, those things were more challenging. But I was fit and determined and, you know, focused. And so I gutted through that, had no problem getting through there. Then I went to Jump School the same day, and what I remember about going through Jump School, although my body was kind of wracked a little bit from going through Ranger School, when I had that Ranger tab on my shoulder, I was in, I felt invincible. And so I would invite, I would invite torment from the Airborne instructors. And it was all in good fun, but, you know, they would, they'd have--when everybody else was doing side straddle hop, jumping jacks, to a slow cadence, they'd make me do 'em as fast I could do 'em. And I would be up on the tower and they'd make you yell out something that you would have to say, like, you know, "Four jumpers, right door." I'd yell out, "Four jumpers, right door, Rangers lead the way." And then they'd say, okay, Ranger, leg. get down here. I'm gonna show you who leads the way. And they'd mess with me, but it was fun. I actually enjoyed this. This is going from a freshman where I just hated that kind of stuff to now, I'm actually having fun with it. Story_ID: 36373 Speaker 1: Graduated from Jump School [U.S. Army Airborne School]-- Speaker 2: So these are like boot camps, basically, both of 'em [U.S. Army Ranger School and Airborne (Jump) School] are-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --really tough boot camps. Speaker 1: Hard, right, hard. And-- Speaker 2: So to point that out, so, I mean you're getting up like, how early in the morning-- Speaker 1: Well, when you're in Ranger School, it's like you're living out in the woods continuously for almost nine weeks. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean, you know, so it's not like a, I mean in the very first phase of it, there's a city phase, where you're doing all kinds of personal skill, you know, assessment skills and things like that, right, that's in your early morning, four or five o'clock in the morning runs, you know, in combat boots, going through obstacle courses. They got something called the worm pit which is a water-filled mud pit with barbed wire over the top, and you're crawling under that. You know, there's all kinds of special skills like, you know, like shooting and combatives that I told you about and land navigation, a lot of that kind of stuff. And then they take you up into the mountains, and you stay there for a couple of weeks, and you're patrolling, and you're walking miles and miles and miles. Speaker 2: Now, you're in the mountains of where? Speaker 1: Dahlonega, Georgia. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And, and, you know, and they don't give you a lot, right, so they're starving you a little bit. You don't get a lot of food, you know. And they're doing that to really, intentionally, they're depriving you of sleep, and they're depriving you of food so that you are physically worn down because that's the closest thing they can sort of do to kind of give you the replication of the strain of what combat would be like. And can you make decisions? Can you fight through the pain? Can you fight through the tiredness? Can you focus to get a mission done under those--with that kind of stress, which is, replicates the stress of combat. And that's why they do it like that. And so you're hungry, you're tired, you know, you're delirious and you're trying to focus and make solid decisions. Well, I mean, so it's intentional. So you go through--finished that, and then started Jump School. Jump School's different. They're not trying to deprive you of food or anything because they don't want you to make a mistake and, you know, parachute accident. But, but still, you're in the August heat of Columbus, Georgia, Fort Benning. For me that wasn't bad 'cause I'd been down there for nine weeks already. So I was already acclimatized. You're still doing a lot of physical tasks, running, things of that nature. And you have to be very exacting in terms of, you know, the skills that's required to learn how to be a paratrooper, how to land and all that kind of stuff. I graduated from that 3 August. My parents [Naomi Lewis Brooks and Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] came down for that. They didn't come to my Ranger graduation. They just figured we'll just come at the end when you graduate from everything. So they came down to watch me graduate from Jump School, made five jumps in Jump School and then got back on a plane. Story_ID: 36374 Speaker 1: Flew back to West Point [United States Military Academy], started class the next day [after graduating from the U.S. Army Airborne School]. So I lost--I wouldn't say lost, but I had zero summer between my sophomore and junior year. Now, when I show up at West Point as a new junior, right, I am one of three, maybe, cadets in the entire academy that are Airborne and Ranger qualified 'cause one other person did what I did. And then there was one guy that was prior service who had actually been in the Army, prior service, had a Ranger tab, was Airborne 'cause he was in a Ranger unit before he went to the Academy. And, you know, so now you're this, you're even this, I'll call it, "super rare"--from a military perspective, okay, person. And I fed on that. I wanted to be even more, you know, strict, not strict, more tough, more, more focused, more into the military. I was very much into the military. In sports, remember I was an athlete. So my sophomore year, I had every intention, I was gonna go back to football. And when I, at the end of my freshman year, I was on the track team. We were running one day. And we ran by a rugby field. And the coach I had at the time was named John Delamere (ph.), and he was an Olympian from New Zealand who was actually in the U.S. Army. And he was assigned at West Point as a coach for our track team, for the jumpers. And I was a triple jumper. By the way, the sprint coach, who trained me in sprint, spring coach, was Mel Pender, Olympic Gold Medalist-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --who was the assistant head coach and ended up taking over as the head coach because our head coach, Coach Crowell (ph.), actually had a heart attack and died in my freshman year. So, so I had Mel Pender, Olympic Gold Medalist, as my sprint coach. I have John Delemere, New Zealand Olympian and these guys were in Munich [Germany; Olympics], and Mel Pender was in Mexico [Olympics] too. Mel Pender, a gold medalist, I have this guy and then, and on top of him, we had a guy named Tom Hill. He was the high hurdle coach. Tom Hill was a Silver Medalist in Munich. So these were my three--these were my coaches (laughter) in track, you know, when I was there. So, me, you know, I became a much better athlete as a result of being with that kind of caliber of coach too, which is, by the way, you know, you think about West Point, you know, Bobby Knight was a basketball coach there. Vince Lombardi was a football coach there. Coach Mike Krashefski (ph.) who was the basketball coach there. Matter of fact, Coach Krashefski was a coach--I have another story about that with my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker], how my brother got in the Academy, you know, related to me, related to that. (Simultaneous) Story_ID: 36375 Speaker 1: Incidentally, now, did you notice your brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] was there [United States Military Academy at West Point]? I mean with all this going on in your sophomore year (laughter), I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: --your brother came in as a freshman, right? Speaker 2: Well, okay, so he came in as a freshman. So I went over and messed with a little bit when he was a freshman. So, you know, and I would kind of look out after him. I'd go check on him and stuff like that. But he was having his own little personal experience. The way that we were just coincidentally were assigned, I was in the first regiment--there are four regiments. So it's, on one side of the campus. He was in the fourth regiment on the very far end of the campus. So I was in I-1. He as in I-4, okay. So, but then when I--remember I told you about the, we started scrambling people. So then when I became a junior, they decided that was a good practice. So then I got scrambled. So I left that company. I went to Company G-4. So my brother and I were now assigned in the same battalion. So I see him all the time. Before we, you know, we went, different class schedules, went, you know, came in the mess hall at different times, went to different wings of the mess hall. Now, we're in the same battalion. I used to see him, and our barracks were right around the corner from each other. So as a junior, and he's a sophomore now. He can look around (laughter), you know. I used to see him quite a bit when I moved over to G-4, when my whole class scrambled, and I end up going to G, yeah, Company G-4. Story_ID: 36376 Speaker 1: And so, anyway, we were running track--again, I'm a sophomore [at the United States Military Academy at West Point]. It's in the fall, and we stopped, my New Zealand coach says, hey, let's stop and look at this. And it was a rugby match. I'm, at this time, I'm probably 175 pounds [weight], 175, 180 pounds. I'm very muscular at that time. Remember I had started out as, when I entered West Point, I was 165 [pounds], and I was, you know, so I was growing up a little bit. And so when I was there, and looked at that, and those guys knew that I was a recruited athlete for football, the rugby players, and they knew I was a--I'm a track athlete--I am a varsity track athlete, next thing you know, they started--and they saw me interested in the game, they started doing some covert operations, coming up, hey, you know, you'd be really good at this, you know. And I was enamored with the game. I missed the contact of football that I didn't get in track, and I missed the camaraderie, the teamwork of football that I didn't get in track. And so I then, the spring season of my sophomore year, that's when the main--they had two seasons, fall and spring, but the spring season's the big season that counts, I joined the rugby team. And I've been playing rugby ever since (laughter), you know. Speaker 2: So you still, are you still playing? Speaker 1: Every once in a while, playing like the alumni game, like I'm not on the team right now, but like every year, like when I was a commandant at West Point, I played against all the seniors, which was an interesting experience (laughter). But, you know, so I'll play like in the alumni game against the old, the "Old Gray," they call it. That's the alumni team, against like the seniors and stuff like that. Every once in a while, I'll play. I love the game, but so, I had that experience. Story_ID: 36377 Speaker 1: So now, I'm a junior [at the United States Military Academy at West Point]. So now, I'm thriving in, academically, I was doing well 'cause I'm taking courses that are in my--I'm not just taking general courses. I'm taking courses that I like and I'm taking 'em in engineering disciplines. And it really suited me well, thermodynamics, mechanical, you know, vibrations, aerodynamics, all those things, I really--fluid dynamics, I really liked that kind of stuff. And I was doing well. So I was doing well academically. I'm doing really well militarily. I was having a great time sports wise with my rugby team. I was thriving on the rugby team. I was a wing, I was a left wing on the varsity rugby team, and I just, you know, things were just really going good for me as a junior. That's when I really kind of blossomed. I started now becoming a leader like in the Sunday School, okay, of--and this was a Sunday School to teach children of the faculty. This was not me going to Sunday School. I was still doing individual bible study with Chaplin Dick Camp, you know. So, man, I was really kind of in a zone there when I was a junior. Light bulbs were all on when I was a junior. Next thing you know, when I became a senior, I was selected--well, the, in the summer between my junior and senior year, they gave me a senior leadership position. I did real well at that leadership position. It was out in a field environment, this place I told you, the Camp Buckner, the place where you go, where I went after my freshman year to the summer training. And I was the Number Two person for the whole regiment out there. And they were impressed with me enough that I was elevated from that level to one of the most senior cadets. I was a regimental commander. At that time, that's the highest that any African American had ever served at the Academy. There had been a couple others who had done it, but no one had ever been--the only thing higher than that is the regiment--is the brigade commander. So I was a permanent six-stripe captain. And there are seven of those at West Point, and I was one of them, okay. Story_ID: 36378 Speaker 1: And, so, and then led my senior year, and I did follow my heart and became--chose infantry as my assignment, tried to get to the, went to the 101st Airborne Division as my first unit, duty unit. Speaker 2: This was after graduation [from the United States Military Academy at West Point]? Speaker 1: This is after graduation. Speaker 2: Okay, well, is there anything significant about graduation that you-- Speaker 1: Yep, yep, so I'd be remiss if I didn't mention there was a couple of other people that were really important. So in my, beginning of my senior year--no, in my junior year, I had a classmate in my company who, you know, everybody gets assigned a sponsor, right. And the sponsor is somebody who, it's like a family place where you can kind of go and relax and have a home kind of experience, you know, while you're at the Academy. And this friend of mine had a sponsor who's, who died of leukemia but his wife and their five children were still living on the installation 'cause he had just died. He was a colonel. And this guy took, he said these people just love people. So he took me and about four or five other of my classmates over there just to be with that family, just to be around because they liked cadets. And that ended up becoming a, the--that woman, the widow ended up becoming like a lifetime, like surrogate mother to me. Her name is Bobby Pollock and she has mentored more cadets (laughter), mothered more cadets than anybody I know of. And, you know, and still lives right outside the gate of West Point now. So, but I, so when I--the thing I remember most about graduating was, is I was so, that was such a significant accomplishment, and I'd worked so hard to accomplish that, that when they said, "class dismissed," that's the thing I remember. I turned and saw one of my best friends who was another guy who was with Ms. Pollock, one of the Pollock crew, and we, we looked at each other and had tears in our eyes and just had this incredible embrace--his name was Lloyd Darlington and the--African American graduate too--and just, you know, felt, I just couldn't believe how overwhelmed I felt and how proud I was to have done that and accomplished it. That's the thing I remember most about that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was an incredible day. Speaker 2: All right, so this is in 1979? That's in-- Speaker 1: That was June 6, 1979. Story_ID: 36379 Speaker 1: All right, so the [U.S.] Army, after the Vietnam War, the Vietnam War closes in '73 [1973]-- Speaker 2: '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: '75 [1975], really. Okay, all right, and so many people watched on television as American troops left Saigon [Vietnam]. A lot of people felt, oh, we were over there a long time, but not a lot got done, you know. The Army starts regrouping-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there's, in '73 [1973], the Army becomes all, a volunteer force. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And no more draft. Also, a total force policy is adopted by the chief of staff, you know. So were these, all these changes, like I suppose were discussed at West Point [United States Military Academy], right? Speaker 2: Yep, pretty much, yes. Speaker 1: And what was--well, tell us about the direction of the Army as you were (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: As I was entering, so, boy, do I have some strong feelings about that. I worry that we're heading to some of the things now that we had then. So when I entered the Army, we were drawing down significantly. We under--our units were all under strength. I'm in one of the most ready units in the Army, the 101st Airborne Division, I'm supposed to have forty-four men. I probably had eighteen. We're supposed to have a complement of five officers, a company commander, an executive officer and three rifle platoon leaders. We had three officers, total in our company. I'm supposed to have, I was supposed to have squad leaders that were staff sergeants that had experience that would probably be, you know, eight, nine years experience. Some of 'em I had were Sergeant E-5s that might have had four years experience. We had problems with drugs in the barracks. We actually had to carry weapons, okay, to, when we, when, as staff duty officers at night, to patrol our barracks. We had to carry a weapon. And-- Speaker 1: That was, that's new. That's what you're saying. This is something new. Speaker 2: That's 1979. Well, I mean it was happening in the mid-'70s [1970s] too. Speaker 1: It wasn't-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Well, okay, but I mean it wasn't regular procedure for that-- Speaker 2: During that time period, during the '70s [1970s], yeah, we had racial unrest. You had a lot of drug issues. You had--remember now, these are people who, you had a lot of people who were, some were not motivated to stay. They were using the Army just as a means of, you know, having a paycheck. The Army was not motivated to get rid of people that couldn't meet the standard 'cause they were trying to keep, because they were already short. So when you only got eighteen people in your unit, and somebody's not doing something, you might let 'em slide with something that by 1984, '85 [1985], you would have got rid of 'em in a heartbeat. Back then you wouldn't have. You would have kept them. It'd be harder to get rid of somebody that wasn't meeting the standard. I busted a guy with a marijuana joint sticking out of his pants leg standing in formation, in uniform. I could see it sticking out of his boot, walked up behind him, and what, "What you got in your boot?" you know, and pulled it out. It was a joint. I mean there was a big problem with drugs. There was a problem with thievery. There was a problem with AWOL [Absence Without Leave]. In fact, in--they created, it was around that time, as I recall, that if you had 101 AWOL, as in the 101st Airborne, if you had 101 AWOL-free days, you got a four-day pass for your unit. And so, you know, they were trying to do things to even, just incentivize people to, you know, not leave work and skip work by giving them, you know, a pass. So training. We didn't have ammunition we needed. You know, we--if I were to go out for a platoon live-fire, I might have, you know, two magazines, you know, sixty rounds of ammunition wherein in say, 1986, '85 [1985] time period, I might have seven, eight. I mean, you know, I would be equipped with the ammo I would need. We did not have fuel for our vehicles to take 'em all out and use 'em like we would want to. I can recall people using golf carts to simulate armored vehicles to save gas, just so they could practice moving in formation and not use the big armored vehicles. It was, it was not a good time. And a lot of people left. Story_ID: 36380 Speaker 1: And then thankfully, there was a core group of really solid leaders that had a lot of combat experience. My very first battalion commander was a guy named David Brambling, David C. Brambling. He was a wonderful man, a wonderful leader. He was smart, he was articulate. He was gifted. He was combat experienced, ended up being a four-star general, four-star commander before he retired. And David Brambling, or David A. Brambling, I guess it is, but Dave Brambling, you know, he--despite all those things, you know, he kind of focused on training or how to train, how to train right. So that was a, I learned the power of leadership. At the same time, I saw how bad it could be in terms of how, yeah, how bad it could be in terms of readiness 'cause we weren't ready. And consequently, it was during that kind of time period when you had Miquez (ph.). That's when you had Desert I, all those kind of things were kind of happening in that late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s] time period, right. Speaker 2: Well, that fall, the Iran hostage situation. Speaker 1: That's Desert I, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, you know. And these were supposed to be "the" most trained, right, with night vision use, interoperability between units, you know. All of those things were challenges. Then we had Grenada right after that. And in Grenada, we had where we couldn't--communications were a problem between the Navy Seals and between the ground forces. There were problems in terms of conducting the airborne operation in terms of trying to get all the planes over the drop zone. There were challenges between the 82nd and the Ranger Regiment in terms of coordinating on the ground. There was problems in terms of sharing intelligence, all kinds of problems. So that's '83 [1983], October '83 [1983]. And so it was sort of like after that, I think, everybody said, okay, I mean well, the president, enough is enough. And they really kind of turned around and put money, resources, incentivized having quality leadership and, you know, and not only in the Officer Corps, in the NCO Corps too. And that's sort of like when the big turnaround started. Story_ID: 36381 Speaker 1: For me, I started out, I was a platoon leader in Bravo Company [B Company], 1st [Battalion] of the 503rd [Infantry]. That was my very first assignment. My platoon sergeant, Gary Phillips, I'll never forget him because here's a guy, I was worried to death. This guy in my case was a Sergeant First Class, Vietnam veteran, hardened later, but he, I almost, in some regards, he was like Sergeant Bilco. He had so much stuff going on behind the scenes or whatever. He could get anything, he could anything. Everybody knew him, and he had actually been serving as the platoon leader because they didn't have one for like seven months when I showed up. So I was concerned that he wouldn't wanna give up that authority. But in true, noncommissioned officer [NCO] fashion, I remember standing in my formation for the very first time. He's in front of the formation. I'm behind it, and he says to the troops, he says--I can still hear it. He basically said, all right, Second Platoon, you see we've got a lieutenant back there. He says, he's harder than woodpecker lips. Thank God we finally got one. I'm tired of being an officer. I'm ready to get back to being a platoon sergeant, doing my job. But we're gonna take care of him and support him, you know, 'cause he's our lieutenant. That kind of informal, but very important, transfer of authority, that NCO giving that to me in that way was so awesome and it wouldn't have worked any other way. The guy taught me a lot. He taught me a lot, you know, about fighting, you know. I mean he had had the experience. He helped me reason through how to deal with disciplinary issues that we might have in our platoon. Story_ID: 36382 Speaker 1: For instance, can you give us an example of a discipline issue and how you would deal with it? Speaker 2: Okay, so, for example, if I had a, you know, there was no physical abuse or anything of that nature, but let's say somebody came late to formation because they overslept or something, okay. When you're young, and you don't know any better, your first inclination is, Article XV. I'm gonna write 'em up. I'm gonna punish 'em. But a more reasoned person might say, okay, well, I got all the other, I got a whole lot of other tools I can use that just, doing nontraditional punishment, taking the guy's, busting him in rank. I could have him do remedial training. I could have him, you're gonna--okay, since you did that, you're gonna come do this. You're gonna do this duty we need done in the day room, you know. You're gonna clean the floors in the day room because it needs to be done by every--instead of having the whole platoon doing it on the weekend, you're gonna do it, you know, or something like that, you know, looking for alternative ways in terms of remedial training as opposed to just punishment. And trying to find some things maybe that would be commensurate with whatever the offense was in terms of what you were gonna do in terms of remediation of that individual. And not always reverting to yelling at somebody, like something you see in the movies, but talking to 'em as an adult, treating 'em as an adult when you're talking to 'em, and making them realize why, what they did was not the standard. And in the end, you got them thinking, yeah, I do deserve it as opposed to, you know, having a confrontation where both sides are putting up their shields and, you know, one's digging in and one's, you know, directing. Now, certainly for anything more serious or that was serious, right, you had the Uniform Code of Military Justice to use as a tool. But those are some examples of where you might do that. You might do some other things. Now, I'd encourage people to not always use litigious means to solve problems. I mean, you know-- Speaker 1: So those punishments would not be entered into their record? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's not on their record. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That is not on their record. That's just something you're gonna do and take care of and boom, and all right, we're done with it. Now, you do it again, maybe, you know, maybe I might write it up as a, in your counseling statement, so I have it for the record. But that's not any official document. Speaker 1: So did you find soldiers grateful for that kind of a-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Sure, I'll tell you a story later about where I gave a cadet, when I was a commandant, a second chance in life, and then later on, I--years later, this guy came up to me, and says, you don't remember me, but you gave me a second chance in life. And now, I'm here, serving in this role where, you know, I wouldn't be if you hadn't given me that chance. But see, I didn't forget the lesson that Peter J. Ammons, when I was a, when I was finishing my freshman year, and I started my sophomore year, you know, about giving people a chance, about seeing--trying to look in their heart, looking in their soul and seeing, okay, is this person remorseful or is this guy just, you know, flim-flam man and, you know, he's gonna do it again tomorrow. You know, so if I--that's a gut call. You know, there's nothing that tells you the answer. That's a gut call, how well do you read people? I felt like I read people pretty good and could tell. You know, I've made mistakes in those assessments, but not many. Speaker 1: All right, okay, so this is your first assignment, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you were where in this first assignment? Speaker 2: I was what? Speaker 1: Where were you assigned, I mean? Speaker 2: Fort Campbell, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Oh, Fort--okay, so I do--we do have it right, in Fort Campbell. Speaker 2: 101st [Airborne Division]. Story_ID: 36383 Speaker 1: And then, you know, so as soon as I got there, the first thing they did to me, my unit was deployed. They said, hey, we're gonna send you to [U.S. Army] Air Assault School. Are you in shape? I said, yeah, I can do it. Went to Air Assault School. I was the Distinguished Honor grad [graduate], so I--of that course. So it helped me starting out because the very first thing my unit saw was, is that their lieutenant and in their battalion was named the Distinguished Honor graduate of this course, this Air Assault School course. I, I had a really good assignment there. I was thriving there. I moved to another assignment where I was the, I had a specialty platoon, anti-tank platoon. And from that experience, I got identified as a potential to be aide de camp, you know, to a General Officer. And that guy's name was Claude T. Ivy, Claude Talton Ivy. He was the Assistant Division Commander for Operations. And so he hired me. So for a year, then I got to serve under this general who was really good at training. He was known as a trainer. He was a really hard guy on people, but really good trainer. And, and going with him, we would go--because he was responsible for training of the whole division, I would go around with him, kind of following him around, and I'd witness what was good training, what was bad training, what was in the realm of the possible, what was not. You know, what was too standard, and what wasn't. And I witnessed that for over a year, so when he left, I had several commanders that were saying, you know, hey, you've had all that wonderful experience, I'd like you to stay, come down here to my unit and I'll make you a company commander. Now, a company commander is normally somebody that's a captain and has, you know, anywhere from five to, you know, eight years of service. And at this point, I probably have three and a half. And, but I mean I had chance to command a rifle company in the 101st Airborne Division, Air Assault. So I said, I'd love to have that opportunity, and-- Speaker 2: So by assisting the general for that period of time, you actually deepened your knowledge of-- Speaker 1: Totally, I totally deepened my knowledge. And I also had, you know, I was excelling in my battalion and was known in my brigade, but because I was now this guy's aide de camp, where I was a sponge and sucking up all this, knowledge--you know, information about what's good and what's bad about training, you know, my universe expanded from my battalion to the whole division. Story_ID: 36384 Speaker 1: And then what it also did was it gave me, it happened, it gave me great exposure to other leaders in the division [101st Airborne Division], who then, some of whom sought me as somebody who might have some talent that would add to their unit. And so then, some asked me, hey, I want you to come command a rifle company I my brigade. And so I went from the first, from the 3rd Brigade is where I started, 3rd Brigade, 101st. When I came, left that aide [de camp to the Assistant Division Commander for Operations] job, I went to command a company in the 1st Brigade. As a, I was still a lieutenant. Something I'll never forget about that, at that time, there were about six black infantry company commanders in the division. I mean I knew 'em all by name. And-- Speaker 2: About how many in total? Speaker 1: Oh, ghee, in a, well, let's see, a brigade's got eighteen. There's like, you know, three maneuver brigades, each with eighteen, plus, let me is that right? Yeah, something like that. Then there's probably another, you know, fifteen or so in the Aviation Brigade, another 10, 15 in the Support Brigade, another, you know, then the separate battalions, there's some. So, you know, you're talking, it's 150 company commanders, I'm guessing. I'm, that's a swag. But here's the thing I'll never forget about that. So all those blacks that were commanding. And while I served at the division headquarters working for that general, so I know there was no overt decision to do what I'm about to say, but it sure was beyond coincidence what I experienced. And that is, you know, you have--in an infantry unit, you know, everything sort of circles around the rifle company, right. That's the point of the spear, the rifle company. The rifle company is augmented by either the combat support company that provides like anti-armor weapons capability. But they normally detach their stuff out to support the rifle company. And then there's headquarters companies. That basically is admin, service support for a maneuver unit. And it might have some specialty units in it like, you know, logistics platoon or transportation platoon. Well, like three of the brigade-level--there's three infantry brigades. Two of those infantry brigades had black company commanders. The HHC Company, the headquarters company, the service company, the guy that's just responsible for making sure, you know, you got right supplies and you got the tents set up right, right. And I'm diminishing the assignment because they're all important. But they weren't putting these guys at the point of the spear. They were putting 'em in the service support, one level back position. Two of 'em had the Delta Companies. One of 'em had a battalion HHC. There was only one other guy, besides me, that had a rifle company, at the time, you know, at the time I was there. There was one other, a guy named Arnold [Gordon-] Bray [also a HistoryMaker], who ended up being a general, okay. So, guys were just not getting the opportunity to get in these rifle companies. They were all going to these service support organizations. And so, you know, people promoting their own image, and so what ends up sort of happening is, is they start looking at their top guys or whatever, they're tending to be your rifle company guys, in a light unit, right, in an airborne kind of unit. Nobody wanted to really do the headquarters thing. So that was very interesting. And I noted that. I had a wonderful assignment as a rifle company commander. It went beautifully. I was like one of the youngest ones in the entire division because I, I was in command probably a year as a lieutenant, maybe six, eight months as a lieutenant. And then maybe ten months as a captain, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I hadn't even been to Advance Course which is the training you normally go through before you-- Speaker 2: Become a captain? Speaker 1: --become a company commander. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 36385 Speaker 1: So I came out of the 101st [Airborne Divison]. I ended up being there like four and a half year. I commanded there for eighteen months. I found that I had no problem leading troops. I had a really good unit. I got ranked very highly as a company commander. And so when I was towards the end, and they said, well, what do you wanna do? You ought to think about going to be a professor at West Point [United States Military Academy], you know. You could go do this, that and the other thing. I said, I wanna go to a ranger battalion. Grenada had just happened 'cause that was October '83 [1983]. This was like, you know, I left there in like, probably summer of '84 [1984], no January '84 [1984], I mean like three or four months afterwards, Grenada. And so I went to, I applied to do that. And I can vividly remember one of my battalion commanders, former battalion commander, saying to me, Leo, don't do it. I go why would you say that? He goes, okay, I'm just gonna be candid with you. And he was trying to be helpful. He says, you have gotten excellent efficiency reports as a rifle company commander. You're gonna go, try to go to a ranger battalion, where it's all white, virtually, okay, where you unknown, and you're gonna--and if you stumble, then it's gonna be a risk. They're gonna say maybe you didn't do well, and then over here we said you do well, so, you know, you're, you know, you're not--there's no definitive. You're this thumbs-up guy we're saying right now. Why would you take that risk? I can still remember that guy saying that to me. And I remember saying to him, I said, well, sir, I'm an infantryman. And the rangers are supposed to be the best infantry in the world. Why wouldn't I want to not--why wouldn't I wanna be part of something that's the best there is? That's what I wanna do. So anyway, I applied. I put in a packet. I got great endorsements to go. And I was selected to go. And I went to the, I had to go literally to this Advance Course that I should have gone to before I could even command a company. I went there, and--at Fort Benning, Georgia, to the Infantry Officer Advance Course. And interestingly enough because I delayed a year, because I was in command, you know, normally I would have gone a year before. But I delayed leaving to go because I was commanding a rifle company when I normally wouldn't be doing it. So it caused me to go a year late to the Advance--later than my peers were going. And so my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker], who is now an infantryman, goes when he's supposed to go to the Advanced Course. We're in the exact same course. We live in government quarters, and we are assigned quarters on the exact same cul du sac. We live four doors away from each other, you know. I'm getting ready to go to ranger battalion. He hasn't gone to, he's coming out of the 82nd Airborne Division. And he's getting ready to go to Europe to command a company, his first company in Europe. I can remember my parents [Naomi Lewis Brooks and Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] coming to visit us. And so, you know, I'm living here, he's living right down the street from me. And, you know, my parents learning, okay, so how do we deal with that? We got two sons. They've both got families, blah, blah, blah. So my parents came, they stayed at my house for two days, packed their suitcase, walked down the street, three doors, four doors, and they stayed with him for two days. So I mean that's the kind of thing that--it was just, but it was a really cool time to share, you know, be in something with your brother. Story_ID: 36386 Speaker 1: I graduated from that course, that Advanced Course [Infantry Officer Advance Course], and because I'm going to a ranger battalion, I immediately was lucky enough to get a slot into the [U.S.] Army's Jumpmaster program. So, to me, if [U.S. Army] Ranger School is the most physical course I ever been through in my life, Jumpmaster [School] is, by far, the most difficult mentally. It's zero defects, okay, in terms of procedure, where your hands are, nomenclature, 'cause you're affecting people's lives, how you actually check somebody to parachute out of a plane, very exact. I did that before I went down to ranger battalion. And I was very blessed that, you know, I was the Distinguished Honor graduate of that course before I showed up. So I showed up in that unit with that, having done that, which kind of put me in a good place starting out. When I arrived, I was the only black officer in the ranger regiment when I arrived. There had been a couple--one or two before, at different times. But when I was there, initially, I was the only one in the whole regiment. I had great, I mean when I first got there, I had an awesome battalion commander, a guy named Wesley B. Taylor. And I, you know, that guy was just as level as they come. I really learned when I was in the rangers about what you can do when you're given top-quality people and basically unlimited resources. The stuff we were doing, I mean I just couldn't believe the level of proficiency that these people had. And the confidence that they had in their ability, and to be a part of that, it was the most proud thing I, you could ever imagine, you know. I mean these guys, if you need to go through a wall, that's who you want, you know. I mean they were unstoppable. They were relentless. They're hard, and it was great to be a part of that. I, it took a while for me to break in to sort of the, get accepted. I started out on the staff. And after about two years of waiting on the staff, serving on the staff, doing a good job on the staff, I got the opportunity to command a Ranger Rifle Company. So, you know, point of the spear in the most tough thing that we have, you know. And I took command of Alpha 175 in about July of--June or July of, it would have been probably 1986. And just had some incredible experiences there too. Story_ID: 36387 Speaker 1: So I started out as a Ranger company commander in 2000--in 1986 and, at Alpha Company, and had something really tragic happen very early in my command. We were actually doing a rehearsal, a real-world rehearsal for a real operation--rescue operation. And part of that rehearsal involved using explosive charges. And in an explosion that I actually had the, was talking on a radio and gave the command for the explosive device to be set off. A piece of shrapnel from the explosion actually blew back, a bunch of it, right back where I was laying with my assault unit. And I had, the radio that I gave the command to detonate this thing, was on the back of a young PFC [private first class] named Michael Ruddis (ph.). And a piece of shrapnel hit Ruddis right here on his left side, right next to me. And my shoulder was touching his shoulder literally, as we were laying next to each other and killed him, cut his aorta and killed him. And on my immediate left side was another young man who had another piece of shrapnel hit him and tra--you know, traumatically amputated his hand, his right hand. And so, and then there was a lieutenant that got hit in the head by a piece of shrapnel from that same explosion. And the thing I'll never forget about that was, another one of my heroes is a guy by the name of Joe Stringum (ph.). And Joe Stringum was the ranger regimental commander, fearless wartime hero from Vietnam. He's not a commander of the range regiment. So as this accident occurs, and again, this is a rehearsal for a real op, it was in Dugway, Utah and we're doing it. I called in the Medivac [medical evacuation] to extract my wounded, and PFC Ruddis after we were treating him and the other soldier. And the range regimental commander didn't see it, but he was in the general area. So he came over to the location where I was. I'll never forget this. You know, we're still dealing with the tragic, tragedy of this, you know. And I'd been, I hadn't experienced this kind of thing, per se, before. And he looked right at me. He goes, okay, Ranger, tell me, tell me what happened. I told him where we were, what happened, what I thought happened 'cause this was three o'clock in the morning in the dark. And he goes, okay, you got your wounded evacuated? I said, yes, sir. He goes do you have your sensitive items accounted for? I says, yeah, we got all their stuff together. And then he said to me, looked me in the face--he didn't do what some people would have done, which would, might have been, okay, well, let's stop. Let's take a statement from everybody. Let's, and I'm not saying we shouldn't pay attention to safety. I'm just the opposite. But this is an important thing. He said to me, he goes, "Okay, Ranger. You still got one hour and fifteen minutes to get to extraction." He was telling me, you know, you don't get to quit just because that happened. Move out. Keep moving, continue the mission, Charlie-Mike. I've never, ever forgotten that. And that profoundly impacted me in the, several major decisions later in my life when I was sitting in his role in life. But so, we did move, get our--move to a desert-lake bed. We did get picked up on aircraft, and we did get out of there and did mourn our dead. And I did get to, later to provide a, you know, go hand--it was a tragic thing. I witnessed this guy die, and then I'm now handing a widow, his widow is nineteen [years old], you know, a flag. Story_ID: 36388 Speaker 1: So this was the first casualty you've ever experienced in the [U.S.] Army, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm gonna call it casualty in a killed, while doing something in training; not like a, you know, I had people like, maybe got killed in a car wreck or something, but not like that. I mean and that one was up close and personal. You know, it was, we--this guy's right next to me. This is my op--radio operator. I spent nights in a hole with that guy. The night before he got killed, we were in a old hide-hole with a little net over the top of us, you know, all night or all day rather. I mean this, you know, so, yeah, that was hard. But you know what it did? So two things happened. So after we did that, got back, I'd been back a week maybe, back in Savannah [Georgia] where my headquarters was. And then I got alerted, and my company got a no-notice alert to fly to Fort Campbell, Kentucky, and the mission was to do a live fire breach of a wired obstacle, basically, the exact same thing I had to do in Dugway, Utah. It was get back on your horse, you know. I mean I had no notice, alerted my company, boom, flew us up there, told us to--we had this mission to execute this raid. And that another thing I'll never forget. It was get back on your horse. Of course, we did all the assessments and why did it happen and all that kind of stuff. But it was get back on your horse. We haven't lost confidence in you or your unit. And I'm gonna tell you, as a result of that, as a result of that, that unit galvanized. We were "the" experts in demo 'cause I know what, I understand, understood what it could do more than anybody 'cause I witnessed it in terms of what it does to a human. We were "the" experts in demo. We were "the" best rifle company. We shot more, we fought harder. We road marched [ph.] further. We just galvanized. It was incredible. In fact, my company--I have a picture, right over here is a picture of me getting a big plaque from the Ranger Regimental Commander a year later as "the best" ranger company in the Ranger Regiment. And so, you know, while that was tragic, there was something, the silver lining was learning from that experience and growing. So I served there for longer than most officers do. I was there for four years straight in that kind of unit and was just thriving. And I was surprised when I left, when I was leaving there, they then wanted to go to--wanted me to do something short. Story_ID: 36389 Speaker 1: They sent me to Korea, and I was like, you gotta be kidding man. I've been basically unaccompanied for four years, and you wanna send me to Korea. And they, ah, it'll be good for your career. I said, I don't want (laughter), I don't wanna go to Korea by myself. I got over there by myself, and then worked to find a way to get a command-sponsored job where I could bring my family over there. And I ended up moving into a joint billet for the command and served there for three years actually. Speaker 2: Okay, now, let me ask you at this point, now, how did you meet your wife? Speaker 1: At Fort Campbell [Kentucky] when I was actually working for the, as the aide [-de-camp] to that General. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is early on in your, you know, '82 [1982]? Speaker 1: It was about-- Speaker 2: --eighty-- Speaker 1: '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Right, 1981 Speaker 2: All right, so by 1989, I guess, here, how many children did you have? Speaker 1: So I had one kid per my initial four duty assignments. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So my oldest daughter, Bethany, was born at Fort Campbell, my first assignment. The next one was born when I was going through the Advanced Course in [U.S. Army] Jumpmaster School at Fort Benning [Georgia]. The next one was born when I was in the 75th Ranger Regiment in Savannah [Georgia], and the final one was born when I was in Korea. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 1: All girls. Speaker 2: All right, okay. So let's pick up then. So you're in Korea at this point? Speaker 1: Right, and so I had to, serving on the joint staff I got the opportunity one day, they said, we need somebody to brief. And I'm, at this point, I'm a senior captain. I'm still a captain, but, you know, I'm now wearing Master Parachuter's wings, I'm Pathfinder. I'm Air Assault and Ranger, all these things. So I look like a nice candidate to stick in front of the senior leadership to do briefings, command briefings. And so I briefed the--one time they put me in front of the Commander in Chief of Korea, Lou Menitre (ph.). And, you know, I think part of my West Point [United States Military Academy] training was, you know, you have to do a lot of mental recall, a lot of memorization, a lot of sight memory. So I was able to really kind of look at a map and learn all, remember all kinds of details about what was happening, battle wise on that map. And so I would be able to flow naturally in my speech to this guy. And then he really liked the way I presented it, and the next thing you know, I become his command briefer for all, every day, his war updates while I was over there for two years. Wonderful experience. My first joint experience. I made lifelong friends over there. My, one of my best friends, from over there, a guy named Jay Paxton is now Assistant Commandant, [U.S.] Marine Corps, Marine four-star. I was with him when he was, we were both majors at that time. I got promoted while I was over there. We were both majors together sitting over there. We used to together, go patrol. We would get in a helicopter and fly from one coast to the other coast, right along the demilitarized zone [DMZ] to check boundary warnings and markers and things. That's the kind of stuff we used to do. We were down together when the--they exploited, they found the North Korean tunnel that was dug under the DMZ. They found that while I was there. And we were together on a team that exploited that--not that went in it, but the planning for that. So, really good friend, and now it's cool to see him as a four-star. Another, since we're, doring African American history, you know, another person that was with me there, another Marine was a guy named Walt Gaskin, (ph.). Walt Gaskin is a Marine three-star right now and another great professional who I met over there. There was a really good group of people on that staff. They were, I guess, I think part of--they were sending people over there to get joint qualified in a theater that was real, you know. And there was a lot of good people that came out of there during that group. We worked for a guy by the name of Colonel Marty Steele, ended up being a Marine three star. The Plans, Policy and Operations leader of, for the Marine Corps. And at the time, he was a colonel and just a tremendous--that was another guy. I learned about how to be a staff officer from that guy. It was just incredible in terms of what he expected and the kind of products we produced. Story_ID: 36390 Speaker 1: I left there [Korea], went to the Command and General Staff College [CGSC] of Fort Leavenworth [Kansas] where I served for, you know, I was just basically going to school for a year. And then I went to the 82nd Airborne Division, and, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay, so Fort Leavenworth is in-- Speaker 1: Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. Speaker 2: Not, yeah, yeah, and that's in 1991, right? Is that right? Speaker 1: Let's see, '90 [1990], '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: '90 [1990], '91 [1991] time period. Speaker 2: All right, so now-- Speaker 1: Let's see, my daughter was born February, '90 [1990], and I think I would have left there June, June of '90 [1990] to June of '91 [1991] probably. Speaker 2: Now, the, in terms of the national focus, people were focused on the Desert Storm in 1990. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Colin Powell came to the attention of many African Americans who didn't even know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who he was, you know. But at that time, he's appointed head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, so did you play any role in Desert Storm? Speaker 1: I was in Korea during that. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Speaker 1: And so when I got to the Command and General Staff College, it was loaded with people who had just come back from that 'cause that was a pretty quick event, you know. So, yeah, because I was in that theater, I did not go. I stayed in Korea during that time period. Speaker 2: Yeah, but this was-- Speaker 1: You know, Colin Powell, my father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] probably told you. I mean he and Colin Powell were like contemporaries at the same time, kind of growing up, along with, under [Julius] Becton [also a HistoryMaker] (laughter). Speaker 2: So did you know these, did you know Colin Powell at this point? I mean had you-- Speaker 1: Not really. I didn't. My dad did. I knew General Becton. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: For sure, you know, I knew him when I was a cadet. And when I was a senior I remember going down there and he was either getting ready to take over the 1st Calv [Calvary] Division or maybe he had already or he'd just come out of it, one of the two. Story_ID: 36391 Speaker 1: So you're in Command [and General Staff] College [CGSC] at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. Okay. Well, tell us what happened? Speaker 2: I mean that was just regular school year of education and things of that nature. Speaker 1: And I got selected to go to the 82nd Airborne Division [Fort Bragg, North Carolina]. So I went there as a major. I was, you know, I'm coming in with a ton of airborne experience from my four years in the Ranger Regiment. But I had never done big, giant airborne operations. Rangers do small things, you know, smaller sized things. And I was the executive officer, Number Two of a battalion when I came in. My brigade commander was David H. Petraeus, was my boss. I--oh, I take that back, I take that back. That was later. It was a guy named Bob Harper. And so when I, as soon as I got there, started immediately training to go, back then, the Multinational Force and Observers was a big mission. This was the organization that sat between the Israeli's and the Egyptians in the Sinai Peninsula. And so I deployed over there for six months as the second in command of that battalion. I had a great experience doing that, being away, by yourself, with your unit, being in a senior leadership position of that organization, getting to tour the--as a Christian, getting to tour the Holy Land, and I had an opportunity to do that on mid-tour break and climb Mount, you know, Mount Sinai. I mean that was pretty cool to do that kind of thing. So I had that experience. I came back from that experience to finish that year, and then I was picked up. I did well in that assignment, and then so the division commander chose me to come up to be his Deputy G-3, so the deputy operations officer of the division. And I went to do that. I had a great experience under a guy named John Scroggins who was my brigade--my G-3. I was the Deputy G-3; learned a lot about airborne operations at a grander scale, serving in that role, which then really helped me later in life. Story_ID: 36392 Speaker 1: So while there [82nd Airborne Division, Fort Bragg, North Carolina], one day I remember my one-star, over top of me, walked into my office. And that's unusual, and he walked--I was a major. He walked in and he goes, hey, do you have anything, you know, got any hidden things in your closet that would prevent you from doing a very sensitive position? I go, no, sir. I don't know what you're talking about. And he goes, you're being considered for something very significant. I can't tell you right now, but you're being considered for something very significant. And he says, I just wanted to check. Anyway, a couple of weeks go by, and the next thing you know, I'm getting, I get a call saying, you've been selected to interview, to be the aide [-de-camp] to the Chief of Staff of the United States Army, Gordon R. Sullivan. And I said, holy mackerel, I don't even know him. I've never met him. How did that happen? I went up. I interviewed. He sat me down on a couch. He talked to me for about twenty minutes. I, he goes--and I didn't think I got it. And he said, well, you know, he said, you know, if you get this job, you're gonna have a lot of people trying to get through you to me. He said, you're gonna have to deal with a lot of senior people in that regard. And I said, sir, I can handle that. And I, our karma just kind of clicked, and then he goes, well, we'll be in touch with you. So when he said it that, he didn't say, hey, you got the job. And I figured, okay, well, I don't think I got it. I went home. About two days later I got this phone call saying, "Congratulations, can you be up here next week?" (Laughter) Story_ID: 36393 Speaker 1: And within a week, they flew me back up there to go on a, like a seven-country trip [as the aide-de-camp of the chief of staff of the U.S. Army], swing with the old guy I was replacing so that I could--that's why they wanted me to come so fast, so I could see how to do the kinds of things I had to do in that role. And there's probably nobody that has had a greater influence on me as a military professional than that man, Gordon R. Sullivan [former chief of staff of the U.S. Army]. My father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] certainly has been a tremendous influence in terms of character and work ethic and things like that. But this man had that, plus how to lead, how to lead, how to think strategically, how to, you know, use your position to get things done, but not be overbearing. He was a masterful, brilliant man. And I was with him for two years. And I kind of got him in stride. And so he was on his last two years as chief, so, you know, he knew exactly what he was doing, and I was witnessing all these things. I kept a journal. I mean I've been to every place you can think of, you know, from Mogadishu [Somalia] to Rwanda to, you name it, and anywhere there was a soldier. And-- Speaker 2: Now, is '94 [1994] when they had the Rwandan crisis. Speaker 1: I was there (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: So, yeah, so that was, I think that probably would have been, it probably would have been '94 [1994]. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I think it is. I think you're--that was '94 [1994] and-- Speaker 1: I can remember landing at the--you know, again, I'm, you know, in my roots, I'm a paratrooper at heart. So, and I'm a ranger. So, you know, one of the Mecca locations for special operations is, events was the Entebbe raid by the Israelis in Entebbe, Uganda. Speaker 2: Uganda, yeah. Speaker 1: And so when we flew in there, we flew into that airport, and you could still see the 707 that the, that was hijacked, still sitting there in 1994 from whenever that was, which would have been probably fifteen years prior to that. And you could still see bullet holes in the tower. They had built a new part of the run--of the airport, but the old part of the airport still looked like it had just been hit. And that was a very interesting experience to see that. Speaker 2: So you were in Entebbe, you were in Rwanda. You weren't there during the crisis, but afterwards to see-- Speaker 1: Well, no, we were there during the crisis (laughter). Speaker 2: Entebbe, that's the-- Speaker 1: Oh, no, not during the-- Speaker 2: You saw the aftermath of that. Speaker 1: Yes, correct. Speaker 2: But you were there during the Rwandan crisis-- Speaker 1: Correct, correct. Speaker 2: And Mogadishu, right? Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Now, the Black Hawk Down incident took place, what, in 1993? Is that right? Speaker 1: Yeah, October, '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It was, I think it was October. Speaker 2: Right, right, so that was-- Speaker 1: I was there right after that, a little after that. Speaker 2: Yeah, Somalia basically didn't have a government really at--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, it didn't. Matter of fact, it was very interesting to go, you know, we're all bunkered in where we were staying, and then when you go out, you know, fly in a helicopter to go look at the site where that happened, you know, and how you stand off, to make sure you're not, your helicopter doesn't get whacked, you know, it was pretty interesting. Story_ID: 36394 Speaker 1: So was the U.S. Army there as a part of a U.N. peacekeeping force or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: There was a multinational force there, Pakistanis, French. There was a bunch of countries that were in there. Speaker 1: And that's still-- Speaker 2: And they had a U.S. commander. Speaker 1: I think the country still basically doesn't have a government-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --even today. Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right, you're right, very unstable, which is, unfortunately, because that's the kind of place becomes a safe haven for terrorists. Speaker 1: Right, I know they still have pirate activity off the coast and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: So, so you're getting a--once again, you're getting this mentorship and tour as a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --aide-de-camp to someone who's doing a lot of different things-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you're able to shadow them. Speaker 2: Right, Bosnia, everywhere, Bosnia, all, everywhere that there was something going on. And, you know, and witnessed, some very historic kinds of things occurred too, fiftieth anniversary of D-Day. You know, we--I went with him on a contingent over there, and we had, I witnessed, I got to meet men and women that were involved in that fight. And, you know, Saint-Mere-Eglise, where paratroopers landed, Omaha Beach, you know, where the 29th came ashore on--I mean you're in all these places where, you know, history was made, to be there and because he's who he was, obviously, you have people walking him through what happened there in a deep--level of detail that you wouldn't normally get if you were just your average tourist. We took with us a medal of honor winner, Walter Ailers (ph.), was part of our party, won the Congressional Medal of Honor. And his brother was killed there on the beach, you know, to see--interact with this guy and for him to go up and touch the monument that has his brother's name on it, see his reaction, forty years, fifty years later-- Speaker 1: So you're there in '95 [1995], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, 1995. Speaker 2: It was incredible. President Clinton [President Bill Clinton] came over there and did--you know, all these heads of state from all these governments, all of them came, were there. It was incredible. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you were with Gordon R. Sullivan through the end of '95 [1995] or-- Speaker 2: I was with him until June of '95 [1995]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36395 Speaker 1: And then I was selected to go command a battalion in the 82nd Airborne Division, and I went right back to the same battalion I was in when I was a major, same battalion, 1st of the 504, 1st Battalion, 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment, the Red Devils. And I commanded that battalion, I actually got there in October. I commanded it from October of '95 [1995] to October of '97 [1997]. Speaker 2: Now, this is what you have said is your most wonderful experience as a commander, right? Speaker 1: Well, my most wonderful experience was when I commanded the brigade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so, which is coming, so I commanded for two years there. And just, I had a great experience there too. I mean it's hard. I mean my Ranger Company experience was phenomenal as a shaping experience for me. I also loved being the aide [-de-camp] to the Chief of Staff of the Army [Gordon R. Sullivan], but from a command, leadership, interaction perspective, I'd say Ranger Company Command and, well, probably brigade commander in the 82nd, Ranger Company Command and then probably battalion command were the things that really, just were phenomenal. And then probably being the commandant of West Point [United States Military Academy]. I can't throw that out. And, and they're, but they're all different kinds of experiences. When I was a battalion commander, I can recall, you know, having the experience of, you know, because one--the Airborne Battalion in Italy was in Bosnia, and then they thought they were gonna have to do a noncombatant evacuation operation out of another country, Burundi which is right below Rwanda 'cause all that violence was moving down there. And I'd been there. So I can remember one really freezing, cold January getting called to get all my officers or all my planning staff and flew to Italy, to plan to go do neo-operation Burundi. I mean I had all kinds of good experiences like that when I was in, a battalion commander. And when I was a battalion commander, that's when David Petraeus was my brigade commander for the vast majority of it, and then the last three or four months, I had a guy named Carl Horst who's a friend of mine. So Petraeus was a great boss to have. He really, that guy taught me how to, about training too. He was a really good person for being innovative, very innovative leader, very focused in terms of having a PT physical culture. And, you know, just I was always raised to make sure my units were ready to do what they were gonna be called to do in action, right? So being physically fit, being well equipped and trained, being mentally straight so that they were clear in terms of what they had to do, having clear guidance and having the right resources to prepare themselves. That's sort of like really the essence of what I was trying to do when I was in command. And that, a lot of that kind of came from some of these other leaders, especially when I was in the Ranger Battalion, but also Petraeus was really good about that, in terms of teaching me that. Story_ID: 36396 Speaker 1: Okay, so what do these statistics sound like? We have some stats from 1996 that say that African Americans comprised about 21.9 percent of the total enlisted forces in the United States, 30.2 percent of the [U.S.] Army, 18.5 percent of the [U.S.] Navy, 17.1 percent of the [U.S.] Marines and 16.8 percent of the [U.S.] Air Force, and all these figures are above the proportion of African Americans in the total population which is about 11.5 percent. So-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think what you're seeing there is, is the Army--you know, I talked a long time ago here about, even when I was a little kid, about the Army was colorblind. I had opportunity in the Army. My, when I lived at Fort Leavenworth [Kansas] as a little kid, that was the first real integrated place I'd ever really lived. So I think minorities, in particular, see that, can see the military as a place of opportunity and where they can get an equal shot. I also, though, see that, you know, you tend to see a lot of minorities, African Americans, in particular, can be overrepresented in say, the com--some of the combat units. And some people would say, well, you know, they, they're being put out there as cannon fodder or things of that nature. But I'm not one that believes that at all because I would say, you know, your most elite forces, those people who are out on the point of the spear, they're not thinking about cannon fodder. We don't put people out--the military, the U.S. Army doesn't have cannon fodder, human capital is not cannon fodder. We don't ever, we don't look at it that way. That might have been some [American] Civil War mentality, but that's not the mentality today, or not my, not since I've been in the Army. You know, so when I hear that, I don't subscribe to that as being legitimate. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you think for the most part, it's because of the opportunities that-- Speaker 2: I think so. I think it's the opportunities. Maybe there's no--you know, we tend to do, when the Army is, the Army does, or the military does best in terms of recruiting when there's problems in the, on the civil section, in terms of job opportunities, and when there is plenty opportunities in the civil section, that's when the military tends to have bigger challenges in terms of recruiting. And so if there's opportunity, you know, in the military, I think people naturally gravitate to that to seek that opportunity. Speaker 1: Now, these are figures that represent, figures in an all-volunteer force, right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: No one-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and this is no comp--yeah, nobody's compelling these people to be in a particular military occupational specialty. And nobody's compelling them, right, to be in the military, period. So that adds to my point even more. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Okay, so that's the lay of the land in 1997. Story_ID: 36397 Speaker 1: Now, you're in a, you're a lieutenant colonel by this point? Speaker 2: I'm a lieutenant colonel, right, had been selected for lieutenant colonel. I came out of the, out battalion command, and I was selected at that time to go be the chief of operations for the 18th Airborne Corps, so the largest war-fighting corps, airborne corps in the world, is the 18th Airborne Corps. It is headquartered at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] as well. Well, this same man who I told you about a little while ago, when I was a Deputy G-3 back as a major who was the G-3 of the 82nd Airborne Division, has now grown up himself, commanding a brigade and is now the G-3 of the 18th Airborne Corps. And he came to get me from the battalion commander to come be his chief of operations, of current operations. So I did that for a year, and then when it was, which was a phenomenal experience, one of the largest--I participated in one of the largest airborne assaults since World War II, the big exercise they had up there called Purple Dragon. General Jack Keane was the corps commander then. And it was really trying to reinvigorate the power of airborne operations and the flexibility it gave combatant commanders. I, then, towards the end of that year, I had a wonderful thing happen to me. I had been selected to go to the Army War College. So I knew I was gonna go do that next. Story_ID: 36398 Speaker 1: And then I had been nominated and picked to go command a ranger battalion, which there has never been a black ranger battalion commander. And I was ecstatic that I was gonna go--and I was going to 2nd Ranger Battalion up in Fort Lewis, Washington. And the regimental commander said, hey, you might--we wanna keep our commanders for two years. You might actually have to command that battalion, even as a colonel, for up to six months to a year because I gotta keep the continuity. You know, are you willing to do that? And I said, absolutely, I'd love to go back and command a regiment battalion. And so I was all excited about doing that, and then he told me, he says, okay, one caveat. If you get selected for brigade command which will come out between the time you go to this ranger battalion, and if you come out on the brigade command list, I cannot, I will not be able to keep you as a ranger battalion commander to defer going to a brigade. That wouldn't make sense. And the Army wouldn't let me do it. And that happened. So good news is I got picked up early to command a brigade. Bad news is, because I did, it caused me not to be able to go to that ranger battalion. And so I ended up going to the War College, and then coming right out of there and going straight into brigade command. And it came right back to my beloved 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment, the third time now (laughter), you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it is here that I, I'm just, I'm most comfortable, most prepared, best fit for that job of any I've ever had, was that job there. I mean I knew that place inside and out-- Speaker 2: I would guess (laughter)-- Speaker 1: I'd been the head of operations of the organization above it at Corps. I've been the WG-3 of the 87--of the division, that, which it was in. I've been a battalion commander, I've been a major, I mean I was thriving. That was a great assignment. Speaker 2: Fort Bragg again, right? Speaker 1: Fort Bragg. Speaker 2: Fort Bragg, North Carolina, okay. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 36399 Speaker 1: Now, this is, this takes us to the year 2000, right? Speaker 2: Yep, so I was, my oldest daughter [Bethany] is about to graduate from college--or correction, high school. She's been selected to go to the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, which we're excited about. My division commander, a guy named J.R. Vines, great American, who I served with numerous times, says to me, he goes, hey, as spring comes around, I'm gonna need a new chief of staff of the division. He goes nobody knows the division better than you. I'd like you to stay in the 82nd Airborne Division as my chief of staff, after you come out of brigade command for a year. I'm gonna go seek that now so that, because I know you're gonna get sought to be like a military advisor to the chairman or to the chief or something like that, which a lot of former brigade commanders do. And I said, sir, I sign up. I was excited. It was gonna let me be quasi near my daughter, going to college for her freshman year. And I had another daughter, Number Two, was gonna be a senior. So it was gonna let me get her through her senior year. So everything was great. I get a call in say, April. And I'm gonna change command in May. And I get a call in April saying, Colonel Brooks? Yes. Hey, I'm calling you from assignments branch. You're gonna be, you're gonna be reassigned. You're gonna go be the special assistant to the commanding general, 1st Armor Division in Germany. And I said, no, I'm not. I'm gonna be chief of staff of the 82nd Airborne Division. He goes, let me try this again. And this time he said, congratulations, you're gonna be the special assistant to the commanding general, 1st Armor Division. What he was telling me was that I was on the one-star list which had not come out yet. But I'm already coming out of command. So instead of, you know, sending me some place that I, you know, that didn't make sense, they sent me to the job they wanted me to have as a one star. But they sent me even before it came out that I was gonna be a one star. And I was, you know, and I said, wow, and this is something I really admired General [Eric] Shinseki. He was the Chief of Staff of the [U.S.] Army at the time. And so when you think about the, everything I've described to you, 101st Airborne Division, Air Assault, four and a half years, 1st Ranger Battalion, Airborne, four years, three different assignments in the 82nd Airborne Division, okay. And what do they do to me when I become a general, they send me to the heaviest unit in the Army in Germany, which I've never been, okay. Story_ID: 36400 Speaker 1: Now, it was, it was a great experience and it worked out because what it did was, it took me totally out of my comfort zone. It exposed me to a piece of the [U.S.] Army I had not really been involved with. I got mentored and coached by great leaders over there, and, you know what? I brought things to them that they didn't know or do because of where I had come from with my experiences. Speaker 2: So you're saying there might be some wisdom in this-- Speaker 1: Oh, it was great wisdom. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, you know, I thought, you know, in doing that. It's a risk--I don't know if that's something I'd do with everybody, but it's a risk worth taking if you think you have somebody who can pull it off. So packed up, went over there, and did that. Before I went, I literally said, okay, I told you that he called me in April. I'm changing in May. As soon as I changed in May, I had a couple weeks. I said, okay. I called Fort Knox [Kentucky], the Armor School, and I said, I need the best master gunner, tanker you can find to spend a week with me teaching me about a tank, and about the capabilities of the armored force and whatever, and I--good ole E-7, master gunner, do that. And then I went to Fort Benning [Georgia], and I had somebody do that on a Bradley, fighting vehicle, the infantry fighting vehicle, the same way for a week. And so, you know, what I've learned, and this was the thing why I think it's a wise thing to try is that a lot of the things, the nuance, the tactics of fighting and all that, they're no different, may move at a different pace, may have different ranges or weapon capability, but in the end, you need to know how to integrate 'em all, right, bring in fire support, bring in air support, set conditions to let your people get to where they need to be so that they can, at the decisive moment in time, they have an overwhelming advantage. That's the same whether you're an Airborne guy or you're a Mec guy. And it's just how you do it. So anyway, it was a wonderful experience in Germany. Story_ID: 36401 Speaker 1: I was there [U.S. Army; 1st Armor Division, Germany] on 9/11 [September 11, 2001; terrorist attacks on the United States]. I was actually in Hungary on a deployment. My division had probably a third of the division, half the division almost, was in Hungary on a major exercise with the Hungarian Army. These guys were using Soviet equipment. We had just done a major, live-fire maneuver with a U.S. and a Hungarian armored unit. I mean we have Hine helicopters flying with Apaches. We have all kinds of things happening (unclear) jointly. The president of the country was there. At that particular event, I was the senior U.S. military official. And after it was over with, we had lunch out in a tent, out in the field with the president and their leadership. And it was literally, believe it or not, that was a rehearsal for the next day, a whole bunch of NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] leaders were coming in. And at this time, Hungary was trying to become part of NATO. So the president was kind of watching the dress rehearsal before that big NATO event. And while we were, after the president left, me and my Hungarian general counterpart were kind of doing high five's about, hey, wasn't that great, great show. And that's when I got the phone call, telling me, you know, over there, it was lunchtime in the afternoon, that it had happened. And I got--then I called my commanding general, Rick Sanchez, who told me, leave everybody down there--remember, we don't know what's going on at that time, leave everybody down there. Put one of the brigade commanders in charge, get back here as fast as possible. And so I literally got on a helicopter which is--that's a long way to fly in a helicopter and flew for hours to get back to Germany to start securing our locations and trying to figure out how we're gonna secure all our population. The thing I'll never forget about that was, I was down in my emergency operations center. I was responsible physically--I lived in a town called Baumholder. The Baumholder concern was one of "the" largest Army concerns or Army locations in Germany, right, in terms of troop population. It had a high school. It had a couple middle schools, and elementary schools. It had a middle school. It was, it was a, it had a maneuver brigade on it, it had an engineer brigade. It had a lot of stuff on it. And that's where I lived. And so I was trying to synchronize and coordinate how we were gonna secure our base because we had pockets of housing that was out in the community. And again, at that first few days, nobody knew where this was emanating from, what was, who was another target or whatever. And as I was in my emergency operations center, working on this plan, my garrison commander walked up to me and says, you have got to go to the front gate. I said, I don't have time to go to the front gate. Sir, you have got to go to the front gate. And I said, why? He says the mayor and almost, the whole town is at the front gate. And so I got in my vehicle, and went up there. And a very touching thing, and that was the mayor, Mayor Peas [ph.], was his name, Mayor Peas and all the citizens of Baumholder. They had shut down school, and they were there with votive candles and flowers. And we had 'em locked out, you know, at that point. They couldn't come in the gate, where before, the day before, it would have been a total open post. You could do, come in and out as you wanted. And all these people down there to show their solidarity, you know, with us. And he says, I'm so sorry. We're with you, we're with you, very important thing for me in term of I--my love for the German people and how they were with us during that time. And their local police were incredible in terms of like anywhere we had pockets to secure our people. And, you know, we had scares here and there, a lot of stuff just because we kind of thought it was something, it wasn't, you know, over there--. Story_ID: 36402 Speaker 1: And then we start--and a little while later, we start planning for what we were gonna do in Iraq from over there. Speaker 2: I think first came Afghanistan, though, right? To try to find the-- Speaker 1: Well, we started, we were never planning-- Speaker 2: Okay, you, okay, you (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --to go to Iraq. We were totally focused on Iraq. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, you're right. There was an Airborne operation, my old ranger unit, okay, that parachuted into Afghanistan, okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so that was the 82nd Airborne? Speaker 1: No, that was the 75th Ranger Regiment. Speaker 2: Okay, oh, the rangers, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, so they did, you're correct. They did that. And then there was 101st and 10th Mountain Division went in there, going after Osama Bin Laden, okay. That, in the (unclear) Shellery Code Valley. That was 101st, 10th Mountain Division, convention wise, that were doing that. The very first people, you know, major ground combat, other than special forces though, was like the 75th Ranger Regiment. They jumped on Kandahar Airfield, as I recall. Story_ID: 36403 Speaker 1: Now, the U.S., when the U.S. announced the invasion of Iraq or even was, the build up to it, the presentation that General [Colin] Powell before the U.N. [United Nations], did you have any second thoughts about that? I know soldiers don't necessarily question their orders, but I'm just--I just wonder-- Speaker 2: Not really, and we were shooting (unclear), when we were starting to plan for that, I still remember, my corps commander, Lieutenant General Scott Wallace, called all the generals up to his headquarters and put us in the classified skiff, you know, location. It was really interesting. I said, and he goes, "Gentlemen, I've been given a task to start planning something that I have been worrying about for weeks. And I don't wanna be the only one worrying about it. So now, you're gonna help me worry about." And then they briefed us on what was going on and what our plan was. And then we started coordinating the, you know, what we were gonna do in terms of heavy forces, you know, putting stuff on ships and going down there. And then, so--and that was probably December, January, something like that. I left, so that, yeah, so that was September. By December-January, we were already thinking about it. Then I went to, but then the summer came, right, and I already thought, this is the second time, one of many times this happened to me, the four star over there, General Meigs, Monty Meigs, said to me, he goes, hey, I want you to stay over here and how'd you like to be the corps chief of staff of the Fifth Corps. So, you know, now, I'm gonna go be the chief of staff of a mechanized corps, you know. And I was good to do that 'cause it was gonna go down range and it was gonna keep me another year in Europe, which I was having fun over there. And I adapted to that well. And General [Eric] Shinseki came over, witnessed me and my division going through war planning for Iraq, like something, and the next thing you know, my assignment's changed. I'm gonna be commandant of West Point [United States Military Academy]. And, you know, you're going to West Point, which from--being Fifth Corps chief of staff would have been great, but having the honor of being responsible for training and educating and mentoring and being a role model for the corps cadets was, you know, just a phenomenal honor that I could, I mean it was just an incredible experience. So that's, so I ended up going there. Story_ID: 36404 Speaker 1: And I'll never forget. So I was, I swore in the first class on the first day [at the United States Military Academy at West Point]--they call it reception day of 2002, the first class past 9/11 [September 11, 2001; terrorist attacks], post-9/11, you know. The kids that came in there all knew what they were getting into. We hadn't even really fought really yet, but they all knew that that, they coming in time of war. And-- Speaker 2: This is the first class that's come in, in a time of really, real war since-- Speaker 1: Well, see like Desert Storm, Panama, all those things were fast. They were short and they were over, you know. They were months, and they're done, right. This, this was a, the nation is at war, you know, and I mean, shoot, what's it been? Eleven years. So-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and I will tell you that in the time since I was the commandant of cadets, there are probably, at least twenty-six students that were there while I was there that have been killed in action between Afghanistan and Iraq, at least twenty-six. And these young people paying a big price. But, you know, they're all signing up, I mean they're not--and I'm telling you, and I know a lot of them, you know. And it's, this is--but they all sign up for it. I mean they know what they're getting into. I mean no one's signing up to die, but I mean they sign up knowing that's a potential risk. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I had a, it was a wonderful experience being there. Speaker 2: So, it seems like I should go back to how you found out you were gonna be commander at West Point. I mean that's really a big thing and I don't know. I mean how did you feel about that? Speaker 1: I was struggling. It was sort of like when I got, found out I was gonna be the aide [-de-camp] to the chief of staff of the [U.S.] Army and when I found out I was gonna be the commander of a brigade in the 82nd [Airborne Division], I was like, I was like humbled. I thought about the giants. I knew who had had that job before. I thought about the opportunity to touch future generations. I thought about how I viewed my commandant when I was a cadet and what that person was. And at the time, I was really hungry. I was looking forward to it. Speaker 2: Who was the commandant when you were a cadet? Speaker 1: John C. Bard, B-A-R-D, well, so I had--there were two. So the first one I had was Walter Ulmer, and the second one was John Bard, B-A-R-D. Nobody forgets their commandant. You might not remember some things, but you don't forget who your commandant was when you were a cadet. Story_ID: 36405 Speaker 1: Typically, how long does a commandant stay [at the United States Military Academy at West Point]? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's an interesting thing. So what they'll do is, is so there's three generals at West Point, right. There's a superintendent, there's a commandant, and there's a dean. The superintendent's a three star. It's by mandate the way the [U.S.] Army does it now is that guy is gonna have that job. He's gonna do it for four years and he's gonna retire. And so he can't be influenced by other people because he's trying to get promoted or whatever. So that's a four-year job, and you get the stability of somebody that's kind of running a university as a president of the university. You got the dean. The dean is normally a, is always somebody who used to be a department head of one of the academic departments. That job's five years. So this, that person kind of has grown up through the academic system at West Point, wearing a uniform, is active-duty military, but, you know, preponderance of their military career is as a professor. So then you got the, you have that. You have those two bookends, right, this academic professional and this senior president, kind of guy, who's over, top of everything. So then how do you make sure you have relevance in terms of what do we want our, the military aspect, in terms of what we want ingrained and the warrior ethos we want ingrained in our cadets. How do we make 'em, you know, street smart, you know, how do we make them to be good ambassadors out there? How do we teach 'em to be good leaders to deal with adversity, those kinds of things. While all, every aspect of the cadet experience has a role in that, the Office of the Commandant is principally responsible for it. And that person's only there two years for a reason. And that's because they want somebody, the mud is still wet on their boots. They know what the field needs 'cause they just came from it, you know. And if you stay too long, you lose your edge. Speaker 1: You get out of touch. Speaker 2: You get out of touch. And so that's why they normally just keep that job two years. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now, what does the--well, you know, this is simple question. What does the commandant do, you know, serves as basically a college president and-- Speaker 2: No, the commandant, I would, the commandant has sort of the role of he or she is sort of the, I would call it the dean of students, serves in that kind of capacity, responsible for some educational things. For example, on military training, responsible for physical education, which is an academic course, and has academic requirements, responsible for managing and enforcing the honor code in our system. Responsible for ethics training. So, and then oversees all the clubs and things like that, extracurricular activities that occur. So, for example, like, you know, the sailing club, the mountain climbing club, the scuba club, all those kinds of activities and intramural activities, the rugby club, team, all those things kind of fall under the commandant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's like the dean of students and provost or something. Story_ID: 36406 Speaker 1: What were some of the actual issues that you had to deal with when you were commandant of West Point [United States Military Academy]? Speaker 2: So, while I was commandant, it was the same time that the [U.S.] Air Force Academy had some issues with command climate or climate as it relates to sexual harassment by students, not by faculty, but, you know, men sexual abuse, or whatever, of men to women. Speaker 1: Because women are at the Air Force Academy now and at West Point. Speaker 2: And there were--they all came in together in 1980-- Speaker 1: 1980. Speaker 2: --the Class of 1980. So 1976 is when they all, all of three of 'em at the same time. So, you know, we, you know, same students, same kind of issues. Okay, we had our share of incidents like that where you might have had, where you had inappropriate relationships between, you know, maybe a freshman and senior or you had female, you know, you had sexual assault allegations. You know, we had a couple of those too. I had one real bad thing where I had just this brilliant female student, academically gifted, who, but was involved in selling cocaine. I mean she got thrown out and went to jail, you know, unusual, incredibly unusual, but we had that happen. Had a case where a guy, where a student actually--we had to deal with things like pirating information. So in this day of technology, people download Napster, download songs and things of that nature. Okay, so that's how they all grew up doing that, that that's acceptable. But that is stealing, proprietary music from a--and we had to work through how technology--changes in technology, how does it affect our ethical behavior and what is an accepted norm, things like that. Story_ID: 36677 Speaker 1: So the, at any rate, we had issues like that [at the United States Military Academy at West Point; Brooks was the commandant of cadets there from 2002-2004]. I mean I, thankfully, I don't recall--I had one kid that died while I was there, now that I think about it. Speaker 2: Was that due to some hazing or something? Speaker 1: No, this young man, his name was Todd Hoinkling (ph.). I won't forget him either 'cause I was with him when he was actually pronounced dead. This young man was a sophomore. He was trying out for the Marathon Team. They had like an eight-mile trial run, and it ended about 200 feet from my quarters where I lived at West Point. And he, just ran, there were water stations and things, but anyway, as he--he ran himself to the point of heat exhaustion, heat stroke, and he was running--he was, I am not kidding you, he was 150 yards from the finish line, and he just collapsed, literally in the, right in front of the dean's house, next door to me. And he got back up, took about three more steps and then boom, went down hard. They called the ambulance and took him up to the emergency room. And he died. And just unbelievable. I mean they worked on him hard and trying to get him revived, but died. And so that was a, that was a hard thing, you know, but, to deal with. And then to talk, trying to find his parents and tell his parents. And then I took a contingent of cadets to present the flag to his mother, which was a hard thing. So that's the one loss I had while I was there or I had, or we had as an academy. I feel like they're mine too. Speaker 2: Okay, now, here you are. This is maybe almost a hundred years since the first African American, you know, attended West Point for the first time. Was there any incidents of racism when you were there? Speaker 1: There were isolated, not, not--there were no incidents of racism that I would call institutional. There were incidents of racism that were individual. People who would use racial comments, racial slurs. People that might get you, may focus on you. You clearly could tell that it was racially motivated in terms of the veracity of their anger, in terms of how they might direct things at you. I think that the--there were enough, and I witnessed this with women too, by the way, okay, when they came in, a similar pattern because there were some that just didn't want them there, and said I'm gonna do everything in my power to run 'em all out. And the same thing you had with some blacks, you know, with African Americans there. The good news was that, you know, if you knew that was the case, and you could prove it, you could sure--you know, no one was gonna tolerate it. The problem you have is is, if you're--especially, if you're an underclassman, a freshman, you know, you tend as a victim, sometimes people fear saying something for fear that if, you know, the wrath could be even worse if the perpetrator is not thrown out. Speaker 2: Yeah, I take it that a freshman's subject to a lot of wrath anyway, just as--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. And so I think that--and maybe as a freshman having a little bit less trust in the system than somebody who's more senior might have because they've witnessed the system to be fair. A freshman doesn't have that perspective. They know you've told them, but they don't have it. Story_ID: 36678 Speaker 1: This occurred to me, and I don't know if you had any or not, but were there any Arab Americans at West Point? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Going through? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Matter of fact, not only are there some, there are actually international students at West Point who are actually from those countries as international exchange students, from Iraq, from Afghanistan, both. Speaker 1: So it-- Speaker 2: And from other countries. Speaker 1: The 9/11 [terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001] perpetrators were basically from Egypt and Saudi Arabia and I think-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Syria, I think. Speaker 2: Um-hum, I know Egypt and Saudi. I'm not sure of all of them, but, right, exactly. Speaker 1: Right, right. And I would, and U.S. relations with those countries was still solid, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, thankfully, we don't, you know, because of the act of a few, we don't say the whole nation is bad, you know. It's easy for people to generalize and get there, you're right, you know, but thankfully, we don't, haven't had to--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But did they have a rougher time in the population? Speaker 2: Not that I recall. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean not that I recall. Now, let me state. When I was the commandant, right, we didn't have exchange students from those countries 'cause we hadn't invaded there yet, you know, not really. I mean we were just starting, right, our operations over there. Matter of fact, the ground war in which my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] was the spokesman for, I can remember watching that when I was the commandant. I was going, I was in the airport going to Paris [France] to give a speech when that happened, you know. I guess it was March. And, you know, and I had come in the previous June, you know, June to that role. Speaker 1: This is 2003, for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --just to refresh people. Story_ID: 36679 Speaker 1: So, now, what was, how did you feel about, I mean I've read here in the material that we have that you have strong feelings about the role of the chaplain? Speaker 2: Yep, I do. I tell you what. Every unit I've ever been in, I've seen the chaplain serve as a force multiplier. I told you how important the chaplain was for me when I was a cadet in terms of giving me inner strength and support or help me find inner strength and support, when I was a freshman and then continue on through that. So, everywhere I've ever been, I've used my chaplains. When I was a brigade commander, the first thing, and I did it on purpose, the first thing I did when I was a brigade commander, and after I took command, I took command. I went in my headquarters, and they said, my sergeant major said, sir, who do you wanna see first? You wanna go see the battalion commanders, you wanna see--I said, I want the chaplain. What? (Laughter). Get me the chaplain. And the chaplain comes into my office, and I said, you know, I didn't make any public thing with everybody I had--me and him 'cause I knew the word was gonna get out, but it was personal and it was heartfelt. I said, chaplain, I want you to pray, I want you to pray for me, okay, that I will lead this brigade, you know, honorably and, you know, with integrity, and I would bring, you know, the honor due this organization and provide the best leadership that I can and that you would help guide me in doing that, that God will help guide me in doing that. And he was like, really? (Laughter) So anyway, that's how I started. When I was the commandant of West Point [United States Military Academy], I used to, once a month, I used to have all the chaplains--there was a chaplain for each one of the regiments, meet with me because I knew just because of my own experience that when something's churning, if there's racial things going on, if there's sexual issues that are happening going on, if there's some serious incident going on at somebody's home and they're contemplating suicide, if those things happen, for a lot of people, they're gonna go confide in that chaplain, okay, for some moral support in terms of how to deal with that they're dealing with. And I didn't want and didn't expect and didn't get anybody violating some confidentiality. But they could give me a sense better than almost anybody, in terms of what is the vibe going on in my unit? What is the, what are issues that are contentious that you might not even know they're percolating out there. And they really valued that, and they knew, and they could actually tell there's, there are people that come to see them, that, you know, hey, I'm gonna talk to, I'm gonna be able to talk to commandant, and I'm gonna be able to keep you in confidence, you know. If you got something we need to raise, you need to tell me, you know, and they would. And they'd tell me. And then I could go do something about it, okay. At my level, I had the ability to do something quick. And so I really valued them as a force multiplier like that. Story_ID: 36680 Speaker 1: Now, did you kind of dole out punishment the way you were describing when you were commander of a unit or a division of, I mean-- Speaker 2: Ah-- Speaker 1: --in terms of not, of using alternative punishment? Speaker 2: Right, so yes and no. So the, the--normally, for me, okay, I was normally an appellate authority or I, at my level, I was-- Speaker 1: So, by the time it got to you, it was-- Speaker 2: Somebody already decided something or they were recommending something, okay. Now, so that's the "no" part. So I didn't, I wasn't in as much, you know, I mean things were already happening, and I was maybe checking appellate authority. Now, here's the "yes" part. There were numerous occasions where, okay, something would come to me like honor cases are the most common, not a discipline, but an honor case. I, and it would be in my court in terms of what would be the recommendations to the superintendent? The superintendent generally is too far away from it to overturn something that I'm gonna do as the Commandant if what I'm doing is legally sufficient. And so, you know you're the decider. And you know that what you're doing is, determines whether this person's life is altered for life. They're gonna have to leave or not. They're gonna stay, it's still altered, but they stay and get a second chance. And I would look in people's souls. I would try to understand who they were, what they were. And I did try to, if I could, if I could, I'd defer on the side of, okay, if I really thought you were pinned, and you didn't violate something that for the good order and discipline of the organization, I couldn't look past it. If I could, I would give 'em a chance. I'd still maybe do something, but maybe I'd give 'em a chance. Like maybe I'd turn 'em back. I'd make 'em repeat a semester or repeat a year instead of throwing 'em out, depending on what it was, you know. I'm not a big believer in people that go everything's black and white, and every situation is the same in each and every case. I think that's crazy, you know. There are absolute, we have absolute standards about things, right? But there're mitigating circumstances around each one of those incidents. And you have to think through those things, especially when you're dealing with somebody's future. And I tended to be more like that than not. A lot of people thought I was hard, you know, but I, but I would be--there are things that were common threads. If I wasn't, you know, okay, look, if you violated these things, you're gonna be dead, you know. If you, but if I see that you--it wasn't a, I mean it was a stupid thing or whatever, maybe I'm gonna figure out how you're gonna get punished, but you're not gonna get the death penalty. That's sort of how I looked at it. Story_ID: 36681 Speaker 1: Okay, we have a quote that you said at a certain, I guess in a presentation that, the military is a profession with higher ethical standards than the rest of society. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: And, okay, can you kind of elaborate on that? Speaker 2: I think if you just look at what you see in everyday life, I don't care, even [U.S.] Congress, the things that occur with individuals, okay, in the workplace and in civil organizations, I mean in commercial organizations and, or in government, other branches of government, there is much more tolerance for those people than those who wear the uniform. We are, I think the country looks at us and expects us in the military to be held to a higher standard. We're in a profession, and that profession has a higher, moral ethos than a lot of other professions do because it deals with human lives more than others do. And so therefore, it's, sometimes some might see something happen on television, and you say, well, why? I can't believe for that they threw this general out or the punished this general for that. Well, people generally, within the profession, see it and go, well, you know, we hold ourselves to a higher standard. And by holding ourselves to a higher standard, we keep ourselves pure. And people are gonna make mistakes, people are human. Nobody's without sin, you know. But, you know, we are at a higher level than I would say, the normal society, in terms of what we expect for each other. And we hold--we keep each other accountable, accordingly. Speaker 1: Okay, you also said that you believe that a person is obligated to serve their country, whether it be in the military or some other form. Speaker 2: I agree with that too. I mean I tell you what, you know, my experiences that, I mean I've been very fortunate. I've been around the world. I've been in every crap hole place that the U.S. Army has got a troop. And Americans don't generally appreciate how good they have it. We got our warts in our democracy. That's for sure. Nobody would say we don't. Some of the things I see, and what's going on in Congress now, and stalemate, not doing the right things to get, you know, get--for example, our troops funded, you know, I think is abominable, right. At the same time, we have, we live in the greatest country in the world. We really, really do. And you'd know that if you went out and saw, people would die to have what we have. And I think it's not too much to ask for every able-bodied citizen to be able to give a little bit of their life to keep it that way. And I'm not saying you gotta pick up a gun. It could be public service. It could be counseling in prisons. It could be mentoring kids in the disadvantaged schools. It could be planting trees, you know, out in some area that's been deforested, you know. There are a hundred thousand different ways to help make this country stronger than it is. And it does include, though, making it safe. And I think we'd be much better off if everybody else had a stake in it as opposed to feeling like what they had, what we have is an entitlement, as opposed to feeling like it's something I need to cherish and help protect. Speaker 1: Now, do you embrace the concept of national service as in the Corporation for National [and Community] Service, Americorps, and-- Speaker 2: I do. I actually do. You know, I'm not sure how, you know, I couldn't say that it needs to be one year, two years, five years or whatever it is. But I do. I think there should be a need for national service in some way, you know. And who knows, maybe it is in your summers, while you're a college student, you have to--if you chose to, you could do "x", "y" and "z" for, you know, for four summers. Or maybe it is you got a year, you do something or you use your profession to do something. But we have, we have interns here at my company. We have interns all over the place doing something. Why can't we have interns doing, you know, focused on doing things? We do, like City Year and other groups like that, you know, that are out there trying to make the world a better place, make our country a better place, and I think there's nothing wrong with expecting people to contribute to that. Story_ID: 36682 Speaker 1: Okay, we talked about the high standard that the military holds for itself, and there's an expectation from the public that the military, you know-- Speaker 2: I, right. Speaker 1: --maintains a higher standard. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But if you could change something in the military yourself, I mean just ideally, what would you change? Speaker 2: So this will not meant to be, sound as double talk. I think that there is not an appreciation for the sacrifices that we put these men and women through and the--I'll call it (unclear) rules and regulations which are meant to protect the American taxpayer that are absolute silly nuisances, okay, and annoyances that I think just, that just turn off our leaders and make 'em wanna just say forget it. An example. I gotta go to a formal event where I'm gonna be, where I, where there'll be alcohol served or whatever at that event. I'm a general, and if I'm not the chief of staff of the [U.S.] Army or maybe some combatant commander, okay, I could drive myself to my office and I could have and it's unofficially then, and I could have my driver take me, but I couldn't have the driver come to my house and get me 'cause it violates domicile to duty rule. So you want me to go to the office, get in the military vehicle, have the military vehicle to take me to the event. Then the military vehicle, 'cause it, 'cause I can go to my, to a military location. I just can't go to my home, right. And then drive the vehicle to wherever I gotta go and then come back, and then have to get in my car after I drink a glass of wine or whatever, and go back. You know, I gotta take a spouse. I'm in my office in the Pentagon. I have to go--I live on Fort Myer [Virginia]. I need to go to an event. That car can't go get my spouse from that government quarter location. So it's relatively close and come get me, take me to that event. Nah, she gotta drive in and do it, so therefore, when we come back, we have to go get in--and transfer to a civilian car to go home. Yeah, there's perks that these people get, but the responsibility that we're putting on us, is incredibly significant. And I think that gets minimized. And I see people criticizing them, goes all these, they have enlisted aides, and they have, you know, guys that help cook their meals. Well, when--well, shoot, these, you know, some of the stuff that we're asking these people to do is so significant and the time we're asking them to contribute to it, guess what? You probably have it in corporate America. Somebody who has equal responsibility, you know. Why are we holding them to a different standard? [U.S.] Congress gets it. You know, so I don't like some of the rules that are in place like that, that are meant to protect the taxpayer, but in essence, they burden people. Story_ID: 36683 Speaker 1: I'd like to see a, I think I'd like to see a system that would help promote--I don't know what's going on, why we're having all these issues with sexual assault right now, sexual harassment in the military, but I do know that what we tend to do is we tend to, I'll say--I'm not gonna say overreact, but we tend to, we tend to, wherever the pendulum is, we swing way to the other side so then every, you know, everything is, you almost can't, you're almost forced into certain actions. I mean just look what's happening. So there are members of Congress that wanna take the authority away from commanders, the chairmen, all the combatant commanders, and their ability to perform UCMJ, Uniform Code of Military Justice because they don't think that the commanders will legally do something right. So we're just gonna take it away from 'em and create a special court for it. That kind of mentality to me is ludicrous. What they ought to be thinking about is, okay, well, okay, why did those commanders, if there was a case you didn't like, make that decision? And, and figure out what it is that you've gotta do to, you know, make sure they get the right training, if it--if there's a trend. I tell you, I don't believe there's a, you know, that's a trend like that. What I think you have is, you have people who, they're going off of the law, they're going off of what their legal counsel tells 'em. They're going after maybe the mitigating circumstances associated with it. And there's a whole lot of things that go into--and I know this from being a commandant [of cadets] at West Point [United States Military Academy], mitigating circumstances go into every event like that. We absolutely had to protect all of our people. We have to protect the women in our workforce, absolutely. They should feel absolutely safe just like every--you know, men do. But we don't want an environment where a man gets to the point where he can't even enter into a room with a colleague that happens to be a woman because he's afraid, what if she says I sexually assaulted her? You're moving to that kind of extreme, I think. Speaker 2: Have you ever had to, did you ever have to discipline a cadet for sexual harassment when you were commandant? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean in some cases I threw cadets out, you know. Absolutely, more than once. And so I think, I mean in one case, did it, and I had the parents come see me to explain to me why--and I knew the parents, why I should give their kid a fourth chance or whatever. You know, he had had minor things and that's, un-un. I don't want that going into my Army and then being, bringing that kind of mentality into the Army that you, 'cause that guy was a military professional too, the father, that you and I said we would never allow. That's one of those cases where I looked into the soul, and I could see, you're not different. You haven't changed. That wasn't an honest mistake. That wasn't a, you know, whatever. That was the, you're out, you know, so. I, so absolutely. I've done it in both cases. Story_ID: 36684 Speaker 1: Now, was there a highlight to being the commandant [of cadets] of West Point [United States Military Academy]? Speaker 2: I'd say the bookends [ph.]. So, well, the bookends are two days, are highlights for me. The first highlight is, the frontend bookend is, I can't tell you what it feels like on R-Day, the day they arrive. They all arrive, different shapes, sizes, haircuts, different clothes, and at the end of the day their parents are all, the ones that come up there, nervous, sick, you know. They know their kid's going through some trial. And they don't get to really see 'em, right? Then at the end of that day, that first day, they all come marching out. They're all in uniform. They all got a haircut. They all know how to salute, you know, and they, and the commandant is the one that gets to swear them in, to the United States Corps Cadets, you know. And to have that honor, to do that out on Trophy Point on the Hudson River, have 1,400 of these brand new, highly motivated, charged up, young people getting ready to start their journey in life, in the military, to swear them in is the most powerful feeling, awesome feeling, you know, one of the one's, most awesome things I've ever experienced, to see that and all that that's out there, looking at you. And then the bookend of that would be those that are experiencing the same experience I told you about when I graduated, of that sense of accomplishment, that total humbleness to think that, God, you helped, you got me through, you know, that feeling of rejoicing, of enduring that hardship at the other end, watching that, both times. Man, I tell you what, that put tears in your eyes, me, it did anyway, on both ends. Story_ID: 36685 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you have become, from what I've read here, somewhat of a historian on black participation at West Point, and some of the cadets who have come through and the struggles of your ancestors. You wanna give us a little bit of history? Speaker 2: Sure, so, I mean, and so, actually, the, you know, Henry O. Flipper was the first graduate of West Point. And to think that that guy--I think of the kind of abuse, I'll call it the ritualistic kinds of things I went through in 1975, to think what he was doing back in the 1800s is just unbelievable, you know. And so, and then there was a number of years, and I don't recall exactly what it is. It might have been ten or twelve until Charles Young came along after Flipper and graduated. But then, you know, the system got him and as it got a lot of people in the beginning. And it's like I used to tell people, and I believe this. You know, you can't be--when I went to the Ranger Regiment, I knew I had to do this. My dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] told me this. You can't be as good as your counterpart. You cannot be. If you're as good, you're gonna fail. You have to be better. You have to be so good that the people who you are serving with can't afford not to have you on their team, you know. That's what I kind of went through. That's what guys like, I think like Charles Young tried to do. He got, he got accused of stealing payroll and I think it was at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. He was court martialed. He went out of the [U.S.] Army, but he still wanted to serve his country. He took an appointment where he actually did something--I think it was Panama or in South America, still serving the Department of--, you know, the U.S. government, but in that role. You look at guys like Benjamin O. Davis, Class of 1936, was basically, silenced where nobody would talk to him, at the direction of his own classmates. The head classmate, by the way, his classmate that did that, was William C. Westmoreland, okay, who we all tout as this great leader in Vietnam. That guy was the instigator for not letting, you know, of trying to run Benjamin O. Davis out because he was black. Benjamin O. Davis died on 4th of July in 2002. And I tell you what, I had the great honor as the commandant of cadets to then take, you know, West Point cadets, down there with me to his funeral, to the place that, you know, really didn't treat him all that well. But he was honored to graduate from there, but never really kind of went back there and did anything because of the bad experience he had when he was a cadet. And then to go forward to have my, you know, to have my own little brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker] be the first African American, First Captain, you know, I, and I'd like to think I helped pave the way so that he could do that, where I was highest level that had been achieved. Some others had done that too, couple of 'em, and then the next year, they said, hey, we can have one that can do that, you know, you know. And, and served honorably, and you know what, there's been one other--well, there's been--there was the second one. You know when the second one occurred? The second, there was--the second black to become the First Captain occurred when I made him one when I was a commandant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his name is Ricardo Turner. And that guy has excelled out in the Army. He was selected early for major. He's out doing great things. He's been to combat numerous times, and just kicking out, in the Army as only--so, you know, these are great leaders that they just needed to have that same equal shot that everybody got. And he did, and has excelled. And now, the First Captain this past year, was a football player who is also an African American. So now there's been three. Story_ID: 36416 Speaker 1: Okay, so you retired in 2003. Speaker 2: 2006. Speaker 1: 2006, okay, all right. Speaker 2: August 1st, 2006. Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, that's right because you took, you were the commandant at West Point [United States Military Academy] and-- Speaker 2: And then I was the Vice Director of the Army Staff-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was my last assignment. Speaker 1: All right, well, tell us about that last assignment? Speaker 2: That was a phenomenal experience too. So Pete Schumacher was the chief of staff of the Army. The director of the Army staff was a guy named Jim Campbell, Lieutenant Jim Campbell. So as the vice director, you know, basically, I coordinated the Army staff. So I saw all the major actions coming into the, that were going into the Secretary [of the Army] or the Chief. I met, I spoke with a small group, like about three times a week, with the Secretary of the Army, myself. It was what was, I'll tell you a really interesting thing about my family. So when he would have the, me or the director, and normally, he had me, the vice director of the Army staff--this is the Secretary of the Army, he'd have his chief of Public Affairs, which was my brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker], and he had his acquisition executive and his lawyer, and his deputy. That would be the little morning meeting group. And so it was kind of cool that, you know, he's having his little group that meets to periodically, you know, to talk about what's going on in the Army, whatever, and two of 'em are brothers. And another thing that I didn't mention, which was kind of interesting, you know, I talked about my experience as the aide [-de-camp] to the chief of staff of the Army. Well, about, I was there for two years. About a year and a half into that, the vice chief of staff, the Number Two person in the Army picked an aide, and it was my brother. So for about six months, the, when you came into the headquarters suite of the Department of the Army, the chief and the vice chief--there was Lieutenant Colonel Brooks, and Lieutenant--and Major Brooks, you know, were the two aides to those senior leaders at the same time. I don't think that's ever been, ever (laughter), anywhere. Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: And, you know, I--one of the things I worked there was Abu Ghraib, the prison scandal, which was phenomenal. So, you know, there were about, I'd say somewhere in the order of seventeen different inspections, assessments, reports, investigations that were associated with the Abu Ghraib abuse, prisoner abuse, you know, fiasco. And so somebody had to go through and sift through every one of the recommendations that came from all those different things. And there was a bunch of 'em, over a--I want to say 300 and something recommendations that came out of that. Some of 'em didn't make any sense, you know, and you weren't gonna do 'em. Maybe it came from an organization that wasn't even military that did an assessment that just didn't have legal merit, right. But, but you couldn't afford not to have at least looked at 'em, and done the analysis of whether or not that was gonna be U.S. policy or not in the future. So the provost marshal of the United States Army sort of had overall responsibility for actually looking at the investigations themselves. Then myself and the intelligence officer of the Army, which was at that time, Lieutenant General Keith Alexander, the current commander of CYBERCOM [United States Cyber Command] in the NSA [National Security Agency], we more or less had the role of, okay, me, as a tasking order that could task the Army staff and could task major commands. And my role was to, as we got things, was to task organizations to either do research or to come in with a position or to write a policy position, based upon their, you know, whatever domain they might have oversight over. So I got to see every single thing that all the photos that were associated with that. I got to read every one of these reports. I had the opportunity to brief the Secretary of Defense, Secretary [Donald] Rumsfeld on it, on two occasions, and it was really an interesting experience to be in the Army and have that kind of insight into what was going on and something that was so significant and to be trusted to kind of help pull that together. Story_ID: 36417 Speaker 1: Yeah, did--what changed as a result? Was it policy or practice or both? Speaker 2: Both, so, well, one of the things that they did, there was not a clear standard for what, how all people who are combatants on a battlefield would be treated. You know, if you were a military combatant, you had these kind of rules. If you were not under the Geneva Convention, i.e., you were a terrorist, you had these kind of rules for interrogation. You know, if you were CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], you could do something else, and so it--and people might see these different techniques being used different places, and it was so convoluted that it was no wonder that people made mistakes. They might have seen something that might have been authorized in one theater, say Guantanamo, that because of the status of those people there, that wasn't authorized in Iraq, with a military combatant. And so, in essence, what happened is, is now there is one standard. There is, the Army has a proponent for the field manual that oversees interrogations. And that's for all government. That covers all organizations. Now, there's classified appendixes to it, you know, that deal with certain things that can be done in certain circumstances that have to be authorized to be able to be done by certain groups of people. But the premise, the general premise, basically, is everybody sort of gets treated the same, which wasn't the case before. And so there was a big policy change. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And in practice, and just in terms of, you know, let's face it. We weren't in a war. We weren't used to having and maintaining a bunch of prisoners and we had people who were trying to do interrogations, that didn't have any authorization to do it. And in some cases like an Abu Ghraib, there were, the people who abused those people, they weren't interrogating anybody to being with. That was not an interrogation abuse. That was just some misguided soldiers that were abusing prisoners, not interrogating them, abusing them. But there were other cases where it was, you know, there was interrogation abuse. Yeah, so, it's a combination. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you were vice director of the Army staff through the year--well, from 2004 to 2006? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay, and anything else from that period that you wanna share with us? Speaker 2: Just it was, I had a just, trying to think. That was a phenomenal time to be in there. That Abu Ghraib thing was a major thing we worked on, transitioning a new Secretary of the Army during that time was also big for me. It was interesting to be involved in some cases where me and my brother, from two different directorates were actually having to present our arguments from different points of view, you know, about like who should have proponency over, say a particular office. You know, as the vice director, I had a group that did some things. He thought it should be under him. He's presenting it to the director I'm presenting it to director why they shouldn't. It's too many--two brothers doing that. They stay with me. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 36418 Speaker 1: So now you retired from the [U.S.] Army in 2006, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yes, August 1st. Speaker 1: August 1st, 2006. Okay, now, what prompted your retirement? Were you, I mean you could have stayed, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I surely could have stayed. Health, okay. My wife had health, big health issues, went through big cancer scare. I had some health issues too which are all good now, but, so that was the main thing and just saying, you know, while I can, I'm gonna, I'm gonna go start a new career. I've been successful at this one. The health scare, you know, kind of made me say, okay, I'm ready to make a transition. And I did and feeling good. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now, did you have this position lined up at Boeing when you retired? Speaker 2: Not at all. In fact, I wasn't even thinking about Boeing when I actually retired. I had several companies, when they heard I was retiring, starting to talk to me. I had offers on the table for several. And then it was actually, probably, I actually stopped working--my retirement ceremony was May 15th. It was probably July that Boeing started courting me. And I really didn't think about Boeing too much because they're more, I always saw them more as an aviation-focused business. And I'm not an aviator. I'm an infantryman. But what they were looking for was somebody who had a broader, grand vision of the Army and what its overall needs were and where it was trying to go and the kind of capabilities it would need in the future. And I totally was capable of doing that. So when they talked to me, and I, I did a couple of different things. I did my own due diligence. I looked at a video. I saw the chairman, brand--at that time, he had been there for maybe a year, Jim McNerney, and it was a video. And the video was of him talking to all of his vice presidents, right after he had taken over. And he was talking about the importance of people. And more than focusing on the product, his energy was going into how we grow people, how we develop our people, how do we give 'em the right tools and equipment so that they can do, you know, make the incredible products that we make. He was talking about the leader development. And I was going, man, this guy is talking just like, you know, as if I--like when I would have when I was the commandant [of cadets] of West Point [United States Military Academy], about how you grow, how you make a great organization. And I was so intrigued with that, I said, man, that's where I wanna go. So that was, that was the selling point. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and now, did they offer you more than one position or did they-- Speaker 2: No, I was specifically brought in to be the vice president of Army Systems. So their, they were creating this, actually, I'm the first one they ever had. They created a customer-facing organization that had three vice presidents that belonged to the CEO, the defense CEO, and an Army and Navy and an Air Force customer-facing vice president. And I was the first Army vice president that they hired. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I did that for about two years. Story_ID: 36419 Speaker 1: Now, did, is this, when you worked on the Block III helicopter? Speaker 2: Primarily, back then, I was working on something called "Future Combat Systems," which was the, where the [U.S.] Army was trying to go in its major modernization effort. I also worked on the Apache Block III and on the Chinook CH-47F. Those were the, probably the big three things, and then some radio programs. And so they ended up not doing the Future Combat Systems. I didn't--it was a very expensive program, and it changed multiple times in terms of what the requirements were. And then also, you know, where we were in terms of our pace of getting it done. There was, you know, it was intended to provide a whole unit, and capability of fighting in the future. And it was always designed to do that, and we were building it to do that. But then there was a need to try to do stuff faster. So then they wanted to take little pieces from it, right, maybe a little robot, maybe a radio, maybe something else, a sensor, and get that out faster. And just pull those pieces. Well, so when you started breaking it apart, and putting those pieces out in the force, some people saw that as, wait a minute. We're spending all this money, and all we're getting is these pieces? They weren't patient enough to wait for when it was always scheduled to get the whole system. And so then it kind of lost its support on the Hill [Capitol], and in the Department of Defense [DoD] with the Secretary of Defense. And then it got killed. The Block III Apache is alive and fully funded, and today as is the CH-47F. So those did well. Speaker 1: I was reading a little bit about the Block III. How's it different from the Apache? Speaker 2: Well, so I'd say, it's like the difference between you having a car that has air conditioning and all power seats and rearview camera and a GPS [global positioning system] system and having a car where you gotta roll down windows and, you know, doesn't, and doesn't have any air conditioning or anything of that nature. So a Block III Apache is, it's a note in the network, this thing has the ability to connect to both Air Force and ground assets. It has the ability to control unmanned aerial vehicles itself. So a copilot could actually, in the future, will take over and actually fly. Let's say a UAV [unmanned aerial vehicle] is flying out there and sees a bad guy. You know, that UAV can shoot a laser and designate where that person is on the ground or that thing is on the ground. And then that Apache--that's not even connected to it, can fire a missile and go where that laser is pointing. Or that system could actually take control of that UAV and move it to another place so the Apache is out of harm's way. The UAV flies over the target where you want it to look at. The UAV then lasers, you shoot a missile that can go there. It absolutely brings fear to the enemy. They run when they hear one coming because it's so lethal. It's got incredible sights on it, night and day. So it can provide excellent situation awareness to the troops on the battlefield. And it can actually transmit data that they see down to the battlefield so they can see it or remote viewing terminals. So you could actually see what the Apache is seeing. So just an incredible capability that the Army really, really wants, and much more survivable than a Block I or Block II Apache, which they won't even let them deploy at that range anymore because of, it's so much more advanced, the Block III is. Speaker 1: Now, is that the Block III over your right shoulder in the back? We can actually see it in the shot so that's why I ask? Is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah, that is actually, no, that's a Block II right there. Speaker 1: That's a Block II, okay. Speaker 2: That's a Block II picture right there. Speaker 1: All right. I tried to get the Block III behind you, but I didn't see one (laughter). All we could come up with was a Block II. Story_ID: 36420 Speaker 1: So, now, your role has changed a little bit now, right? Speaker 2: Yes, totally changed. So interesting story, so, about two years after I was into the job, I got a call saying chairman--I want you to, I'm having a car come to pick you up. The chairman of the company wants to meet you and wants to talk to you. And I said, really? I mean un--no notice. And so I saw him, and says they were creating a new position. This is a new position as well. And I want, I'm gonna create a group where we basically takes all those customer-facing people that I just described, I was, the Army, the Navy group, and added to it, it's got Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Intelligence, like the NSA [National Security Agency] and all those kind of organizations. It's got NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], Homeland Security, and all those organizations that we deal with, takes them, puts them all together, and then puts them all under the head of government operations here to basically be the lead for advocacy for defense, NASA, Homeland Security and Intelligence organizations for the corporation. And so I over see that organization. So it's been a, it's been an eye-opening experience but absolutely fabulous because now I don't just think about a Block III Apache or I'm thinking about F-18 fighters. I'm thinking about--and the capability they bring, the EATG Growler, the space launch system, the next deep space exploration rocket, the International Space Station, you know. I'm thinking about things like that, that new Army--the Air Force tanker, the new Navy Maritime domain awareness platform, the PA, Poseidon, all these things, the C-17 transporter plane, all those are things that are in, that the Boeing defense systems, makes that I support with people who are subject matter experts, advocates that can--myself included, can go up to Capitol Hill, can go into the Pentagon, can interact with senior customers that they trust and respect because they know we are credible professionals with credentials from our past. And we can advise the business in terms of what they ought to be thinking about in terms of strategy, in terms of how to develop new capability and new products and services, you know, to support our Department of Defense [DoD], NASA and Homeland Security customers. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what are your future plans? I mean I know you're doing this [vice president, National Security and Space Group, Boeing Company] now, but like what do you-- Speaker 2: Well, my future (unclear), you know, as my daddy [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] taught me a long time ago, you know, do your job, do it well, and, you know, be better than every--be better and not be the same as everybody else. So that's all I'm doing is focused on--I love my job. I, I'm truly in a unique position because this is, this kind of role is niche in one regard, meaning you need somebody that's got the experience from the Pentagon that knows the products, that knows the customers. And so I'm, I fit really well in this job. And my business likes what I do. So I, you know, and I'm at a very senior level now in the company. I really love the leadership of the company. I love the direction the company's going in, and I also really like the fact that it is both commercial and defense. You know, I focus primarily on defense and national security. But, but there's another whole half of the company that focuses on the commercial aspects. So it's great to be part of such a big, iconic company that has such a great reputation around the world. A lot of times it might not even be for the defense side. It might be for the commercial aspect of a Boeing jet. And it also is neat to participate in things like, to help with like, as we start working on international campaigns, as we work on things to sell our products around the world. So, so I'm fully engaged, doing what I'm doing right now. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a chance to use your training as an engineer to, in this position? Speaker 2: Not in the purest sense. I tell you what it does do though, it helps me to use the engineering discipline in terms of how--critical thinking, as I am reviewing and listening to proposals and, or, solutions that we're presenting. That critical thought, the analytical thought process that you use has helped me in this business because I'm dealing with a whole bunch of engineers. And I know, so that's for, that's how they process, how they think. Story_ID: 36421 Speaker 1: All right, so, now, you do quite a bit of public speaking. Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: And what's your message for--it's primarily to young people, right? Speaker 2: I do a lot of speaking to young people. I talk to other organizations too, but, you know, I'm really focused on the fact of, I go back to my roots and really to go back beyond that, I go to my parents' roots. So when people say you can't make it. The environment's stacked against you, there's, you don't have a chance. Yes, you do. You do have a chance. You gotta decide for yourself whether you're gonna reach out, grab the brass ring, make yourself a better person or you're not. And you need to know that there are so many people that wanna root for you, that wanna help you, that you don't have to succumb to all the peer pressure that may be around you. You can stand strong. You need to seek support where there are people that wanna help you, you know, grow and have opportunity. Don't be satisfied with just being average. Focus on being better. Don't be as good, be better. And opportunity will come to you if you do that. You're not gonna be the CEO in a week. You're not gonna be Michael Jordan in a week. You focus on fundamentals and staying morally straight. And generally, when people do that, and they stay focused, I'd rather have the old saying, you know, I'd rather have a lion leading lambs than to have a lamb leading lions. You know, so it's that aspect of strong leadership, okay, helping encourage people. The other thing I like to focus on is leader development. And I'll focus on the fact of, you know, I've had many positive influences in my life, and they were all people that gave me more energy than they took. They inspired me to want to be better. They weren't like my coach Buddy, when I was in fifth grade, who told me I'd never be able to meet, amount to anything in sports. And, boy, was he wrong, you know. There was the coach, the coaches that, you know, that inspired me to do, that if I just did this little bit more, I could do better or they'd focus on some aspect of what I was doing to help me grow better. I got that in the military. I got that at home, and I think being that positive influence, giving energy--not just a cheerleader, 'cause a cheerleader doesn't add value other than make you feel good for a minute. But if you wanna feel good, if you wanna really change somebody, you know, gotta really show 'em that you care about 'em, and you gotta have that kind of emotion and passion that makes a difference in their life. And you have to give 'em constructive ways of how to do it. You gotta invest yourself if you're gonna help somebody in making sure they know you're committed to help 'em do it. So that's what I like to talk to people about, when they're mentoring people or if they're trying to be, trying to develop their own leadership skills or if I'm talking to you. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36422 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done in life so far, is there anything major that you would go back and change or do differently, if you could? Speaker 2: That's a great question. That is a great question. I don't believe so. I, I'm certainly glad I chose to join the United States Army. I'm certainly glad that I chose my path to go to West Point [Unites States Military Academy] to meet that, meet that goal, meet that opportunity of serving in the U.S. Army. I'm so totally thankful that I was an infantryman, and that I served on the point of the spear, the vast majority of my career in tough, hard combat units. And I am, I value that I'm, I have a bond with those people that I served with. And I'm very thankful for my four daughters that I have now--I actually have now a son-in-law that actually graduated from West Point in 2009, and now I have granddaughter from that son-in-law and my third daughter. And who knows, maybe I'll have another generation at West Point coming up after that. In fact, his father went to West Point too. So, nah, I'm very thankful for my children. I'm thankful for the parents [Naomi Lewis Brooks and Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] and the upbringing that I had. There's not a whole lot I'd change. I've had a good life. Story_ID: 36423 Speaker 1: Speaking of your children, now, tell us a little bit about your children. You have four daughters, right? Speaker 2: Four daughters. My oldest daughter, Bethany, it's funny as I look at them, none of them chose the path of going into the military. But my oldest daughter, Bethany, is a physical education teacher, graduated from the University of North Carolina in, I guess, 2005. And then she became a teacher here in Northern Virginia, teaching elementary physical education. Then she went back and got her master's degree in kinesiology and, from the University of Georgia. And so, now she's happily married, got married in, I guess November of last year. And so, we're proud of her. She's about thirty years old. And then my Number Two daughter, Loren [ph.], is a math high school teacher in Raleigh, North Carolina and just got married this past July--this past June and incredibly accomplished, went to North Carolina as well, graduated in 2006, got a master's degree in math education from Wake Forest University and was named 'Teacher of the Year' for Wake County, which is one of the largest counties in the nation in North Carolina, as a math teacher, so very, real proud of her. Matter of fact, as we speak, as a result of her Teacher of the Year accomplishment, she is now on some kind of exchange for like the summer in India, right now, as we speak, married to a wonderful young man named Andrew. And my daughter, Bethany, is married to a wonderful young man named Chris. And then my Number Three daughter, Amanda, graduated 2009 from the University of Greensboro. She's a deaf education major. She signs. And she married her high school sweetheart, who ended up going to West Point [United States Military Academy], and she graduated like around the 15th of May. He graduated about the 25th of May, and they get married on the 26th of May. That was a, talk about putting stress on your old dad's heart, that did it, and all that kind of stuff. And now they have, have given me a beautiful granddaughter, Hannah Rose Berlin, and so--and my son-in-law, I'll tell you how ironic this is, is so Amanda was born when I was in the First Ranger Battalion in Savannah, Georgia. My daughter-in-law--my daughter was born there in Savannah, Georgia when I was in the First Ranger Battalion. My son-in-law is now in First Ranger Battalion, the same Ranger Battalion I was in when I was a captain, you know, twenty-six years ago. And they have a granddaughter--have a daughter, Hannah Rose. She's, she turned one in July. So she's one year and a month. And then my youngest daughter, Rachel, Rachel Diane. She went to Wheaton College near Chicago [Illinois], Wheaton, Illinois. And Rachel's my "save the world, Mother Theresa" daughter, just beautiful soul, beautiful spirit. Rachel graduated and started out working for, doing an internship where she was working, helping undocumented aliens, okay, from other countries, primarily Hispanics--she's fluent in Spanish, you know, deal with living in the United States and trying to help them get medical care--[phone rings]. Story_ID: 36424 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your youngest daughter. Speaker 2: Yeah, so my daughter, Amanda, who graduated from Wheaton [College], went on a six-month semester abroad to Peru, Lima, Peru, came back fluent in Spanish. She was already really good in Spanish, came back fluent in Spanish. She, while she was there, she was working for an organization called Paz E-Esperanza [ph.], and basically, it was, down there, it was helping primarily women, battered women and things of that nature, with civil rights and things of that nature down there, in Peru. She came back from that with this passion for wanting to help disadvantaged people. So when she graduated, she took an internship with an organization that's really sort of part of AmeriCorps, that was helping undocumented aliens get healthcare and integrate into society. And so she's doing, she just finished that, and now, she's just taken over a new job doing something similar in terms of the social work and support of, you know, immigrants that are in the Chicago [Illinois], greater Chicago area and having a great time with that, real proud of her. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36425 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. When you look back on everything you've done again to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I think that I am known as a person that was a positive role model, leader, that I, I'm real proud of the fact that I look around and I see a lot of the people who came up underneath me that are now rising up into positions of significance in the military. I, I like to think that I had some kind of contribution to that, in terms of that. And so just as a, being known as a person who was a solid professional leader, that cared about people, that knew how to develop and train organizations and people, that could be put in really tough situations, and could deal with it in a calm, professional, courageous way. That's what I want, that's what I hope is my legacy, that people look back when they look at me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36426 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't discussed we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think, although I'd say, you know, I've spent a, I'm very blessed to be part of this family. I didn't talk a lot about my sister [Marquita Karen Brooks] or my mom [Naomi Lewis Brooks] very much, but just the fact of, to have a family that is, the importance of family and support. We talked a little bit about this earlier. My brother [Vincent Brooks; also a HistoryMaker], I think mentioned it in his interview, the importance of family. Now, while everybody doesn't have, might not have a biological family, everybody can have a support network that, and can, that can help with wholesome, healthy focused support to help somebody, you know, and not by just giving 'em everything, but be there to support them as they're trying to achieve their goals in life. That has been a real important thing in my life, my family. My sister, my mother, my dad [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker], my brother, his wife, and you know, my children. It's just, I'm so, so thankful to have had that support, and all my extended family, my cousins and aunts and uncles. When somebody's in need, they rally, you know. And I'm very thankful to have that 'cause I know a lot of people don't. The other thing is the importance of God in my life. You know, our family's blessed that you're doing this, these interviews because we've been able to achieve something. But we all know, all three of us know that, you know--and I'm sure every one of them said the same thing, you know, that, it's not because of them. You know, there is a purpose, there's a reason why God's chosen to give us this opportunity. And so I first recognize that that's where it all starts, not with me, but with Him. And I'm very thankful for that too. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 36427 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I guess I almost sort of said that, didn't I? So, as somebody that was passionate, compassionate, dependable, trustworthy, reliable, committed, dedicated and loving. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. All right, I appreciate it. Story_ID: 36428 Speaker 1: So the picture you're looking at right here is my command photo as the Commandant of Cadets at the United States Military Academy [West Point]. So you can see the West Point colors, Commandant Cadet colors in the back, in the gray, next to the American flag, and my general officer uniform. Speaker 2: About what year is that? Speaker 1: That is 2002, summer of 2002. Speaker 2: And this picture here is a picture of me standing next to my Command Sergeant Major, Gary Calanosky (ph.) when I'm the commander of the 1st Brigade at the 82nd. And we're out at a site in Kosovo when we were over there, one of our battalions that was in Kosovo at a monastery up on a hill. That was about 1999. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Probably some winter. Speaker 1: This picture is of the Board of Directors for a nonprofit organization called "D.C. College Access Program" that supports--provides scholarships to [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] high school youth for college. And it also provides mentorship opportunities for them. And I'm on the board as chair, but Don Graham, the chairman of 'The Washington Post' in the center and the lady in red is the vice president's [Joe Biden] wife, [Jill] Biden, Dr. [Jill] Biden. And that was taken probably around May of 2011. Speaker 2: In my role as Vice President of National Security Space Group, I had the honor of hosting an event with Senator John Glenn because of his role as an astronaut. Also, with him is Astronaut-- Speaker 1: Deek (unclear). Speaker 2: No, Scott Carpenter, okay, who by the way, not only was one of the first people to orbit the earth, but he's also, was like, has one of the records for deep sea exploration in terms of being, going to the deepest place that a human's gone in, in the sea also in a Navy vessel. And then the fellow on the far right in that picture is Jack Daley, a lieutenant general, retired, U.S. Marine Corps, who runs the Smithsonian. Speaker 1: This was taken when I was the Commandant of Cadets in probably 2004, early 2004, Spring. And that is Gordon R. Sullivan, the 32nd Chief of Staff of the Army. And he is receiving the prestigious Silvanis Thayer Award, and I had the honor of being the host for that ceremony at West Point when I as a Commandant. And we're trooping the line in a jeep. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSON): Speaker 2: This great picture, two pictures is when I was a commander of A Company, First Battalion, 75th Infantry Ranger, when I was in the Ranger Regiment in Savannah, Georgia. And the top picture is me being presented a plaque for having the best company in the 75th Ranger Regiment, Alpha Company, 175, and it's being presented by the Regimental Commander. That is, at the time, Colonel Wesley B. Taylor, and at the bottom is a picture of all the company commanders of the seventy--of First Ranger Battalion. And we were about to get a tour battle streamer from Grenada, from then Secretary of the Army, John O. Marsh, in the blue suit. And that was probably Summer of 1987. Speaker 1: I'm a great lover of rugby, played rugby all, pretty much all my life since I entered West Point or since my sophomore year at West Point. And in the Spring of every year, all the alumni Rugby players come back to West Point to play in a match against the graduating seniors of the West Point Rugby team. The West Point seniors are wearing the gray uniforms. And all the old alumni who came to play are in the yellow and black and yellow. And it's called, that, our team is actually called "Old Gray," and this playing that alumni versus seniors match, when I am the Commandant of West Point in the spring of 2004. Speaker 2: Back in the Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] era, you may recall, we were at a significant tension with the Nicaraguans with the Sandinistas and so the ranger battalions were being sent down there to border to basically train, live fire along the border and do operations along the border. This is a picture of the First Ranger Battalion commanders and staff during that deployment, and that is about--I am the Commander A-Company, 175. That is about 1987, and that is on the, vicinity of the border of Nicaragua in Honduras, and from left to right, you have me, A-Company Commander, Dave Morehouse, B-Company Commander, next to me. The third guy over with glasses, Steve Fondacarrol (ph.) who was the C-Company commander. The next guy to him, the Major, is Jim Dubick. He ended up retiring as a Lieutenant General who's the XO, the assistant S-3 was Captain Mick Betenarick (ph.). In the middle there, who is now a serving three-star General, the guy next to him is Major Earl Atkinson, who was the operations officer of the battalion, came in late. It was, that time, he came in, he was the third African American in the--officer in the regiment when I came in. The guy next to him was our doc, and the guy next to him, Doc Mellon, and the guy next to him is our support officer. And the people in the front, the guy with his hands behind his back in the very front is the battalion commander, Keith M. Nightingale (ph.). Speaker 1: This is my father [Leo Brooks, Sr.; also a HistoryMaker] in the white who is giving me my commissioning oath when I was a regimental commander at West Point on June 6, 1979. I wore those same whites in my career as a general officer in the military, the same ones he's wearing right there, I wore. Speaker 2: You all about the same size. Speaker 1: Didn't even have to change the name. Speaker 2: That's right. It was easy money. Speaker 1: This is a picture of the First Brigade of the 82nd staff, and every year in May we have something called All American Week, which is a week of activities to commemorate the history of the 82nd Airborne Division. And my brigade was, happened to be passing in review in the parade, and someone took this picture. And what's interesting about that picture is that that picture, unknown to me, ended up becoming a poster, AUSA, Association United States Army poster that, with that whole staff in the center of it later. That was done in probably May of 1999. Speaker 2: I can see that being on a poster. Speaker 1: Yeah, looks like a Hollywood (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was actually a rehearsal. It wasn't even the main event, but, yeah. I love that picture. Speaker 1: Okay, is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah, and now, do I--should I do like if I wanted-- Speaker 1: This is my daughter, Rachel Diane Brooks. This is her high school graduation picture. This would have been in 2008. Speaker 2: This is my daughter, Amanda Brooks Berlin, married to my son-in-law, Joseph Berlin, and this is a glam shot, I think when she was in college. And that she's the mother of my granddaughter, Hannah Rose Berlin. Speaker 1: This is the college graduation picture of my oldest daughter, Bethany. She graduated from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill Tar Heels, in 2005. And that's her graduation photo. Speaker 2: Which one did I not show? Speaker 1: You haven't done that one over there. Speaker 2: And this is my daughter, Lauren Brooks Baucom who got married in--that's right, I forgot about Bethany, her name is now Bethany Brooks Sink, married to my son-in-law, Chris. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: S-I-N-K. Not this one, the one from-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And so Chris Sink is my son-in-law, and Bethany-- Speaker 1: Now, this is Lauren Brooks Baucom, B-A-U-C-O-M, okay, and she just got married in June to my wonderful son-in-law, Andrew Baucom. They live in North Carolina. And that's taken when she was a teacher, probably about 2008. Story_ID: 34170 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Leo Austin Brooks. That's spelled L-E-O, A-U-S-T-I-N, B-R-O-O-K-S. I'm neither a senior nor junior. Speaker 1: All right. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nine, August, 1932. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born, actually, born in Washington, D.C. at Garfield Hospital, but from two days later, I lived in Alexandria, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am now fully retired. I served a few months short of thirty years in the United States Army. I was a city manager for almost two years and I was an independent consultant for three and then I fully retired. Speaker 1: Okay. And when you retired, what rank were you? Speaker 2: At the time I was a major general, but since I retired before I had three years in grade I had to retire as a Brigadier General. So my act of duty--last act of duty rank was major general. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: (Leaning over to hear). Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, today's date. It's June the--July the 22nd, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Right now we are in--at the Fairfax, which is a retirement community of mostly all military people in the southern end of Fairfax County, just south of Ft. Belvoir, Virginia. Story_ID: 34171 Speaker 1: All right. Now, sir, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food. I have several favorite foods. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black and gold. Speaker 1: Okay. Combination. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Probably springtime. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, no, no. I go to Myrtle Beach to play golf in the spring, but having spent 30 years in the army, you get to go so many places, you know, you're not enamored with anyone. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one sir, is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have several, one of which I take from Harry Truman, which is "The buck stops here" and the other is "I never take credit for success, I always give it to God". Story_ID: 34172 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, separately, then we'll put them together, all right. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Evelyn Lemon Brooks. Speaker 1: And can you spell that for us. Speaker 2: E-V-E-L-Y-N, L-E-M-O-N, B-R-O-O-K-S. Speaker 1: And what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her place of birth was Warm Springs, Virginia, and her date of birth was June the 14th, 1908. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family, about the ancestors on that side, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I can go a good ways back. Her mother died when she was about 12 years old, leaving her as the oldest girl at home. She was one of nine by the way, leaving her to raise or to be in charge of her three younger sisters. In those days young people got married at 14, 15, 16 years old, so her two oldest sisters had already married, one went to Charleston, West Virginia, and the other one went to Steelton, Pennsylvania. But her mother was from over in West Virginia, just across the--across the Virginian line, we're talking back up in the--up in the mountains near Hot Springs. And her father was one of three, his name was Eckard; E-C-K-A-R-D, was the way you spelled it, Eckard Lemon. His grandfather was a Irish doctor whose name was McCutchen(sp), and he had an African American--half African American, half Indian wife, whom he stood by and took care of throughout her life. Their daughter's name was Mariah and Mariah was the mother of my grandfather, so I can go back that far on my--on my mother's family. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But my mother was number four--she was the number five out of nine. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you know what--what kind of work did your mother's family do? Speaker 2: Well, they were farmers. She had a brother who owned a cress lake. It was one of the very few cress lakes in the United States, and the land is still there. I saw it not long ago where they grew fresh watercress, and it was shipped all over the eastern United States. Story_ID: 34173 Speaker 1: Watercress. Okay. I asked you what a cress lake was. So it's a lake where you grow watercress? Speaker 2: Yeah, what they did was they leveled off this area that was oh, about the size of a football field and dammed it at one end and flooded it, and then, of course, they grew cress there for years. Course it's not--it's no longer there. His name was Warren Lemon. Speaker 1: Okay. And as a kid in the summertime, when we would go there, it would be interesting to go down to the cress farm and watch them load barrels of cress, big wooden stave barrels with cress and ice on it and load it on a truck. They'd take it down to Covington, Virginia, and put it on a train, it'd go to New York City. I remember seeing that as a kid, yeah. But there was little or no work there. The only work--the basic work for people who lived up in them mountains there was at the homestead, which is a resort or they might work in the paper mill down in Covington. So most young women, many young women rather, would leave that are and come up to Washington [D.C.] or go to Philadelphia or someplace and do domestic work. And a aunt of my mother's [Evelyn Lemon Brooks] encouraged her to leave, and she went to Philadelphia and worked out in Ardmore, Pennsylvania, for a family for a very short while. And I may be jumping the gun here, but she went one night to a dance over in Chester, Pennsylvania, where she met my father [Houston George Brooks, Sr.]. Speaker 2: Now, let me ask, did your mother have a chance to finish school in Virginia before she moved? Speaker 1: Up there in the mountains, they could only get to the sixth grade. After she came to Pennsylvania, she went to night school. And then when they subsequently moved back to the Alexandria, Washington area, she went to--there was a high school at night. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 34174 Speaker 1: So, I'm going to go back to how your parents met, you know in a minute, but I'm going to go over to your father's side, now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Houston, H-O-U-S-T-O-N; George, G-E-O-R-G-E; Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S, Senior. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was December the 24th, 1904. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Alexandria, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. And what can you tell us about his side of the family? Speaker 2: I can trace his family back to the civil war times. My great-grandfather whose name was Richard Henry Brooks, was a slave, and I hold a copy of his autobiography, which indicates that he escaped from a plantation near Culpeper, actually it was at Orange, and he ended up in Northern Virginia, where he was captured and put back into slavery up near Haymarket. When the union army came through there, about the time of the first battle of Manassas, he jumped the plantation and went to work as a horse handler for a artillery officer--union artillery officer from Maine by the name of Freeman Magillavery(sp). And--of course, he traveled with him for sometime during the war and then as the war got heavy in 1862, Magillavery had to send his family back to Maine. In those days, you know, families traveled with officers. Most of them were in Washington when they came across, and if you read the history of that battle, they came in wagons as if they were going to a picnic to see the first battle of Manassas [Virginia], of course the union was defeated at it. But when the war became more involved, Magillavery sent his wife back to Maine with her brother--with his brother and with my great-grandfather driving the wagon. Story_ID: 34175 Speaker 1: He [Richard Henry Brooks] stayed in Maine for two and half years until the war ended in 1865. There she taught him to read and write, gave him a speller, put him in charge of the gardens that she--that they grew and sold, and the brother got him a job working in the shipyard there in Maine from which he developed some mechanical trades. When the war was over, he came back, met his first wife and took her to Pensacola, Florida, where she died of yellow fever. He came back to Alexandria where he met Mary Frances Smith, who was a free black and they bought a house at 725 S. Fairfax Street in Alexandria for $790, with 30 years to pay it. They had five children, one of whom was my grandfather who was Henry Curtis. That's H-E-N-R-Y, C-U-R-T-I-S, BROOKS. Of course he became a senior also. And his wife died in childbirth of my father or so a few days thereafter, hemorrhaging. My father was then raised by a family that lived two blocks away, the name of which was Day, I'm sorry was White, W-H-I-T-E, was the last name, and Sarah White was her name, and of course he, my grandfather, then took him when he became a young man, and they went to Pennsylvania to work in the shipyards. He went to--he went to--in those days you had two schools in Alexandria, Snowden School and oh, it will come to me in just a moment, Hollowell(sp) School, for blacks, and they went--those schools went to the sixth grade and that was all you could get. If you wanted any more, you went to Washington, D.C., and you were to go to one of the high schools there. In those days they had Dunbar, Armstrong and Cardozo. Story_ID: 34176 Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father go to school? Speaker 2: He [Houston George Brooks, Sr.] also had to go to night school to get the rest of his education. And then he continued in a program. In those days the--they used to have the Baptist Minister's Institute, I think it was called, or something close to that, that ran for a month or so in the summers, and he went to that for several years. During the early days of his life, he was--he and my grandfather [Henry Curtis Brooks], because of the depression had to leave Pennsylvania--leave the shipyard when the shipyard closed down, they came back to Alexandria. My grandfather had an old truck and they would take the old truck and go along the Potomac River, drag in firewood, cut it and sell the firewood for income. From that, and we still have two of the old saws that are about eight feet long with giant teeth and about an inch long teeth that they used to cross-cut that firewood. They then progressed into floor sanding and then into interior decorating and exterior decorating. And we were able to put five children through college and some graduate schools off of the earnings from their decorating business, my father and grandfather and I and each of my brothers when we hit the age of twelve, and when summertime came, we went to work in the business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that today I or anyone of my brothers could effectively run a decorating business. Speaker 1: So the decorating included painting, hanging wallpaper, that sort of thing and flooring, too? Speaker 2: Yes, painting, paper hanging, minor carpentry, plastering and what not, preparing the walls and things of that nature, yes. In 1938, when I was just a kid, about six years old, my father felt a call to the ministry and that's when he started that ministerial study and was ordained in 1940. And just about two miles from where we sit right now was where his first church was, just out of the gates of the Gunston Hall Plantation. It's called Shiloh Baptist Church, Shiloh of Gunston was his first church. But he continued his secular work in decorating because he had five children. And in order to see all five of them through undergraduate school and most of graduate school for them, he had to continue. In those days ministers didn't make very much. He would come home on Sunday night from his church around Christmastime, and he would have jars of canned venison and all sorts of things, and he would bring home the collection in a handkerchief, because most of it would be change, and I would always get the job to count the change, and it would be great when that handkerchief had as much as 20 to 25 dollars in it. So that was--so he had to keep his secular work in order to take care of his family. Story_ID: 34177 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now is the time to tell us the story of how your parents met? Speaker 2: As I said, she, my mother [Evelyn Lemon Brooks] went to this dance in Chester [Pennsylvania], and of course, he being there working, was at the dance, and there they met. About eight or nine months later they married, yeah. And sometime after that my oldest brother was born there in Chester. I was able to return my mother and father [Henry George Brooks, Sr.] to the scene of that birth. While I was in Philadelphia, they came to visit me, and I took them over to Chester to see the old little two-story, about 10-room hospital, where my oldest brother was born. But because--I said because of the depression and the work shut down in the shipyard, they came back to Virginia and lived for a while with my great-grandmother Mary Francis Smith-Brooks and--there in Alexandria, until they could get themselves together and then they moved to Washington [D.C.], and that's where they both continued school while he worked for a while. And then--then they bought in 1929--1930, no 1929, just before the depression, it was, a home on Albert Avenue in Alexandria. Albert Avenue is in a section of Alexandria called Sunnyside, and Sunnyside was a community developed by a black lawyer by the name of Montgomery Watson who practiced law in Washington, D.C., but who built himself a lovely home and then developed the plots, the landscape, for development that was about two and a half blocks long and about two and a half blocks wide there in--on the north end of Alexandria. At the time it was Orrington County. Alexandria subsequently annexed that area. And they bought a house there that someone else had lived in for a short while, and there they raised their family there. And that community was an all black neighborhood. We didn't get running water there until 1946, when the war was over. Speaker 1: Was that typical for those days? Speaker 2: Well, no. Most of all of Alexandria had running water but it was a black community, so we didn't get any. It wasn't until the war was over and the health people made them do something about it. Speaker 1: Did you have like a-- Speaker 2: Well, it had wells and a couple of homes had wells and septic tanks, two houses had that. The rest all had to have the scavenger to come and take away the toilet-- Speaker 1: --The sewage. Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34178 Speaker 1: It sounds pretty typical for Virginia in those days in the black community you wouldn't have the kind of services you would have in-- Speaker 2: Well, unless you lived right in the heart of the city where they had to have it, yes, that was pretty typical. Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: There were certain--now my wife is from the area on the west end of Alexandria called Seminary, and Seminary has--they had the same situation there, outdoor toilets. Speaker 1: All right, so, were the streets paved in Sunnyside? Speaker 2: Originally, no. They had just gravel on them. And we didn't have a hard asphalt surface until I was in high school, that too came after the war. And one reason was that street became a little bit of a thoroughfare for the area of Alexandria [Virginia] known as Beverly Hills. It was the short cut that people took getting into Washington, from the Beverly Hills area. Speaker 1: Okay. Was Beverly Hills kind of an analogous to the Beverly Hills in California? Speaker 2: No, not really, it was--in comparison to where we lived it was, but it was brick homes, all white, but brick homes and one of the better new neighborhoods in the Alexandria area. As a kid I would go--whenever it would snow, I'd take my shovel and go knock on doors and pick up 20 to 30 bucks shoveling snow there. Plus Beverly Hills had a lovely hill called overlook drive that we would sleigh ride down on snow days as a kid, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So you grew up in Sunnyside? Speaker 2: I grew up in Sunnyside. Well, now we didn't have--we didn't have any schools there. We had to pass two schools on the way to go into Alexandria to go to the old black high school, which was a high school and elementary school called Parker-Gray High School. Story_ID: 34179 Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yes. I have four siblings, and my two older brothers, the oldest one is Dr. Houston George Brooks, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. Is he a physician? Speaker 2: No. He's a--he was a research chemist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he graduated from Parker-Gray High School and then graduated from Storer College. He and my second brother Henry Curtis Brooks, Jr. graduated from Storer College. The oldest boy went to Tuskegee Institute in those days to get a master's degree in chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is Dr. Houston Brooks? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings in order? Speaker 2: Okay. Houston George Brooks, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay, he's the oldest? Speaker 2: Then there's Henry Curtis Brooks, then there's Nellie Victoria Brooks Quander, that's spelled Q-U-A-N-D-E-R, and then of course Leo Austin Brooks and then Francis Keith Brooks, my baby brother who's eleven years younger than I, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were telling us that Houston George Brooks is a chemist, a research chemist? Speaker 2: Yes. After graduating from Tuskegee--by the way he's now being deferred from service because we--we've gotten through World War II. He would have been eligible at the end of World War II, there was a draft still going on. He was deferred because he was a chemistry student. From there he went to Iowa State University to work on a doctorate. He got about half way through his work and of course when you do doctoral work in chemistry, the greatest portion of your work is your research project. Well, he came upon coming close to his twenty-ninth birthday, so his draft board which was still here in Alexandria, called for him. So he went into the service and had to delay his work for those two years he was in the service. He came back out and went back to Iowa State, finished, and then went to work as a research chemist for American Cyanamid Corporation in New Jersey, in New Brunswick, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then passed away a year ago. Speaker 1: Okay, and Henry Curtis Brooks? Speaker 2: Henry Curtis Brooks, well he finished Storer College, went to Andover Newton Theological Seminary in Newton Center, Massachusetts, which is a suburb of Boston where he earned a Bachelor of Divinity Degree. And in those days you also had what was called the Master of Sacred Theology, the STM Degree. Speaker 1: Now, is he a reverend? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And ordained by my father, by the way. Speaker 1: So he's Baptist-- Speaker 2: Trained, initially, by my father but ordained up in Massachusetts. He then went to Boston University to get a doctorate. It was during the days that Oral Roberts was very popular on TV for telling people to put your hand on the television and be healed. Well, there were no scholarly people who could speak to that. So he and two other persons were encouraged to do dual work. His doctorate is in psychology from Boston University, but he completed almost all of the courses for a medical degree at the same time so that he would have the dual knowledge to be able to speak to the healing situation. And then he taught and became the dean of Clinical Pastoral Studies at Andover Theological Seminary in Boston, he was there for almost twenty five years. And he has subsequently passed. Story_ID: 34180 Speaker 1: Okay. That's Reverend Henry Curtis Brooks? Speaker 2: Yes. Reverend Doctor Henry Curtis Brooks. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Henry Curtis-- Speaker 2: Ph.D. from Boston University. Speaker 1: --Okay. Now these-- Speaker 2: By the way he was there at the same time that Martin Luther King was there. Speaker 1: --Yeah. I was going to ask you about that. And also are these the only two that attended Storer? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: I know Storer College is closed, I guess in the "60s" (1960s)? Speaker 2: About, maybe 10 years after that they closed it. Speaker 1: Okay. Dr. Richard McKinney who I think was the last president? Speaker 2: Richard McKinney was the president when they were students there. When McKinney left Storer, incidentally, he came to Virginia State College for a one-year term as the Dean of the Chapel while the then dean was away finishing his doctorate. And of course I was a student there when Dr. McKinney was there. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay, so Nellie Brooks Quander? Speaker 2: Nellie Brooks Quander is a graduate of--after leaving Alexandria, she was a graduate of Virginia Union University, and she holds a master's degree from George Washington University and, incidentally, she received her master's degree the same night I did at George Washington University. So my parents got to see two at once. And then of course she has a what they now call a education certificate which is thirty hours above a master's degree. She taught in--went back to Alexandria to teach. Rose through the ranks, became a principal and was the first African American principal--was the first principal, I guess it is, of the combined schools. When they integrated the schools, they closed what had become Charles Houston. The old Parker-Gray's name was changed to Charles Houston, and she became the principal when it was combined with what--the white children went to what was called Jefferson Elementary School. So she became the principal of that school. After several years Fairfax County was attempting to increase its minority faculty population and participation, and she was recruited to come into Fairfax County where she was the principal of Hybla Valley Elementary School, which is about five miles north of where we are right now on U.S. 1. And from there she grew to be the director of curriculum--elementary school curriculum for Fairfax County, and she finished her career as--in teaching, as the area administrator. Fairfax County is broken into four areas, it's such a large county, and so she was the area administrator for Area Four for the county which is this part of--the southern part of Fairfax County. During her time there, in the education business--system, she rose to be elected the president of the National Elementary School Principal's Association, became the first African American to finally get to that. See she started in the segregated system, and then after 1954, the Supreme Court decision, and they began to break up the segregated system in Alexandria, you know, she went through that transition. Story_ID: 34181 Speaker 1: The old Parker-Gray school--in 1948, thereabouts, when it became apparent that the case of Brown vs. the Board of Education might not be sustained in the appellate court, the appellate court decision might not be sustained, the school systems decided to upgrade black schools, and the reason was, was the old Percy Ferguson decision said that segregation is all right as long as the school systems are equal. Well, they were obviously unequal, because the school that I went to we didn't have a cafeteria, we didn't have a gym, the gym was about the size of a half of a basketball court. It was also the state--the auditorium, and the ceiling was about 12 to 14 feet high, so you couldn't play basketball, couldn't do anything else hardly in it. And thank God the U.S. Government had placed a USO [United Service Organizations] in the city that we could then use for a basketball court and for other large activities, we didn't have it. The chemistry lab was almost nothing, the biology lab was about six microscopes and that was the extent of biology and of course that's the school we came up through. And the books that we got were the used books from the white schools, off times with no backs, with pages torn out, things of that nature. But God is great and we survived even that. So they built a new Parker-Gray High School about six blocks away and converted the old one into just an elementary school and then they finally did away with it. I got off the track there. In an effort to meet the demands of Plessy v. Ferguson, they built a new high school. There's Luther Jackson High School in Merrifield which is part of Fairfax County which was also an attempt to comply. But of course the May, 1954 decision said for greater reasons than the building, the school systems are unequal, highly psychologically and sociologically they're unequal. So, that's-then brought integration here in the Alexandria area. Speaker 2: Now the new school that was built to replace Parker-Gray was named after Charles Hamilton Houston, you said? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Were you saying that? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The old Parker-Gray-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Was replaced. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And one of those pictures over there has me standing on the opening night of that building, standing out front of the replacement school. When integration then came about, they tore it down too and integrated that-- Parker-Gray's student body and George Washington High School's student body into Hammond High School. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And subsequently came T.C. Williams High School which replaced both of them as the senior high school. And Hammond and George Washington became middle schools, or not middle, I guess you'd call them junior high schools. Story_ID: 34182 Speaker 1: Okay. So became Hammond then combined with another school to become T.C. Williams. All right. Now, what about Leo Austin Brooks, oh, that's you. All right, now Francis Brooks? Speaker 2: Want to go to Francis first? Speaker 1: So you're next to-- Speaker 2: I'm number four. Speaker 1: This interview will take care of your story, but your younger brother, Francis? Speaker 2: Yeah, my youngest brother of course is eleven years younger than I am, and we jokingly refer to him as a mistake and an accident. Went to--he was in next to the last class in the old Parker-Gray High School. After graduating from there, he went to live with my brother in Boston, and he attended Browne and Nichols Academy which is a pretty exclusive prep school in Cambridge, across the river in Cambridge. He went for two years there. And while there was encouraged by a member of the faculty to apply to go to Norwich University in Vermont. He was also enamored by the fact that at that point, I was already a captain in the army and it was a military school so that everything meshed in his desires and he went to Norwich University. During his junior year, or at the end of his sophomore year, he had to take a physical to go to ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] summer camp, or to go into the advanced ROTC program. They discovered he had high blood pressure, and he was told you go home this summer and get it down and then maybe you will be able to come into the advanced program. Well, it turned out to be a case of unarrestable high blood pressure, so he couldn't go in, so he switched his straight chemistry degree to an education degree. He went up to the town of Montpelier [Vermont] to do his cadet teaching during his senior year, and he lived with the sheriff and his wife. He was the only black person in the city of Montpelier. But the sheriff and his wife fell so in love with him and the school system did too, when he graduated they begged him to come back to work there. So he went back to Montpelier and was hired as a science teacher in the high school, progressed through the system to become the head of the science department. In the meanwhile, during the meantime, he got his master's degree from Bates University across the--not Bates, New York University just across the river into New York, I can't recall at this moment the name of the school. And also became a volunteer fireman. Got to know a lot of people and someone said you ought to run for the State Legislature. So he ran for the House of Delegates and won. He knocked off a republican who had been there for about twenty years, and remained in the State Legislature for 26 years, rising to be Chairman of the State House Appropriations Committee, the delegates, it's not a house, it's a House of Delegates Appropriation Committee and another committee. He retired from the school system, gave up his seat and ran for what is called the Sergeant-at-Arms of the State Capitol, and he's elected by the State Legislature, and he is today, still, the Sergeant-at-Arms of the State Capitol of Vermont. Now they don't have a Sergeant-at-Arms of the Senate and the Sergeant-at-Arms of the House, things of that nature, it's not that big. So the Sergeant-at-Arms is over the building that the governor is in as well as both houses of the legislature. He's there yet today. Story_ID: 34183 Speaker 1: That's quite a story. Now these are all pretty good success stories. Your family did well. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you. Speaker 1: I take it the atmosphere in your household was one that promoted education when you were growing up in Sunnyside? Speaker 2: It goes all the way back to that great-grandfather, Richard Henry Brooks, who was--as you read through his autobiography, was a rather aggressive kind of person. My grandfather [Henry Curtis Brooks] was equally an aggressive man, and from the time I was old enough to understand conversation, I heard all of my life, if you are willing to work, you can be what you want to be. Nobody is smarter than you, some work harder than others and if you are the harder worker, you will advance. Education is your key out of segregation. Education is the way that you will be able to demand respect of all men. That was the nature of the way I was raised. I don't know when I wasn't going to college. In other words, I never expected that I wouldn't. It's just like you expect to go from the fourth grade to the fifth or from the--into high school from elementary school. I just thought that the next path was on to college, and that was the way we were raised, always to be aggressive and always seek to demand respect, though on many occasions you were not respected, you still sought to be respected. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, we always ask this question. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Do I have an earliest childhood memory? I guess I really don't. You know, I got some early memories, but I can't--I can't say you know what was the earliest. I can remember things from when I was four or five years old, but very little prior to that. I can remember my great-grandmother, Mary Frances Brooks, her, I can remember her funeral when I was four and we were in the--the children were in the balcony of the church, I can remember that. I don't remember very much else that I can kind of pinpoint as a benchmark. Story_ID: 34184 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we ask this question too, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Sunnyside? Speaker 2: What was what? Speaker 1: Some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Of my early life? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, when that man came around each week on Mondays to clean out the toilet, that's something you'll never forget. (laughing) I remember as a kid a boy coming down the street on a bicycle, hollering "Extra, extra, read all about it," and he had a newspaper he was selling and it was telling us about Pearl Harbor. Of course, at the time I was already eight-years old. We had to--when my father [Houston George Brooks, Sr.] couldn't take us to school, we had to ride the bus. And if we would walk about 12 or 14 blocks, we could ride the bus for a nickel. If we caught the bus nearer to home, it was ten cents, and then we would ride right past, and by the way, when we walked that 12 to 14 blocks, we would be walking right past another elementary school that we could not attend. And I will always remember the jolliness of those kids going to that school right there that I couldn't go to, and it hurt me even till today. I was a musician. My grandfather [Henry Curtis Brooks] was a trombone player and a baritone horn player. And when I say grandfather, I'm talking about my father's father, and he taught my two older brothers to play the trombone and the baritone. My parents paid twenty-five cents a lesson for my sister to take piano lessons, and by the time it got to me, I started trombone lessons, had about three lessons and then that was the end of that, but I finished teaching myself how to play the trombone and used music as a vehicle for a significant portion of my early life. Speaker 1: Used the vehicle for-- Speaker 2: Well, I played well enough in high school that I was able to secure a scholarship to go to college if I would be a music education major, so I was an instrumental music education major in college. In those days college costs $590 a year, and I got $300 from the scholarship. Now, my father would be--we would--all of us would work all summer, all of the boys and my father and grandfather would work. And we wouldn't get a salary, the boys, we didn't get a salary. If we needed a dollar for a date or what not, we could get that, but we didn't get any more money. And he would save that up, and come September, he would pay tuitions for my sister and the older boys and subsequently me. When--by March or so that money would run out, and he would borrow money to pay it, and he had a lawyer, a white lawyer in Alexandria [Virginia] that he would borrow, and I had the pass book that he would borrow five hundred, eight hundred dollars or thereabouts and pay him back at fifty dollars a month until summertime, and then we would have the whole crew working, he'd pay that off and store up some more for us to go to school in the fall. Story_ID: 34185 Speaker 1: Okay, so music was a big part of growing up and playing the Trombone? Speaker 2: Yeah. I played trombone throughout high school, traveling with the Elks Band, Elks Lodge Number 85 in Washington, D.C. We'd coast to New York--to Buffalo to Chicago [Illinois] to Cincinnati [Ohio] and other places and--which developed me to extent that I qualified for a scholarship to go to Virginia State College, which was worth $300 a year, which was half of what it took in those days. Speaker 1: I want to go back. Something else I have on the outline, it was really important, too. The boy scouts? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us about the boy scouts? Speaker 2: Yeah. We had a troupe in Alexandria [Virginia] called 575, Troupe 575. It was the black troupe in Alexandria. My two older brothers had been in when it started. I was subsequently a cub scout in it and then was a scout. I rose to explorer scout, which is--which is not in the regular channel of scouting and had some wonderful experiences that also helped teach me some leadership skills. And then of course when I went off to college, I became an assistant scout master for the scout troupe there at Virginia State College for the young--for the faculty members' kids mostly. Story_ID: 34186 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about school. Did you start at Parker High-- Speaker 2: Parker-Gray? Speaker 1: --Yeah, was it an elementary school, different-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was both an elementary school and a high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the way they generally worked it was, you went to--they had a second elementary school, which by the way, my grandfather, Henry Curtis Brooks, was the agitator who stimulated the city into giving it--giving an old factory down on Pitt Street, you know, to converting it to a school. So you went to Parker-Gray Elementary School, which was in the same building with the high school. The first floor was elementary, the second floor was high school, and the basement was high school. You went to the first through the fifth grade, through the fourth grade rather, at Parker-Gray, and then you went out to Lyles-Crouch and then from Lyles-Crouch you came back in the seventh grade back to Parker-Gray. Speaker 1: So Lyles-Crouch would be middle school? Speaker 2: It was an elementary school also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It went from the first through the sixth grade. And then you went--in those days we only had eleven years of school. You started high school in the eighth grade, didn't have a middle school, no such thing as a middle school for us. So you're right there in the same building you went to the seventh grade in Parker-Gray and then you went right on into high school, right there. Speaker 1: Okay. But you had to go to the sixth grade at Lyles-Crouch? Speaker 2: Yes. Fifth and sixth grade you went to Lyles-Crouch. Speaker 1: How do you spell that name? Speaker 2: L-Y-L-E-S, C-R-O-U-C-H, and it's with a dash in between, it's two people, just as is Parker-Gray, two people. Speaker 1: Okay. So, who was Parker-Gray named for, were they black people? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. The--one had been the principal at Snowden School and the other one had been the principal at Hollowell(sp) School, those were the two schools that we could attend before there was a high school, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So I take it you liked school, did you? Speaker 2: Well, I was the fourth child in as I say a very aggressive family and when I got to school, all I would hear--everybody knew almost everybody, knew the families anyway, and my father had gone to school with at least two of the teachers as a kid. Everybody expected me to be like my brothers--two older brothers and sisters. Well, I rebelled, you know. I now look back on it and see that I was looking for a piece of attention in that bunch of fast burners too, and I kind of acted out a little bit. So when I got to the eighth grade--well, let us back up a minute. One of the stunts I did, I used to bring--because I lived out--it was rural in those days out where I lived. I used to keep the class supplied with frogs and snakes and things of that nature. Story_ID: 34187 Speaker 1: Now this is 1938 or so when you started school. You started school in '38' (1938)? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. So I used to keep the class, you know, supplied with things of that nature. And I had a teacher who does--the post office in Alexandria is named after--her name was Helen Day who when you did your multiplication tables or what not, you stood before her and she sat in a chair, and she had these flash cards, and she would raise the flash card up, and you would have to say nine times five is forty-five, eight times eight is sixty-four, whatever came up. If you got it right she'd put it in one pile and if you got it wrong, she'd put it in another pile. At the end of the pile, she would count the wrongs, and she had a strap about an inch and a half wide, and you held out your hand and for everyone you missed, you got a real slam right into the palm of your hand with that strap. So it was--you were incentivized to learn your multiplication tables. Well, one day I missed several. And so at the end of the day, she was out of the room, I packed up the tadpoles that I had taken to school, put them back in the bottle and had them at my desk. Well, when she walked in the room, one of the little girls says, oh, Miss Day, he's taking the tadpoles home. So she and I fell out. Well, we fell back in later, because she and my dad had knew each other very well. But I was bent on being, as I said earlier, respected, but I didn't quite know how off times to do it. When I got to high school, the first semester, I got my report card back, and of course we had show and tell at my house, you walked in with the report card and you stood at attention, as it were, while my parents reviewed the report card and you were praised or hazed right there. Well, I brought this report card home from the first semester in high school. And now I had been already working with my father, so I was mechanically oriented anyway, but I had a "B" in shop a "C" in English, I had another "B", I don't know, history or something, but all the rest "Cs". Well, my father and mother sat me down this time. By then my two older brothers had gone off to college and my sister was not at home at the time, so it was just my mother and father and I. And my father said, "Son, this is ridiculous, it cannot happen again. Here's what we're going to do." Now, I'm looking over at my mother who's sitting there with tears in her eyes, because they obviously have already discussed this strategy before they called me in. He said "You're going to come home from school every day, go into your room and study until suppertime. When supper is over you will do the dishes, when it's your turn and then you will study until eight o'clock and then you will go to bed, you won't go out and play. On Saturdays you'll be able to go out and play from 10 to 12, at 12 you come in and you begin to study until six. Sunday after church you will study. And you will do this for the next semester. Now you don't have to do it--now he's very stern at this moment," his voice is raising a bit, I recall it as if it were yesterday. "You don't have to do it, you can quit school, get out and get a job and pay your mother thirty dollars a month to live here and feed you or you can get out of the house." Now, the tears are really running down my mother's face and I'm as afraid as Goldie Locks before the big bad wolf. (laughing) So I took the first alternative and went from a bungling average to an "A" student. Speaker 1: How old are you at this point? Speaker 2: Well, I was about 14 years old, 13, 14 years old, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 34188 Speaker 1: So there's a real possibility you could be put out? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I thought he meant it. It was no doubt in my mind that he meant it. But I guess he also, being a man over the years I refer to as one of the greatest practical psychologists I have ever known, he probably knew also that I would crumple under that pressure and get down to work. And as you saw on the picture I showed you earlier, you know, I graduated with honors. And becoming a class president for three of the four years, and the fourth year I was president of student council, was always active in things of that nature. And while all this was going on I was singing in the school chorus, as well as the adult choir at Alpha Street Baptist in Alexandria [Virginia] from the time I was about fifteen years old. And while in that choir, incidentally, we had some augmentation of some people who came to help us sing the Messiah one Christmas, and along in that group was a man by the name of Othella Wilson, who was the director of a semi-professional group called the Musical Arts Choir of Washington, D.C. And Othella Wilson invited me to come to a rehearsal and try out for the Musical Arts Choir. Now here I am again, a seventeen year old boy by this time, and I ended up singing and making two tours with them. They didn't take long tours, they took three to four day trips, and sang with them at several colleges and two church performances, and got a wonderful musical experience, you know, out of that. But back at the high school, once I caught the spirit that--in myself that I could be seen positively as opposed to acting out, I begin to enjoy, really enjoy high school, yeah. We had an Elks oratorical contest while I was there. And my sister having won the city--the state and becoming a national oratorical contest contestant before me. When I came along I won the city as well as coming in second in the State of Virginia. I don't know where I found time to do all that, but I did. And then off to Virginia State College. Story_ID: 34189 Speaker 1: Now, before we leave high school, tell us who were some of your mentors in high school, were there any special teachers? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. My homeroom teacher's name was Farris Holland. He was also the chemistry teacher. He had been the inspiration for my oldest brother and my baby brother to enter chemistry, was quite a mentor. The principal, whom as a kid, most kids didn't like, because he was tough. His name was William H. Pitts. And--but as I grew older, I learned from my own experiences that he had been one of the best mentors I had ever had. And then the music teacher there, his name was Patterson, Earl Patterson, was also a great mentor of mine, and he's the one who kind of pushed me further and further in music. Speaker 1: Was he the bridge to the music scholarship? Speaker 2: Well, he's the one who told me about it, yeah, yeah, you know, that it was available, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. He's an important man. Now, did you play any sports in high school at all? Speaker 2: I ran track one year. Ran about a six and a half minute mile and that was enough. One of the problems we had was we lived out--didn't have school buses so that if you played on the football team, you'd get home seven o'clock or eight o'clock at night, having to ride the bus home and what not, so it wasn't really convenient for me and so I didn't spend much time doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, college, now you graduate from high school in-- Speaker 2: 1950. Speaker 1: --Okay. So you go on to Virginia State. This is near Petersburg, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, what was--who were some of the special people at Virginia State? Speaker 2: Well, the head of my department's name was Nathaniel Gatlin, G-A-T-L-I-N is the way he spells his last name. Speaker 1: That's the music department, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Dr. Nathaniel Gatlin is head of the department. He's also the orchestra and band director. And he was like a father to me. There was another man there who ran the laundry and some other business enterprises for the school. See they had a laundry because they did the boys'--the males' clothes for them and they provided assistance to the females. And he ran that laundry. He'd graduated from Morehouse College and was a member of my fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha. And he was also the advisor for the fraternity. He was more like a father to me. They were quite instrumental in pushing me. Both of them--I couldn't do poorly with the kind of inspiration that they gave to me, you know. They just pushed me to run harder. Speaker 1: What was the man's name who ran the laundry? Speaker 2: John B. Saunders, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He'd been a great football player at Morehouse. And then there were several other people who had positive influence on me there. One was the business manager, his name is John Cephas. Speaker 1: C-E-P-H-A-S? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 34190 Speaker 1: And he was quite a, you know, quite an inspiration to me too. I don't know whether those people were doing that at that point just as a matter of a way to get a kid to work or how sincere they were, but it sure worked on me, you know, it caused me to work very hard at things to the extent that I became the president of my fraternity at the end of my sophomore year which normally doesn't happen. That's normally at the end of your junior year. So I was the president of my fraternity for two years. Speaker 2: How did you come--were your brothers in A Phi A? Speaker 1: My oldest brother was an Omega and was infuriated. And of course Alexandria was basically--it wasn't that many in those days, but there were more Kappas than anything else. But when I went there I met and was so impressed by the then president of the student government and two or three other, what I called big guys on campus, campus leaders were Alphas, and I kind of fell in with them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And ended up the president of student government of Virginia State University. Not to brag but I was also the student conductor of the concert band, the director of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] band, the regimental adjutant of the ROTC and they called me in to say we would make you the commander, but you have too much else going on in school, so we're going to let somebody else do that, (laughing) which was fine with me. So I was thoroughly involved the whole time I was in school. And things that gave me exposure to the president, Dr. R. P. Daniel, Richard Prentiss Daniel was his name, I mean Robert Prentiss Daniel, rather, who was very kind to me and heard several of my cries about things on the campus. I was able to get some things done, that had I gone boisterous about them, I'd probably would have never gotten them done, not in 1953 or '54' (1954). Story_ID: 34191 Speaker 1: Now in those days just tell us a little bit about what campus life was like, because it's different, way different from today? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes. We ate family style. You had tablemates that you ate dinner and supper with, breakfast you ate--as you came in they would make up tables. Now, of course, I would always try to find a table with girls and--because the girls didn't each much and I would be able to get a little bit more breakfast. In addition to that when I went we still had World War II barracks that augmented the male dormitories. And I lived in the barracks my freshman year where it was cold all of the time. It was against the rules to have a heater but I had one and I would hide it up behind my clothes in my closet. I had a little shelf I made right behind my clothes in the closet about half way up, and I would sit it on that and so that--when I'd have it down trying to keep the temperature up above--the temperature was about 60 degrees in there, to keep it warm in there and it would blow out the fuse, I would immediately take it and put it up underneath my clothes, because the building monitor--the dorm monitor would come around looking for whose blowing the fuses out. And the other trick was you'd have to open your window right away so it would cool down, because if you came in there and it was warm, he'd know you had a heater in there some place. Speaker 1: You mean the building was not heated? Speaker 2: Well it was heated but I was the last room on the end and it was an old coal furnace--coal fire furnace with the hot air blown in and it wasn't very effective at all and the building leaked like a sieve anyway. But then of course after that I moved into the brick dormitories up closer on campus. We had four fraternities there and each fraternity--we didn't have fraternity houses, we had a fraternity room and they were all in the basement of Trinkle Hall, and the girls had to be in by six o'clock. If they were out after six o'clock, they were on a pass. They were either in class or going to and from something. But you couldn't lollygag around the campus. Speaker 1: This is only for the girls? Speaker 2: Yeah, in those buildings, yeah. We could come--boys could be out. You could go down to visit them. You could only go into the sitting parlor or in the lobby of the building to sit with the girl. And you had to be out of there before eight o'clock. Another young fellow and I, who subsequently became a lawyer, used to go down to one of the girl's dormitory to play cards at night every now and then, and you could stay until eight. But I met my--I knew my wife [Naomi Lewis Brooks] from high school days, and my family knew her family. And it wasn't until we got off into college that we began to date. I was a year ahead of her and of course you had to finish your date by eight o'clock and then you could only be in the library with her or in a program or something in the auditorium or what not, otherwise you had to be in the sitting parlor. The faculty in those days with a few exceptions did more to teach life than they did to teach chemistry and music and history and things of that nature. They were people who were dedicated to molding youngsters. And that doesn't exist very much anymore, and I'd been on several campuses with my children and with my grandchildren and it's just not like it used to be in that respect. That's one way in which, as far as I'm concerned, integration has not served us because you didn't have those additional support systems--you don't have those additional support systems that you had in those days. Story_ID: 34192 Speaker 1: Are we back on the air now? Speaker 2: Yes. I want to ask you about the military history of Petersburg. I mean it's a historic place in terms of black soldiers and their service in the civil war. I was just wondering if that was taught to you or not. You were in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], right-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: --At Virginia State? Speaker 1: Yes. The significance of the crater battle to me was something that we generally don't stop to remember that even soldiers in those days had to stop and rest. They didn't have any facilities we have now, and it made no difference which side they were on, the use of defensive lines was--was quite common, and you would layer your defense in echelons. Well, of course, the Battle of the Crater, the union from the southeast side along that ridge dug that tunnel which took several months to dig. The union army is sitting there now--the confederate army is sitting still along this defensive line. Speaker 2: Tell us now whose idea--this was the idea of [General Ambrose E.] Burnside, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: General Burnside. And who dug the tunnel? Speaker 1: Well, union infantry dug that tunnel, and I guess they expected that the confederates would stay right there long enough for them to get it dug. And of course, if you look at the drawings of it now, they had to build--they had to dig holes that came straight up to the surface along the way and build a fire over the hole so that it would suck air into the tunnel and the people digging wouldn't suffocate in there. It was quite an engineering feat, it turned out to be. And of course, once it was blown, it destroyed the line and before they realized they might have done better had they stayed, the confederate army moved back--back up the Appomattox River until it got up to the Appomattox Courthouse and of course that's where the surrender finally took place, yeah. I used to teach military history and we used the battle of--that battle at Petersburg as an example of how the absence of mobility can become a detriment to your--to your unit because we teach the principles of war, you know, maneuver, mobility, objective, you know, security and surprise, etc. And of course, we used the Battle of Princeton as an example of mobility at night and several others that we used to teach how even in those days, we used the principles of war. Now we go all the way back to the revolution, and when the Union Army--when [General George Washington] was just about done, they were just about wiped out, and had retreated to just up above Philadelphia, the name of the town escapes me now, it will come to me in just a minute. Speaker 2: Trenton [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: No, no. Just up the Schuylkill River. There's a college there now. I spoke at the college. I can't even think of it now. It'll come to me in just a moment. When you retreated there, that's when we had the gift of aide from France which brought in [Friedrich von] Steuben, [Tadeusz] Kosciuszko and [Marquis de] Lafayette and a couple others who took parts of the union army--of the revolutionary army and--[Casimir] Pulaski was another--and massaged it. Von Steuben became the Kremlin of the IG [Inspector General] and taught us, you know, how to inspect the unit and how to train it and what not. Others taught tactics and things of that nature and led units during the revolution when they then got back on their feet. But before we leave here, it's going to come back to me as well as I know that--Valley Forge. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 34193 Speaker 1: So, in terms of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] now, was that like--did you envision yourself going into the military for a long period of time when you were taking ROTC? Speaker 2: I tried to get out--I'll be honest with you, I tried to get out of ROTC. I said I have bad sinus problems when I was a freshman, and I'd like to get exempted. Well the smart sergeant said, well, all right, sir, you can get out of it, but we notify your draft board tomorrow. So I decided maybe I better suffer my sinus and take ROTC. So I did well. As a sophomore you become a sergeant, and I became a master sergeant as a sophomore and most guys--just a few people get that. Then in my junior year, I became a captain and most juniors don't get passed first lieutenant, you know, few will get to be captain, and cause my senior year, I became a lieutenant colonel in ROTC. Before you go off to your summer camp between your junior and senior year, the ROTC faculty picks students who have potential, and they call them distinguished military students. And you go to camp, and you get a extra observation, you get extra jobs, leadership jobs, because you're being evaluated. Well, you don't know that when it's happening and that was going on with me. So when I came back, I was given the job as regimental adjutant, which is the--you have the regimental commander, the executive officer and the adjutant. In the spring of my senior year, they called me in and said we're going to nominate you for a regular army commission which meant thirty years. Well, I had taken that scholarship money, plus I wanted to teach music in the school system, public school system. I was already being courted by Alexandria [Virginia] to come back to Alexandria to teach, to take over Paterson's, Earl Patterson's work. So I turned it down, turned the regular army commission down, which was about as offensive a move as I could have ever made to the professor of military science and tactics. So I didn't take the regular army commission. I graduated, got the band master's award and all sorts of other things, got the quarter master gold key, all sorts of awards, and went on into the army. Story_ID: 34194 Speaker 1: When I--the first unit I was in, I was in what was called headquarters and headquarters company of Fort Lee. Speaker 2: So you went into the army going as a-- Speaker 1: Second Lieutenant. Speaker 2: --Second Lieutenant, okay. Speaker 1: For Fort Lee. All of the black officers coming out of the--once you go in, you go to school, go to the basic officer's course. Most all of the black officers were going to the two troupe units, the third quarter master group, and the, what is it, the five 39th, or five 49th quarter master group, because that's where most of the black soldiers were on the post. Speaker 2: Now this is 1954? Speaker 1: This is now January, 1955. Speaker 2: Fifty-five (1955), okay. Speaker 1: I was sent to headquarters in headquarters' company. And to my knowledge no one knew of a black officer having been in headquarters' company. There was one other black officer in the special troops command, and he was the company commander of the casual company, that's whereas troops come into the post, that's where you report in. His name was Jack Halsey, who just passed here about three years ago. But I was in headquarters cause it was second lieutenant. The company commander changed after I was there about a month. And a man by the name of James G. Monteith, M-O-N-T-E-I-T-H, became the company commander. He was a white man who was born in Arizona but raised in New York City, who did not have a college degree, knew that I did, and used me to help him off-times with some of his college work, but who also took me under his wing. He had been in the army during World War II. When World War II was over in 1946, he was released as a First Lieutenant along with thousands of other officers. In December, 1950, after the Korean War broke out, he and some 25 or 30,000 other people were called back to duty. Now he was called in on December the 30th, 1950, I'll always remember it. So, that made him much older than me, but he took time to say to me things like what kind of sports do you play? And I would say, well, I can play a little softball and basketball. He said, can you play tennis, no, says, do you have golf clubs, no, do you bowl, I says no. He said, well you got to go do that. He says why don't you do that? I says where I came from, I wasn't allowed on a tennis court. If I was at the bowling alley, all I could do was set pins. So he said I want you to go to the thrift shop and buy a set of used golf clubs, and I'm going to teach you how to play golf. He did several things like that. He said you need to get into the extension--officer's extension education program. You've already finished the basic course, but you need to start on the middle level course right now. He says because when boards look at your records, they say, oh, this officer has been studying, he's been trying to improve himself even over what he has to do, says you need to get into the quarter master general's reading program. He did several things like that, encouraged me to do those. And all the time he was laying the groundwork to encourage me then to apply to go into the regular army, which I had once refused. And after about fifteen months working with him, I applied. In fact, it got to the point where I signed his name and he could not tell whether he wrote it or I wrote it. And he was--would be sitting there at his desk working on his school work, trying to get out of college and I was doing much of his work. I signed everything except the morning report, and that's the only document you go to jail if somebody signs it for you. But all of the unit passes and what not, and so I got a great chance that he allowed me to run free in that unit. And we had over 500 troops in our company. Story_ID: 34195 Speaker 1: So you're basically in charge of 500 men? Speaker 2: That's right as a second lieutenant. And he is a benchmark along my route to whom today I'm dearly, you know, thankful for having known him. And so I applied for the regular army and I was selected. Of course the first question they asked before I went before the board, the selection board-- Speaker 1: Just a point of clarification. Now you were in the reserve or something? Speaker 2: --Well, you're a reserve officer meaning that your tenure is, you have no real tenure, you know, you can go whenever they don't need you any longer. Many people stayed in the reserves through 20 years, but it's as if you were a temporary hire. One of the disadvantages of that is if you're a regular army officer they know you're around so they can invest in you, they can invest education, they can invest quality jobs, things of that nature, so a regular army officers fair better than reserve officers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But where was I--I was-- Speaker 1: You decided to enlist into the regular army. Speaker 2: --Oh, yeah, and one of the first questions before I--when I went before the board was why did you turn the army down the in the first place? And I told them I hated it. And they looked at me real strangely and I explained that I had been through ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. I went to ROTC summer camp and the life of a cadet at summer camp was not what I was interested in spending the rest of my life doing. And nobody took the time to explain to me that the life of an officer is very different from that of a cadet in summer camp. And I guess I had punctured the pride of the ROTC faculty where--at Virginia State so bad that they didn't take time to correct that misunderstanding either. Maybe I didn't offer it to them. So I took the examination. Also in those days you had to take a written examination, had to take two, a psychological battery and an educational battery. What I did to prepare for both of those was I went over across the other side of Petersburg to Virginia State University and got the director of testing over there to give me a couple of tests so that I could practice on. They were not the same test, but one was an educational test--educational achievement test, and the other was a psychological battery. And I took them just to smooth out my skills of taking tests. So I took those and passed those and by then I was in Alaska and was integrated into the regular army out there. Story_ID: 34196 Speaker 1: Now a significant event occurred there. Having started as a quartermaster, now having two and a half years of service, and integrating into the regular army, I was sent to the 23rd infantry regiment, it was there at the moment, still a regiment. Well, they didn't know what to do with a quartermaster. So they made me the public affairs officer. Speaker 2: Now, where is this? Speaker 1: This was in Fort Richardson, Alaska. Speaker 2: Okay. Fort Richardson. Speaker 1: Made me the public affairs officer. The inspector general discovered it, and said no, he has to be in a rifle company. So I was then sent to a rifle company and by then it had been converted to a battle group from a regiment, and I was put in "B" company, 23rd infantry regiment. There I am now competing. I'm a first lieutenant competing with four other first lieutenants and a captain, all of whom had been to the infantry basic officers schools, all of whom had had experience in infantry units up to that time. So the test was there before me. And I survived it. In fact, had two events that occurred while I was a lieutenant there. They decided to train the--some recruits in Alaska instead of sending them back to the United States. So they selected me and my platoon to take these 24 men, put them into squads in my platoon and teach them how to be soldiers--how to be infantry soldiers. And we did it, and we did it very successfully, which turned out to be another milestone benchmark in my life. Speaker 2: So this is what--what year is this? Speaker 1: We're now in 1957, '58' (1958). Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: And then when those two years were up and I left the infantry, I went back to the same unit I had been in in Alaska, the Alaska General Depot. You know when I went there, show you how God works. I went to Alaska to be assigned as the Post Exchange officer up in the north, up at Eielson Air Force base up near Fairbanks. But when I hit Fort Richardson they pulled me off of those orders, broke my heart, and put me in the 121st quartermasters' service company, which was about the lowest level of unit you can get. My feelings were hurt. I had been abused. What I had worked for had been taken away from me. It turned out to be a blessing from God, because later on in my career and then too, I was with troops. Had I been in the Post Exchange business, I would not have been with troops. I would not have had that troop experience--some more troop experience. When I went back to the depot after finishing my infantry two years, I became a company commander as a first lieutenant. And there weren't very many first lieutenant commanders in those days. All the rest of the commanders and depot were captains. So there I was again getting a chance to stand out. And it was a happenstance that was meant to be what I thought evil that turned out to be for good by having to go to the 121st quartermaster service company. And that kind of experience happened to me several times in my life and each one of them turned out to be a blessing. I went to Vietnam and we will probably get to that in a moment, but I went to Vietnam the first time, scheduled to go to headquarters U.S. Army Military Assistance group in Saigon. Story_ID: 34197 Speaker 1: Now this is 19-- Speaker 2: Now we're all the way up to 1963, now. Speaker 1: --Sixty-Three. Okay so you-- Speaker 2: I've skipped over ROTC, my ROTC assignment. I'll come back to that in just a minute. Speaker 1: Okay, your first ROTC assignment. That was at-- Speaker 2: That was at Central State College in those days. Speaker 1: --Central State College-- Speaker 2: Let's go there and then I'll go to Vietnam in just a moment. Speaker 1: --All right. Speaker 2: I left and I came back to Central State College. Speaker 1: So your sons were born in Alaska? Speaker 2: Both boys were born in Alaska, one in the State--one in the territory, and of course that next year it became a state and the second one in the state. The oldest boy Leo was born in the territory, yeah. Speaker 1: That's right, that's before statehood for Alaska, right? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: That's when the United States had 49 states, 48 rather? Speaker 2: And before the first boy was born, my wife [Naomi Lewis Brooks] taught in the adult education program there, because we had many soldiers who didn't have high school diplomas, and she taught in that program for a while. And then after they were both born, she did it a couple of times. She would get a babysitter just to keep her teaching skills honed, because she was the elementary school graduate--elementary education graduate also from Virginia State and taught in Alexandria for a year before I went to Alaska, yeah. But on to ROTC, I worked for--before I got there I got a letter from this lieutenant colonel who said don't worry, you will not be hurt by coming to ROTC duty. There was a reputation that these professors of military science were killing off young officers by giving them bad efficient reports, you know, that they really didn't deserve, give them poor reports. He says don't worry about the efficient report, if you do well, you'll get well. Well I got there to work for Roy W. Sorrell, who had graduated from Howard University in 1938 and who was the professor of military science. And he took a liking to my work and I did well there, I taught military science--I taught map reading and military history for most of the time and substitute taught military law. I was also the public affairs officer for the unit, and as always I got thoroughly involved in the community as did my wife. My wife taught there on the campus also. She taught remedial reading to college students, she ran their clinic. And of course we had the two boys. And we managed it by, I would teach my eight o'clock class, I lived about two minutes down the highway from the campus, I would dash home at 8:50, my wife would get in the car and dash up there, teach here nine o'clock class, when one of the kids was sick, and then she would come back at the end of her nine o'clock class, she would dash home at ten. I would jump back in the car and dash back up and teach my ten o'clock class. Whenever somebody would have the measles or something as kids always seemed to do. But the kids went to laboratory school at two and three years old, got a wonderful head start. And while there I had asked the army to send me to graduate school as they was doing many other people. They said your degree is in music, we don't--you can't get accepted into a business school with a music degree. So if you go prepare yourself, we'll consider it. So while on the faculty I took courses. I took 41 hours in the three years that I was there. Made and "A" in every last class. I wrote to the quartermaster branch, which I was back in, I said all right now send me to graduate school. They says well you got to go to the advance course then after that we'll see. Well, when the end of that came the see was the salt China Sea and I ended up in Vietnam. When I got to Vietnam, I was on orders to go to MACV [Military Assistance Command, Vietnam] a US Army Military Assistance Group Vietnam, headquarters in Saigon. Somehow or another somebody got a hold of my orders and I ended up way up country in a little place called Qui Nhon. Story_ID: 34198 Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't want to get away from Wilberforce [University] without asking you about Colonel Charles Young and B.O. Davis(sp) and some of the other history. Were they talking about that in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program at Central? Speaker 2: Very little, in those days, very little. Although I knew of Charles Young's existence and influence there, because when Charles Young was around there, there was one school, it was Wilberforce University. Subsequently, the state and the separation of church and state deal separated its portion of the campus as Central State College. Oddly enough there's a gully that looks like a canal that runs between the two schools as though it were a mote at one point. But of course Wilberforce University had the great history of people. In fact, it was Wilberforce University when the likes of Fred Sheffey who became a major general was out of there and several other people, yeah. Speaker 1: Also Wilberforce being such an all black institution, Charles Wesley, who was the president of Central State when you were there, he was also the author of the history of the Alphas, right? Speaker 2: Well, he's a history of several organizations. He was also the historian of the boule of which I was also a member, he was the history if it and wrote out a rather significant volume on it as well as Alpha Phi Alpha, but Charles Wesley was, as far as I am concerned, was a tremendous lover of young people who caused many young people to achieve what they had no dream of ever doing, by being tolerant with their lack of money and also by his strictness on his faculty, yeah. He has as his dean, Dean Jackson, who had been a Red Tail, the-- Speaker 1: Tuskegee-- Speaker 2: --Tuskegee Airman, yes, and who flew with them in Europe. Speaker 1: --And you were saying, I think, off camera too that-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: --Off camera you mentioned that, before we got started that there was one of the original founders of A Phi A? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Henry A. Chapman lived in the community, and in fact, he came to a fraternity meeting while I was there as--and of course at the time he was about ninety-five years old, yeah. When was A Phi A founded? Speaker 1: Nineteen o'eight (1908), December, 1908. The oldest African American Fraternity at Cornell University, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. I just wanted to make those points before we moved on, you know, because it's essential in such a historical place, in terms of Wilberforce the oldest black school, being just across the gully, as you say. Story_ID: 34199 Speaker 1: But Vietnam, now, I remember as a kid the Kennedy administration, I guess, in a press conference, John Kennedy was saying that we had advisors in Vietnam. So you went over as one of those advisors? Speaker 2: That's right. And I was stationed at Qui Nhon, and had--was the advisor to the (unclear) depot, that's the 121st Vietnamese Depot. I had--was assigned an interpreter, and his job of course is to play in between you and the person whom you are the advisor to. But I told him when I got there I said, your job is to teach me the language. I expect in the next four months to be able to speak this language. Well, by that time, I was--he had done a fairly good job, and I could carry on a reasonable conversation. It came in very handy because quite often we would have meetings, joint meetings with all of our advisor group and with the command structure of the Vietnamese army there at Qui Nhon. And at the end of it, when the Americans would get back together, my boss would say, well, my counterparts says it's such and such and such is what was really said and so and so and so and so. Well, after about four months, I would say, sir, that's not what my boss, the Lieutenant Colonel, I said that's not what was said at all. What was said was so and so, you know. When he told it to you he had cleaned up the bad part and made it not so painful. I said this is the situation. Well, I then became quite a valuable resource because I could carry on a conversation. I subsequently have lost most of it because that's been over 30 years--30 years now. In fact that was about 40 years ago. Speaker 1: Can you kind of tell people what was the situation in Vietnam. Why was the United States in Vietnam? Speaker 2: Well, this is my theory. This is not what the, you know, what the government was saying. McNamara was the secretary of defense. I thought the whole time I was up there that we were pouring water down a rat hole. We were attempting to impose a culture on people who at my level, were really not interested in our culture. They were interested in their culture which was very different from ours. There was a sergeant there, when McNamara came over, he asked this sergeant how are things going, and the sergeant said we're wasting time, you know, we need to go home. Well, I understand the next day after McNamara left, the sergeant left, they sent him home. But he was absolutely correct in my estimation. And I turned out to be--it turned out to be true. We wasted a lot of lives, a lot of money over a place that we could not gain control. Their culture is just that much different from ours. They had a coup--they had a president that we did not--that did not want us, but took our money and our soldiers in South Vietnam then they had a coup to get rid of that government, Ngo Dinh Diem government. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And things really didn't change that much. And then I heard the president or the secretary of state [Henry A.] Kissinger say we have just signed a just and lasting peace. Well the just and lasting peace lasted about six months and then I have the vision in my mind of the man hanging on the strut of a helicopter off of the top of the Embassy building as the last person out of the country, because we were gone, and it was all lost. So as far as I am concerned, I was a soldier, I did exactly what I'm told to do and I always will, but that was a waste of our time and resources and our nation. Story_ID: 34200 Speaker 1: Well, do you think it was inevitable that hostilities would escalate? I know that the US was there officially as advisors in 1961 and so on? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, see then the North Vietnamese got involved and then the Chinese got involved and with those two sets of persons and resources, the Viet Cong was able to sustain. See the Vietnamese people could not hold a village by themselves because there was so many, what I called sympathizers and what not in the villages that it was impossible to maintain security. So the only thing you'd have would be the large cities and then you would lose--eventually lose those. But the will of the people was not there to fight that war. Those people had been fighting for years. They fought the Chinese, you know, they fought on and on, they fought Communist and what not, and when the French left in 1954, you know, nothing changed. Then we got in--and so those people were tired. They'd had enough. War is a way of life with them, and we were trying to finish a war and you couldn't do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the gospel according to Leo. Okay. All right, all right. So, the first time you were there, you were there from '63' (1963) to-- Speaker 1: I went--I was due to go January the 23rd of 1963. I said, you know, I'm going to try to go early, I'm not going to just sit around. I had finished school, the officer's advance course in December. I said I'm not going to sit around a month, I'm going to go--see if I can go. So I got my date moved up to January the 4th. Then that winter--the winter--matter of fact I had been there pretty much a year, the United States was trying to demonstrate that we were reducing our forces in Vietnam. So they advanced the return of folks, so they says everybody whose ready to go--supposed to go home in January, we're going to send you home in December. So I ended up only being over there 11 months and a few days. Speaker 2: Okay, so you actually came back in '63' (1963). Speaker 1: I came back in December, 1963. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So that was your first tour, right? Speaker 1: That was my first tour. I've really enjoyed dealing with the people. When we didn't have anything pressing, there was a group of us advisors who we would go out to Leprosarium(sp) which is just south of the town of Qui Nhon and we rebuilt their diesel generator and did other things to help them. Learning to speak the language, I was able to go downtown and buy things that I really didn't want. I'd go down and buy a chicken and what not just to practice their method of haggling and then I'd turn around and give the chicken to somebody on the street, you know. But I just loved the people. I got to see a good bit of the central highlands part of the country and the central coastland, where I was. I learned to eat the food and learned to love it. Story_ID: 34201 Speaker 1: But on returning home, I was put through another course, an advance logistics course, and then sent--and said, you promised me you were going to send me to graduate school it's my time, now. So I got orders saying you're going to Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania. The nearest graduate school was 80 miles away at Bucknell University. So when I got the welcome letter from Indiantown Gap, I didn't respond to it. I waited until I got home and I went to--because I got home early, I went over to the assignment office in Washington [D.C.] and said, what do you mean doing this to me? You promised me you would send me to grad school. I was not a fair-head boy in (unclear). While they took care of a lot of people, they didn't take care of me, and I don't mind saying it. Speaker 2: What was your rank at that point? Speaker 1: At this point I'm a captain. I was a captain. So I went in and complained. So they then changed my assignment to Fort Holabird, Maryland, where I ended up working for the intelligence community. And my boss was most of the time down here in Washington, his headquarters was in Washington, so I was the expert, you know, working for them, and I worked for them for almost two and half years. While doing that I also went to graduate school, on my own, and got a master's degree from George Washington University in financial management. Speaker 2: Why financial management? Speaker 1: Well, the undergraduate courses I took at Central State were all in the business arena. You know I'd taken business law, accounting, business management, sales and marketing and all those things, Economics, etc., and so that's why I was enabled to qualify for George Washington University. And as I said my daughter and I got our master's degrees the same night in 1966 at George Washington University. Speaker 2: Your sister, right? Speaker 1: My sister, yeah. Story_ID: 34202 Speaker 1: Now during this period of time--well let me ask you a question about Vietnam in terms of--and the army. What was the status of--how were black officers treated in Vietnam by the army and by the people, the Vietnamese people, how did they react to black officers? Speaker 2: I didn't have any trouble. You know, I heard a few stories, but for the most part, officers represented themselves very well, and as a result of it, we're well respected. Speaker 1: By the Vietnamese? Speaker 2: As advisors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew several of them. In fact I knew two who received great commendation for their work as advisors, first from the United States and then from the Vietnamese government, so that to me that was not a major roadblock. There weren't many--well, there were several, there were about eight black officers at Qui Nhon. They were all doing different kinds of advisory work than I was. But I don't know if any of them who had any significant problem. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is also a time when 1963 the March on Washington took place and there was civil rights agitation all over the United States? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: North and South? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in Vietnam for that and for the assignation of Kennedy. Speaker 1: Now do you think, looking back on those times, do you think that the army was ahead of the-- Speaker 2: Did what? Speaker 1: --When you look back on those days, do you think the army was ahead of the general population in terms of race relations? Speaker 2: Oh, it was ahead then, and it stayed ahead, it's ahead today. It outstripped the other services, it still does, and it has outstripped any segment of our society that you bring up. I can show you how the army has done a much better job, not just in raising generals, but in raising non-commissioned officers and in providing opportunities for any proportional development, developing skills and what not, opportunities to be technicians of all types that pay much in civilian society. They do much better than society does in general. Speaker 1: Why do you think there's more opportunity for advancement or latitude in the army than in the general society? Speaker 2: Then what? Speaker 1: Why do you think there's more opportunity-- Speaker 2: In the army? Speaker 1: --In the army than in the general society? Speaker 2: Because the leadership of the army decided it needed to be done. And between the secretaries of the army over those years, people like Stanley Resor, you know, and the like, and the people who became the chiefs of staff, Harold K. Johnson, who stands out in my mind as a great, great American, you know, and some others. Because of them and they're saying it's going to be done, it got done. And they used the mechanisms to get it done, without any force either. Story_ID: 34203 Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so this is a time, I guess, as we get towards the late '60s' (1960s), there're actually riots on aircraft carriers and that sort of thing, but not in the army? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you're getting up to three assignments later when I went back to Vietnam. That was beginning to subside, but you had this thing, well I'm getting ahead, but we had this thing they used to call the dap(sp) where these soldiers bumped fists and elbows and things for two or three sometimes four or five minutes. And they would do it anywhere. They'd stand up in the dining facility and do it, you know. And I went to the battalion that I took over in December, 1970, before the other guy gave it up. And we were sitting in the dining room, it was about 20 officers, I think I was the only African American in the crowd, and here are these GIs standing up right next to us doing this dap. I said nothing. When I took over I told my sergeant major who is this highest non-commissioned officer in the unit, I said I want you to put the word out that I don't want any more dapping in my dining facilities, don't want any more dapping in my recreation halls, if you want to dap, you either dap outdoors or you dap in your barracks. It all went away. Speaker 1: Now why did you issue an order. Now this was something that American soldiers were doing? Speaker 2: Because the purpose that when you do that in the dining facility, here are two people sitting here eating, they're standing right beside them and two people slapping fists back and forth. It's a disturbance. It would be just as well stand up doing a dance, you know. And it was being done as an intentional affront, and I didn't want that. So they stopped. They did it--do in the barracks, but don't do it in the dining facility. Be just as though if somebody started singing a hillbilly song in the middle of while I'm trying to eat my dinner. It wouldn't made no difference to me, you know, what it was. And I had several other things in that nature that I did. You have to wear a head cover and I had an officer's call--and NCO [non-commissioned officer] call and I said if a soldier is walking down the street and he doesn't have his cap on and you let him do it and don't stop him and challenge him, you just said it's okay to not wear your hat, that's what you said, now do you mean that, no, you don't mean that. Well, then you have no choice but to say something. About four days later I was walking through the compound, and I heard this sergeant say you better put your hat on before Colonel [Leo] Brooks sees you. I let the soldier go by and I grabbed the sergeant and I said, that was the wrong answer. The answer is you better put your hat on before I, the sergeant, sees you. It's not because of Colonel Brooks, it's because it's right to wear your cover. And I used several other homespun techniques of that nature to put my personality on that unit. Story_ID: 34204 Speaker 1: It started off when I got there, it had 1800 people, which is a large battalion. Most battalions run five, six hundred people. And when I left it had had 2600. And the reason was we had begun to draw down in Vietnam. This is on my second tour. And the--as they would draw down in a distant area, up at Thuy Diem(sp) or Fantiet(sp) or Fangrang(sp) or someplace, they would always--they would have to leave a logistical support unit there for the troops that were left. If they only left about a half or a third of the troops there, they could only leave about a half or a third of the support troops. So they had to belong to somebody, so they'd attach them to my battalion. So I ended up having about seven or eight distant sites from where my battalion was really located at Long Binh. And so I had to travel to those rather frequently to maintain control. Speaker 2: Now this is on your second tour? Speaker 1: This is my second tour. I was lieutenant colonel battalion commander. Speaker 2: Okay, so when did you second tour start? Speaker 1: It started--I got there in July, 1970, and came home in July, 1971. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I went over there assigned to a battalion at Tin Nhanh(sp) to go as a battalion commander. I had asked my branch--the people in my personnel office called me several times and hey you ought to volunteer--you need to volunteer to go back to Vietnam, you know. Your numbers going to come up soon, you volunteer you might get a nice job. I said do you have a battalion for me to command. Well we don't have one right now. Well its--they constantly sending guys over there assigned to battalions, but they didn't have one for me. Well at the time I was working for a major general. He was a major general when I started off--named Henry A. Miley, Jr., M-I-L-E-Y, whom I had been his congressional assistant. A very difficult job and he gained great confidence in me. And so I went to him and said listen, they won't help me. So he then wrote a general's private message to a general over there and said I need to get Brooks into a battalion. The next day back came orders for me to go--instructions saying, you send him, I'll put him in such and such and such a battalion. Well the personnel people called me and said you can't do that, we have to assigned, because I said I gave you six months to find a battalion, you couldn't find it, but the general could so I don't really need you. So I went and of course between the four months from the time that happened and the time I got there that battalion was closed down. So became a staff officer for six months and then I took over the largest battalion there, which was the 266. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it turned out to be a blessing. Story_ID: 34205 Speaker 1: All right let's do a little backtracking on the chronology a little bit. So in the time between 1960, you know, after you got your master's degree, you went to Staff College at Fort Leavenworth? Speaker 2: Yes, I went to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas for a year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one other thing we need to go back to. While I was in Vietnam--before I went to Vietnam in 1963, we became pregnant again at my household and so while I was away, I had a daughter, and then that's where my three children are counted for. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After going to the Command and General Staff College for a year, I was sent to the Pentagon, and having been as a young major up at [Fort] Holabird, I was a big dog, I was in charge of my own operation, my boss was in Washington [D.C.], I had no local supervision, so I really ran the place. When I got to the Pentagon and I walked into the office where I was supposed to be assigned, the colonel shook my hand and said now, Major, if you go down the hall--or he says your desk will go over there and it was blank space. He said if you go down the hall about three corridors around, you will find a pile of desks sitting out in the hallway, a big open hallway. He said and you will see a dolly in there, you bring a desk up, pick out one for yourself and bring it up and that's where you will sit in the chair. Well that was my introduction to the Pentagon, because majors were a dime a dozen in the Pentagon. And I was down in the bowels where there were no light--no daylight at all. After being there about four months, a young man had a heart attack upon the third floor, out on E ring, that's where the--and went to--and had to go to the hospital. Well, the general that he was working for, he was his congressional assistant. The general was about to go--had to testify on the [Capitol] Hill the following week. So I was selected to go up there to take his job. So there I was immediately in the fire and this is just before Thanksgiving. And it's my first year in the Washington area since I've been in the army, first time I've been stationed there. And we had arranged a big Thanksgiving dinner for all of my family and her family at the house that we had bought. Well, early that morning the phone rang. Leo, this is General [Henry Augustine] Miley, what time are you going to have Thanksgiving dinner, I said about two o'clock. He said, all right, well come on in here now and you and I need to work to get ready for me to go the Hill on Monday. So I went and when I got home, everybody was picking turkey out of their teeth with toothpicks about four thirty in the evening. Now that was the beginning of a very difficult two and half years assignment. Story_ID: 34206 Speaker 1: When he left that assignment, another two-star came in by the name of Fred Kornett, K-O-R-N-E-T-T, who was a lovely, lovely guy to deal with. And my job was--I would go to the [Capitol] Hill and negotiate questions with staff members and help them to frame questions right, to get certain issues we wanted raised, and would answer questions in advance on some technical things for them. So I had to be pretty skilled in my work. And then I would go to the Hill with a principle and when a question was asked about some weapon system or some item in the budget, in the equipment budget, I had this briefcase that I would quickly run into the briefcase and snatch out a fax sheet and hand it to him so that he had all the real details, but he couldn't remember that on about eight or nine hundred items in the budget, in the equipment budget. So I became very close to both of those two generals who saw in me whatever they thought was there. One of them having said to me-- [Henry Augustine] Miley, having said to me, I should pay close attention to my task in this job, because while traveling around with him up with the chief of staff and his secretary helping, he said, you will see how generals behave, how they negotiate, how they disagree and what not, and he says you'll learn a lot. What it did turn out to be a wonderful, wonderful lesson, not ever thinking I'd be one at that point anyway. So my three years there was intense the entire time, but a blessing. I'll say this about it, down the hall--down in the concourse of the Pentagon was Woodward and Lothrop, a Woodward and Lothrop store and about once a month, sometimes twice a month, I would go in that Woodward and Lothrop store and buy my wife a dress. That's back in the days in the late '60s' (1960s), that's in the days of miniskirts. So I would go there and buy her a dress which she wore up until, until they went back to pants and these ugly mixed up black and green and gray colors and I quit buying after that. Story_ID: 34207 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So now you received a bronze star for service in 1970. Was this for service in Vietnam or service in the Pentagon? Speaker 2: In Vietnam. Speaker 1: Vietnam, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, got a bronze star and I also got the Legion of Merit as a battalion commander, which was kind of uncommon. Most folks were getting what's called a meritorious service medal. Speaker 1: So Legion of Merit is a higher award? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It award that signifies that you were doing a job that deserved to be rewarded? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was not, I would say probably half of the battalion commanders would get, might get a Legion of Merit because it was tough work. And my greatest goal in 1970 was, you know, was to do the job and take care of the men, because we had some very difficult problems in Vietnam at the time. Not the least of which was heroin and it is still with us today. I run a homeless shelter in my church during the winter, and we still have veterans from Vietnam, men who are now in their sixties and seventies, late sixties and seventies who were touched by the heroin and never have fully recovered. I could tell stories on and on about when I went to the battalion, the first commanders' meeting I went to they put up a chart that showed the number of drug incidents in battalions and the commander--the group commander looked at it and said now look at the 266, by which is the battalion I had, said that's the way your record should look. Well we had the lowest number of incidents. After I had been there two months we were two times higher than anybody. And he wondered what's going on down there, I'm doing my job, I'm catching them. I'm not hiding them, I'm catching them. And I was. I came across a soldier with his head on his desk at two o'clock in the morning, because I used to walk through the barracks all hours a night. And this soldier had, you know, was asleep with his head on the--and the powder all over the desk. I just grabbed him by the back of his shirt, raised him up slowly, woke him up and took him out. Took him up to my headquarters and read him his rights, said you're going to jail and I'm going to see to it because I caught you myself, and I'm going to put you--I'm going to see that you go to jail for a long time. Well I knew that wouldn't happen, but I threatened him that way, I said if you don't tell me where this came from. So he told me how the--that a maid would bring it in each morning about nine o'clock. We couldn't search the maids. You couldn't have men search the maids. I had a female sergeant who had worked for me during my first six months there when I was on the staff I sent for her and had her down at my battalion. When this woman came through, we trapped her, took her in the barracks and she had two hundred viles, little capsules with about a half ounce of heroin in each one sewn into her clothes underneath her garments. And so I then called my boss, said sir, you need to come down here right away. And I called his boss, the brigadier general, and I called his boss, the major general, I said, you need to see this right away. And they came and they saw it, I have pictures of it now. Here's all this heroin right there and I said and that's what these soldiers are going through, and there's no need to try to hide it. Story_ID: 34208 Speaker 1: That's something. Speaker 2: Two days later a mysterious hand grenade blew up right outside of my hooch.(laughing)-- Speaker 1: A hooch is the-- Speaker 2: --It didn't bother me-- Speaker 1: --Name for a soldiers' dwelling in Vietnam? Speaker 2: --Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: Yeah, a hooch. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a house. Speaker 1: A hooch. Tell us what a hooch is? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where you sleep? Speaker 1: Did you sleep in a regular hooch? Speaker 2: Well, no I had a little house that I had one room, my battalion exec had a room and my battalion operations officer had the third one. We had our own little shower in there. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now at this point now are you a colonel by now. Speaker 2: I'm a lieutenant colonel. Speaker 1: Lieutenant colonel, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Now, have you--I mean what do you think of--I know a lot has been written about African American soldiers in Vietnam. There was a book a few years ago called "Bloods," it's about the black enlisted man's, you know, experience in Vietnam. Have you read that? Speaker 2: I have not read it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about it. I think some of the books make reference to the disproportionate number of African American soldiers who got killed or wounded in Vietnam, you know, percentage-wise compared to other soldiers and why? Speaker 2: I am not sensitive to that issue, it may be so. Speaker 1: Does it sound likely to you? Speaker 2: I would not have guessed that, and if it was--because they were heavier, many of them in combat units, many, but they were heavier in logistics units, the support units. Speaker 1: Okay. So least-wise they'd be less likely to-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm not going to draw that conclusion, although there may be an implication to that because I don't know. Speaker 1: --Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I've never been sensitized to that fact before. Speaker 1: Okay. So this second tour was from 1970 to '71 (1971). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now was there any indication in those days that the war was going to come to a conclusion? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. We'd begun to draw down. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we were drawing down under the--under the cover of a story that we were turning things over to the army of Vietnam-- Speaker 1: Was that-- Speaker 2: --But which they did not have the ability to sustain. Speaker 1: --Okay. So you came back--did you come back to the country in '71 (1971)? Speaker 2: I came right back and I went to work for that same General [Henry Augustine] Miley again. I became the deputy secretary of the general staff of the army material command. That was the here in the Washington [D.C.] area at the time. Now the deputy secretary of the general staff is the, I would call him the paper dealer. He's the guy who makes sure that all the documents that are going up for the general's signature are in the correct order, that all the attachments are there, that all of the issues are covered properly, but it's not just an administrative but it's a technical job also to make sure that the issues are covered and the right people have agreed or disagreed and if the responses to the disagreements are there and what not. And I did that for a year before I went to the National War College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 34209 Speaker 1: It's come to our attention as we do this research that every time someone goes to National War College, they usually get a promotion afterwards? Speaker 2: Well, generally, about seventy-five percent of them will make colonel, probably more than that back in those days, probably eighty-five percent would make colonel and something like twenty percent will make general, flag--because we had all services, all but become ambassadors or something of that nature, yeah, yeah. But that number is about the--it's very similar to the other senior service schools also. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you went to National War College. This is in '72' (1972)? Speaker 2: Summer of '72' (1972). Speaker 1: Okay. So what was your curriculum there, I mean what were you studying? Speaker 2: Well you studied strategic issues more than anything else. You didn't study anything--it's called the National War College--it was called National War College but it's more about geopolitical strategies, things of that nature, issues that affect national power as opposed to tactical issues and the like. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I know you had mentioned that ambassadors go there too? Speaker 2: Well, see our class was one quarter army, one quarter air force, one quarter navy and marines and one quarter civilians. And the civilians, many of them were from the state department and then the other service--well there were a couple from the department of the army, senior civilians and from some other agencies. We had one fella from the department of agriculture, and one from the forest service, I remember, yeah. Story_ID: 34210 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now you went back to Vietnam in '72' (1972), but to Cambodia, right? Speaker 2: Oh, no. No, no, no, I'm done. After '71' (1971), I'm done with Vietnam. After, after, after--after the National War College, I went to the office of the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which I begged to go there, and I'll tell you why. I had two boys in high school, and I wanted them to finish Jefferson High School in Fairfax County [Virginia]. Jefferson High School was not a magnet school at the time, but it was a good high school, and I wanted them to finish before I moved. They meant more to me than anymore advancement in the service. So I knew if I got assigned to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, I would be locked in for three years. Well, I only lasted thirteen months and was selected to command the Sacramento Army Depot. Well, the selection process for colonel level is such an important event that you dare not miss that and so having been selected, I packed my kids up and we went to California. I was first told I was going to Lexington, Kentucky, and my youngest son, who was six-four was delighted because that's the basketball capital of the world. And then I came back and said, we're going to California, to Sacramento, which they knew nothing about and I came back home a couple days later having talked with a guy I was going to replace and said, and I'm going to put you in a Jesuit high school, and they said well what does that mean. I says there are no girls. Well my oldest boy looked at me down the dining room table with tears in his eyes and says, dad, why are you going to punish us like this. Needless to say when we got to California, and I took them over to the high school standing on the sidewalk waiting for us was the principal, the assistant principal, the basketball coach, the football coach and a couple other members of the faculty, like a role of penguins all dressed in their black clothes with white collars to see them, and I remember the basketball coach looking at Vincent, the six-four son, putting his hands on his head and he said awesome. (laughing) I will never forget it. Well, the next day the oldest boy went to football practice and wallowed in the school and Vincent did too, they had a ball there. And there were plenty of girls around at the high schools that were kind of paired with them, all the girls are high school (unclear). So they had a good time there, and they didn't miss a beat. Story_ID: 34211 Speaker 1: They both graduated with honors and did very well. I remember the--before we left Virginia, while they were in Jefferson High School, the oldest boy came home one day and he said, Dad, you know, Billy Martin, who was a friend of his, a boy who was a guard on the football team, Leo by the way had been a running back and he's getting' ready to go into his senior year in high school and was easily going to be the first string running back, and he was also--had just come from Boy's State, was really riding high in high school, and he said Billy Martin said he's joining the debating team so that his record will look good for him to go to [United States Military Academy at] West Point and I said well, if you want to go you'd better make sure you're into something too. So he looked over at his brother Vincent and said, hey Vince, me go to West Point and he started ribbing me about it and I said nothing, I let it go. Well when it came SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] time, I said I want you to check that block up there that allows your record to go the military academies and that's all I want you to do just check the block, you don't need to go, just check the block. Well then he took the SAT and we went off to California. After being out there for about three or four months, we get a phone call into my office, and my secretary comes in and says, sir, there's a Captain Briggs on the phone from West Point who wants to come out and interview your son to recruit him to the academy. I said I don't want to talk to him I don't want him near me. You have him to call the house, talk to my wife and let them do it and I don't want to be involved. She was shocked, but I intentionally did that so that--the captain came out, talked to him, I still make like I know little or nothing about it, the captain leaves, comes to my office then, stops by, and I thank him, what not, and I appreciate--was appreciative of his behavior, and he went on back to West Point. So a couple of days later, my son says, Dad, you haven't said anything about West Point. I says well, what do you want? I kept the pressure on him and not on me. Finally he says well, I'll put the application in. So we filled out the application. I says in the meantime we're going to fill out two, one in Ohio, where we were residence of, because I had made residence there when I was at Central State and one someplace else. So he applied at Bowling Green University in Ohio and he applied at San Diego State in California, was accepted at both. I said now which one you really going to go to? He says well I'll go back to Ohio, because you're going to be leaving here anyway soon. In the meantime the West Point thing comes through. So he heads off to West Point. I says now I'm going to pay the deposit for a room at Bowling Green so that if you get up there in the summer and you don't like it or you can't cut it, you don't have to wait till spring to apply to go to college someplace, you can just come on back and go straight to Ohio to school. Well that left the heat totally on his back. Story_ID: 34212 Speaker 1: Well he went there and wrote me the best letter I have ever received in my life, a letter of thanks for having led him to where he was and several other very personal issues. I have a copy of that letter that I read every year at Christmastime. I read it to myself and put it right back in the folder. And of course he stayed there and he came home at Christmastime, and we met him in San Francisco. We were still in Sacramento, met him in San Francisco and brought him home, and we sat up talking till the wee hours of the morning, and Vincent disappeared from the room. And all of a sudden he came back in the room and he had rifled Leo's suitcase and had on his full uniform, complete with the hat and what not with his bush sticking out up from underneath of the hat, his hairdo, and we all laughed about it. And we went to bed and I said to my wife before I went to sleep, I said, I think Vincent is hooked too, she says, naw. I said, yes he is. Well sure enough when Leo went back he told then Coach Kryzewsky who was the West Point coach at the time, he told him, he said, it's a shame my brother hurt his elbow on the rim playing basketball the other day, which caught Krzyzewsky's attention. Speaker 2: This is Mike Krzyzewsky or the-- Speaker 1: Mike Krzyzewsky, yes, because he was the coach at West Point at the time. So he then wanted some film. So the coach from Sacramento Jesuit High School, sent the film. So he says I want him. So he then--we went through a quick process and he was accepted. He had already been accepted at Creighton University as a pre-medical student and had already had engagement with the local alumni there in Sacramento there and what not, they were already to have him, and he had also been accepted to go play basketball on a basketball scholarship at Cornell University, but there was no scholarship, there was a scholarship, but it was academic scholarship at Creighton in Nebraska. So he went, played one year and came home at Christmastime and said, Dad, I don't like it, he said, the coach doesn't play his bench, he plays six people and this is too hard a work for me to be there and sitting on a bench. I want to quit, what do you think? I says quit if you want to. He quit. And he got serious--deep into his studies because a kid on the basketball team at West Point has to meet all of those same requirements that the other people about being up at five-thirty in the morning. I don't care that they've been down to temple, down in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] the night before and they get home at one-thirty o'clock in the morning or two o'clock in the morning, he's still got to get up at five-thirty. And he says I'm just not getting my work well and what not. And he finished very high in his class. Speaker 2: I think at the top. Speaker 1: And number one in military studies. So that's how they got there, yeah. But Sacramento turned out to be a wonderful assignment (unclear). Story_ID: 674152 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Leo Austin Brooks [HistoryMaker Major General Leo Brooks, Sr.]. It's L-E-O, A-U-S-T-I-N, B-R-O-O-K-S. Speaker 1: All right. And you're Leo Austin Brooks, Sr., right? Speaker 2: No, I'm, I'm neither junior nor senior. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, explain this now. This is-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, my son [HistoryMaker Brigadier General Leo Brooks, Jr.] is a junior-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I never changed my name when he was born. I never added, rather, the senior. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So, I'm learning something about name protocol now. So, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is August the 9th, 1932, and because I was born in Washington, D.C., but three days after being born, I lived in Alexandria [Virginia]. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your title and occupation? I guess your title is when you retired and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I am retired now from the United States Army and from some other activities subsequent to my retirement. I no longer am employed, am employed--I'm fully retired. Speaker 1: Okay. And, but you retired with the rank of-- Speaker 2: It's kind of a tricky thing. I retired as a brigadier general, but I was a major general, a two-star general on active duty when I retired. And the reason was, the reason is, is when, if you retired before you get three years in grade, you retire at the next lower rank. And I only had eighteen months as a major general when I retired, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. You had attained the rank of major general and you-- Speaker 2: I did what? Speaker 1: --you had attained that rank when you retired? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 1: You had functioned as a major general? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And so, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December the 2nd, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Fairfax County, Virginia. Speaker 1: All right. And we are completing an interview that we began in July, correct? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 674153 Speaker 1: And we left off during the last years of the Vietnam War, 1971. You were--do you have any last thoughts about, about Vietnam, about your tour in Vietnam? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, as I look back at the pain that came out of that war, and to see, even today, the, the damaged people from that war, it, it brings, it brings great, great remorse. Drugs were so prevalent. And so many young men became addicted that, even today, there, there are still remnants of their pain. And I can say that because, as a community and church matter, I have, for the last sixteen years, been a coordinator of a homeless shelter. And as a result of that, as you interview these young men, or these men, we see that many of them are still victims of having been addicted to drugs way back in, in the '70s [1970s], and '60s [1960s], and '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: So, many of them are Vietnam vets [veterans]? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. These are men who now, and the most men in last, sixties and seventies, yeah, yeah, early seventies, yes. And, and then, and this, a great percentage of our homeless population is from that era and that experience. Speaker 1: Okay. And in terms of the--I mean, when, do you have any thoughts about Vietnam now, in terms of where it stands in the-- Speaker 2: Well, it's--there was a sergeant who, who was, met the secretary of defense at the time, down I understand it was in the train where it happened. And he said, "Serge, how is, how are things going?" And the sergeant said, "We're pouring water down a rat hole. We, we're wasting time." Well, the sergeant was sent home, but he turned out to be right in the end because, you know, what we got out of it for what we put into it, in lives and hearts and dollars, did not turn out to be worth the investment, yeah. Story_ID: 674154 Speaker 1: So, you got the word to, that you were to come back in '71 [1971], right? Speaker 2: Yes, I came back from Vietnam in '71 [1971], and became the deputy secretary of the general staff of the U.S. Army Materiel Command which was in Washington [D.C.]. I had worked prior to going, going to, to Vietnam. I had worked for then-Major General Henry A. Miley [Henry A. Miley, Jr.], and upon returning, he said, keep in touch with me because he had apparently liked the kind of work that I did for him under some very high pressure, which we spoke about earlier. And so, I went to work as his deputy general, deputy secretary of his, of his staff. And that lasted for a year, and I was selected to go to the National War College, which is in Washington, D.C., a rather prestigious experience. There, you get to become acquainted with many people who end up the leaders of, of the military forces as, as well as civilians, because they are--one-quarter of the class is, was made up of civilians from the state department [U.S. Department of State], agriculture [U.S. Department of Agriculture], the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], from various sundry places, some very senior civilians. And so, you get to know these people and develop a relationship that carries on through the rest of your service, yeah. The National War College is, is a place where you study global matters. It's not tactics, it's not when you--though, it's called, was called the National War College. You, you don't study battles and things of that nature. You study geopolitical involvement, elements of national power, and the like. And you, that's a year-long program. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm glad you pointed that out because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --most people think, what would a civilian do at National War College, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But it's geopolitical-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --studies that are pursued. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you're dealing with economics, international economics, and finance, and things of that nature, yeah, yeah, pretty high level. Story_ID: 674155 Speaker 1: Upon finishing that assignment, or near my finishing of that assignment, my sons [HistoryMaker Brigadier General Leo Brooks, Jr. and HistoryMaker General Vincent Brooks] were in high school. And I wanted them to stay in Jefferson High School [Thomas Jefferson High School; Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology] in Fairfax County [Virginia]. At the time, it was not a magnet school. It was just a good high school, and I wanted them to finish that high school. So, I encouraged, and was assigned to the office of the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. I became the Cambodian desk officer in the logistics office or J4, where I dealt with such issues as the decline of foodstuffs during the, the latter days of, of Cambodia before it fell, and thought I would be there because, normally, when you go to JCS, you stay there for a good three years. I only lasted thirteen months (laughter) because I, I think I mentioned, and if I didn't, I'll, I'll mention again. While in the National War College [Washington, D.C.], I was selected for promotion to colonel. I had not expected it because the year group that was being considered was two years ahead of me. We normally do it by, by year group, fiscal year group. And it was two years ahead of me, which meant that one year ahead of me was what we called the secondary zone, where they would normally pick something like, 10 percent of the people from that zone who are allegedly doing better than the average bear, and they're promoted along with the folks who are in the regular zone. But when the promotion list came out, I was on it, and I was two years below. I subsequently learned that there were ten of us, ten people picked out of, out of the entire force, for that double below the zone selection. Story_ID: 674156 Speaker 1: Just a question about the Cambodian desk. Now, this is, so you were handling supply concerns, food, for the Cambodian government--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, well, at the, at the Joint Chiefs of Staff level, the, the actual handling of these commodities and things of that nature are done way below you. But an auditor determined the continued viability of the nation, or the survivability of, of it. And foodstuffs, ammunition, fuel, things of that nature are, are quite an important matter. And it was my job to keep an eye on, on the status of that. And I got a daily report directly out of Cambodia as, as to what, what the statuses of these things were because you had not only the, the Cambodian Army [Royal Cambodian Army], but you also had the civilians who had to have foodstuffs. And they were pretty much cut off, except for what rice, salt, et cetera, that came from the United States, or from other countries that the United States provided to them, usually through the [U.S.] Agency for International Development, or something of that, some other source of that nature. Speaker 1: Now, I was just thinking and just reflecting back on this era in my head about the news stories coming out. And I wondered if you had any thoughts about the comparison between Cambodia and Vietnam because in terms of the, the U.S. is here getting out of Vietnam, where many people say we really probably shouldn't be in, in the first place. But Cambodia, we kind of, we get out of there, too, but Cambodia is besieged by Pol Pot and Khmer Rouge, which proves historically--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we were-- Speaker 1: --now, we know it's a disastrous group. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They waid laste [sic.] to the country. Speaker 2: Yeah, well-- Speaker 1: I mean, they laid waste the country and-- Speaker 2: --well we were playing a much lesser role. We were not using conventional forces in Cambodia as we did in, in Vietnam. It was mostly, mostly support through other, other agencies as, as well as people like special forces, et cetera, to assist the country and the--those friendly to, to the, still friendly to the U.S. But they, another big difference was Cambodia has got, got a coastline--I'm sorry, Vietnam has a coastline that extends the length of the country. So, resupplying it, while we were there, was nowhere near as difficult as it was to get products into Cambodia, yeah. It would have been a much more difficult proposition. In fact, the last, one of the last acts before I left was helping to arrange for a U.S. Navy vessel to go down to New Orleans [Louisiana], and pick up a trainload of rice that had been shipped from Stuttgart, Arkansas, and to be loaded and, and gotten over there as quickly as we could. It was of our last ditch efforts, but it wasn't long after that before it was a matter of history. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any, do you think that maybe the U.S. should have applied more military might in Cambodia-- Speaker 2: Oh, I-- Speaker 1: --rather than Vietnam in terms of-- Speaker 2: --oh, I don't really have an educated opinion on that. I, I was just primarily involved in doing what we could do, based on the instructions that were left with us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 674157 Speaker 1: So, you were on the Cambodian desk thirteen months, you said, right? And then-- Speaker 2: Yes, I stayed in J- the Joint Chiefs of Staff's office for thirteen months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and a- another good thing happened to me while I, as I said, I thought I'd gotten myself locked into three years, so that my sons [HistoryMaker Brigadier General Leo Brooks, Jr. and HistoryMaker General Brooks] could finish the high school [Thomas Jefferson High School; Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology, Fairfax County, Virginia] they were in. One of the boys was about to become the captain of the football team. He was already the--he, he had been the lead running back in his junior year. And the other boy was a, was a sophomore, and was--well, then, the number two scorer on the basketball team. And one was in Boys State [American Legion Boys State] debating team--several things. They were just all balled up into the high school, and both were doing very well academically, and I didn't want that to move. But, along came orders where I had been selected to go to Sacramento [California] to become the commander of the Sacramento Army Depot. Oh, when I, I got those orders, I was in contact with, with my predecessor who was already there. And he said, "You don't want to put your kids in the public school here because it's not a very good high school. Its reputation is pretty bad. You probably want to put your kids in the, in the Jesuit High School [Jesuit High School, Carmichael, California]." And I said, "Well, we'll see when we get there." But, I told my sons at the dinner table one night that we, we would, they were probably going to go to a Jesuit high school. Well, the basketball son just lit up in glee because he knows the kind of athletic programs that most Jesuit high schools, and in the league that, that high school was in. He was delighted. The--I said, "But there are no girls in the high school--it's an all-boys school." And I can remember my oldest son with the glassy eyes looking over toward me, and he said, "Dad, why are you going to punish us like that (laughter)?" Well, it turned out not to be a punishment because there, there were four girls' high schools that were kind of matched up with, with the boys', two boys' high schools in, there in Sacramento, and it didn't make a difference. But, so we went to Sacramento in the summer of 1974, and it was probably as, as fun of an assignment as an officer could ever have. Story_ID: 674158 Speaker 1: Now, did you go as a colonel? Speaker 2: I was a colonel, a brand, a brand new colonel. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I had four other colonels there [Sacramento Army Depot, Sacramento, California] working for me, all of whom had been colonels much longer than I--one about three years. But the, the system is whoever is the commander is the commander. And, and the tradition and, and the practices that, that rests, just sort of step out of the commander's way, and the commander becomes in charge. But, the good thing about that assignment was, while my family is not normally involved in my work, they were deeply involved in the community, and so was I. We, we automatically, as, as a major employer, you know, there were about six thousand employees there. That's a major employer in the city and in that community. You become a part of the chamber of commerce, service organizations. I was invited to be a member of the board of, of directors of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], the Urban League [National Urban League] and, and several other things. My wife [Naomi Lewis Brooks] was a member of the board of the blood bank, the Red Cross [American Red Cross], Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], and, and other actives, so you become very involved in the community, which, which is a broadening experience that, otherwise, you wouldn't get if you were stuck on a, on an [U.S.] Army post, buried with, into, into thousands of other people. Story_ID: 674159 Speaker 1: But there we had about three thousand people involved in the rebuild of electronics equipment, night vision, radar, communications, navigation, and, and other kinds of electronics items. And, and I also had the distribution mission for, for general supplies for most of the west, the United--western, the Pacific, and the western United States. And there, there were about twelve hundred people in, in that part of the operation. The, the great challenge then was the, the--we were beginning to reduce, or beginning another iteration of the reduction of [U.S.] military forces because the Vietnam War was over and so, you got to make space for--in order to save money. The [U.S.] Army wanted to, to combine the logistics on distribution mission with my depot at Sacramento [Sacramento Army Depot, Sacramento, California], and the depot down at, at Stockton [Stockton Ordnance Depot, Stockton, California], which is about fifty, sixty miles away. And it became quite a political tussle, and we didn't, we--it, it was resolved after I left. But, I ended up getting sued, you know, but, of course, we prevailed in the suit. And I ended up on (laughter) Easter weekend, this, the Friday before the Easter holiday, in the federal court [United States District Court for the Eastern District of California] down in Sacramento, where we had been sued under the, under the, in an attempt to, to claim that the right kind of environmental study was not made before the decision to move the workout, workout of my depot down to Sacramento. And I remembered while we were there in that room, and the court, that federal courtroom, right down the hall, they were trying Steven Soliah, who was a part of the Panther, and I'm--not Panther, but the movement with Patty, Patty Hearst and-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Symbionese Liberation-- Speaker 1: --Symbionese Liberation Army, yeah, yeah (laughter), right, right down the hall from us. But that was an interesting experience to find myself in, and it was finally, and the judge finally gave a bench ruling about six o'clock in the evening. I had to have the arrangements to be--well, take my family out to Clearlake [California] for the weekend, but we ended up not being able to go because of that. The, the mission of that depot was quite important. Not far away from us was McClellan Air Force Base [California], which also had a similar kind of mission, but its mission was geared mostly to [U.S.] Air Force particular items, while we handled items that were primarily Army and Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] and ground forces items. Speaker 2: Okay. So, was that the Air Force Materiel Command center (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Okay, at McClellan? Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm. Story_ID: 674160 Speaker 1: Now, were you, now '73 [1973] was like a, was a pivotal year in the history of the [U.S.] Army because of the cessation of the draft, right? They--that's when the draft was ended in 1973? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the U.S. Army adopted something called Total Force Policy. And can you tell what that is? Speaker 2: Well, it, it didn't really impact me until two years later. And we'll get to that, but because I had so few [U.S.] military people. Out, out of the almost six thousand people, I had less than forty military, and they were all professionals, you know. They were not draftees--no, no draftees in, in there. And most of them were, were rather mature officers. I only had about six or seven enlisted persons. All, all the rest were officers, who were specialists in maintenance activities and, and finance, general supply, or transportation, or something of that nature. Our communications, and I had a security officer, you know, and what-not. So, I, I--that didn't, didn't impact me personally very much until the--I, I--two years later, when I went to Fort Hood, Texas. To get a command as a colonel, it was in the beginning of the days with the--what we started to having as command selection boards. And that's where a group of senior people sit and, and cull through personnel files to find potential senior officers, more senior officers to give them the experience, as well as put, put these organizations into the best hands possible to do these. The board picks, picks people for this, and I was selected for that to go to Sacramento [California]. Now the problem is this. And I don't know whether it still exists thirty years later, but when you pick a, an officer from what we call for wholesale logistics, a depot, that, that's pretty much wholesale. He doesn't get experience with retail, and that's when you're with troops because with troops, you're, you're--it's, it's on a daily basis. You're not, you're not looking real, very far forward. You're, and except that as it, as it pertains to long term missions of a unit, but your, your job is to keep the readiness up of the unit that you support. So, the, the problem was we were training senior logi- logisticians, who were wholesale. But the combat arms officers, who kinda are the majority that sit on selection boards, would rather have the people who've been dealing directly with soldiers in the retail business. So, someone had, had decided, well, "What we need to do is we need to make sure we have people who've done both." Well, of course, I'd had a retail level assignment as a battalion commander in Vietnam. I'd had a wholesale assignment before that, supporting the intelligence community. So, now, going to Sacramento. That was a wholesale assignment. So, the, the next time they had a board, they decided to double, double-command ten people, and I turned out to be one of those. So, I ended up leaving Sacramento, and going to Fort Hood, Texas where I was made the commander of the 13th corps support command [13th Sustainment Command]. Story_ID: 674161 Speaker 1: Fort Hood, Texas, right. Speaker 2: Yes. The, the U.S. Army's III Corps has its headquarters at Fort Hood, Texas. At that time, the III Corps was made up of the 2nd Armored Division, the 1st Cavalry Division, the, the 3rd Air Cav Brigade [sic. 1st Air Cavalry Divisions; 1st Cavalry Division], and the other major organization was the 13th corps support command [13th Sustainment Command]. And its job is to provide the intermediate level of logistic support, as well as the retail support to those units. Now, Fort Hood, at that time, was the largest concentration of U.S. forces in the world. There were fifty five thousand military people alone. They're not to include the families or the civilian workforce, anything of that nature, with more than three hundred helicopters, two divisions of tanks, and armored personnel carriers and, and mechanized artillery, which made it quite a large operation to support. I'll talk about the 13th corps support command in, in two ways--one about its logistic activities and two, about the chemistry. Let's talk about the, the chemistry first. We're now in the year 1976. We had not many years before that started to, to feeding females into troop units, fully integrated in there, not as a company of females in it, but females scattered in the units. And this unit was one of the first units to have that to happen to it, and it had begun about two and a half years before I got there. The environment, I would not say was toxic, but some portions of it were not wholesome for females. And some portions of it were good and, of course, we had to ferret out, the unwholesome parts to make it good. Speaker 1: Now, did the unwholesome-- Speaker 2: Well, I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --or the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --in attitude, in attitude about females. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I had a question though. Did the type of unit have anything to do with the type of reception the females received? Speaker 2: No, I just think it was the attitude that men had, and to a significant degree, many still have about females--condescension, et cetera. Story_ID: 674162 Speaker 1: By the time I left, I didn't have any females who were battalion commanders because I had nine battalions. And, among them were in that outfit, was about nine thousand people, but I did have some female company commanders. And one of them--I will remember her the rest of my life, Captain Donna Lightfoot was, without a doubt, one of the best company commanders in the, out of the, the 46th or 47th companies that I had. She, you know, ran the unit well. It, all of its important functions were done well. Its morale was at the top, but not so, you know, she was a shining example that I had, but they were not fit. They had not gotten to the point where they were feeding very many female officers in. So, out of the nine thousand we were at about seven or eight hundred females. We had gotten to that point, and it was climbing, steadily climbing. I had only one female field grade officer, a major, who was my adjutant general, but other, other than that, they, they were mostly enlisted people. And it, it presented some, some problems. We had one instance where my sergeant major came to me and said, we have a young lady who works in our com- in our computer--this is, these are, these are van-mounted computers, so that they can go to the field, go anywhere, and she works in the computers with, in, in the computer van. And she's complaining that a sergeant there manages to bump into her, claiming accidentally, because it's very narrow and confined quarters. And she, and, and he says, "And I want to move her." I said, "No, no, no, we're not moving her. We're going to move him. What we're going to do is move him down a grade" (laughter). So, we immediately converted the process from a transfer of her out to a disciplinary action against him. And, and we had, here, we had several experiences like that. I had one--one of the battalion commanders used to make jokes in, in public about, about his, his female troops. Well, if you don't, if you don't attack those kinds of attitudes, they get worse, and they become, they become accepted behavior. Story_ID: 674163 Speaker 1: We also had--one of the di- one of the disadvantages in an, in an outfit like that was when the service is, when the, when the personnel people are dividing up the resources, the, the quote cream of the crop, when they go to troop units, go to the divisions. That's the glory. Even with the logisticians, they go to the divisions. The, the--among field grade officers, the cream of the crop is either in a division for the most part, or it was in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and headquarters department of the [U.S.] Army. Then, you begin to take off the next level coming down, and the--by the time you would get officers into a command like mine, you're getting for the most part, except for the battalion commanders, you're getting secondary and tertiary officers who'll become much more difficult to motivate. Many of them are attempting to, were attempting to live out their twentieth anniversary, so that they could retire and, or not very motivated to, to work hard. So, your leadership problems become more acute and, and it takes a lot more direct involvement of senior officers to make that work. I enjoyed it. One of the things when I got there, I discovered that the divisions in the 3rd Air Cav [1st Air Cavalry Divisions; 1st Cavalry Division] were all--when they would put on their fatigue uniforms, they had on fatigue colored shirts, undershirts, the 13th corps support command [13th Sustainment Command] had on white tee shirts, you know, wore white tee shirts, and I wondered why. Well, the answer was, "Well, that's the way we do it." I said, "You got two weeks to get nine thousand people out of these white tee shirts and into, to, the camouflage colored tee shirt. You go to the field--you're either a soldier, or you're not a soldier. You go to war, you're not going to do that. Why are you doing it now? You got to be practicing what you're going to do. You need to change your attitude." And we spent a lot of time working on changing the attitude of that organization. And I think we very successfully did it because we saw the results. Story_ID: 674164 Speaker 1: As far as its logistics were concerned, the [U.S.] Army had moved into that organization, and another similar one at Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Some of the responsibilities that had been handled by the civilians at the installation, the more technical supply matters, the more technical maintenance matters, and things of that nature, and transportation matters. But I had assigned what was called an inventory management center, okay. Speaker 2: So, what year is this? This is in-- Speaker 1: We're now in 1976, '7 [1977], and '8 [1978]. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 1: The management of, of these things take--a handling of these issues takes a little bit more skill. But I, you know, but they had assigned this, the, officers to me and, and a few NCOs [noncommissioned officer] who, who had been individually trained, and we had to make a management, an inventory management center out of these people. So, I, as the commander, spent a significant portion of my time dealing with the inventory management center, the movement's control center, and the other more technical problems with the, with the computer management, etcetera. And so, I had to turn over to my deputy commander to watch out for the troop units, you know, in the barracks, et cetera. That was my--I, I moved to my higher skill dealing with, with those issues where, well, where I was, could do the best, and what, what needed the most attention in order to get these things off the ground. We also got the chance to build from scratch a battalion whose job it was to rebuild tank, and other armored vehicle engines and transmissions. And these G.I.'s went from scratch and, and were rebuilding these engines. We reduced the demand for, for replacement engines at Fort Hood [Texas] by a significant amount of money, which could then be turned around, and be used to buy track and other things to support these vehicles. And there were those who said, "These G.I.s can't do that." Well, they did it, and they did it well. And it's an experiment that, an experience that, that lives on until today in, in the history of how troops can do those kinds of things, as they did do in World War II [WWII]. Yeah, we were back to that. One of the, one of my regrets from that organization is that I could not get more of my officers to higher suc- succeeding grades. And that was partially because I was getting second tier for the most part, good people, but they were not the real cream. And the manifestation of that is that the battalion commanders, most of them made colonel, but that was about the only people who would make colonel. And I had a lot, I had over five hundred officers in that organization. And I would have liked to have had, seen some more people climb, climb out of there. Now, working beside me, as the 13th corps support commander [13th Sustainment Command], as I said, was the 2nd Armored Division, and whose commander at the time was George S. Patton III. And Julius Becton [HistoryMaker General Julius Becton, Jr.] was the commander of the 1st Cavalry Division. They were both major generals and, and who were very helpful to me in getting my job done. And, of course, I was helpful to them, too, because I was supporting their, their units. Story_ID: 674165 Speaker 1: If you look back through life as an [U.S.] Army officer and you say, "Who was the best example or the worst example of various and sundry things?" If I had to pick the best example of a leader, it would have been the man who was the commander of the III Corps when I got there who, who was a leader who you did not--he did not have to raise his voice. He did not have to be stern or, or ugly in his behavior. He was just such a good leader that you wanted to make sure that nothing went wrong because you didn't want to let him down. It wasn't that you were afraid of him. His name was Robert Shoemaker [Robert M. Shoemaker] who lives today in full retirement, still down there in Texas. Speaker 2: That's S-H-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: His name is spelled S-H-- Speaker 1: Shoemaker, S-H-O-E-M-A-K-E-R. Speaker 2: Okay. I know sometime they spell with a U so I was just making sure. Speaker 1: Yeah. And he--and I learned an awful lot from him. I learn a lot from a lot of people, but he was, he turned out to be a very important person in my life. His deputy, on the other hand, was the exact opposite (laughter), who was a firebrand man with no patience, abrasive tongue (laughter), and, and an un- and, and a vocabulary that I would not like to repeat very much of. But who General Becton [HistoryMaker General Julius Becton, Jr.] had said to me beforehand, "Be careful of him--he's hard on people." Well, my daddy [Houston Brooks, Sr.] taught me as a kid when you're dealing with people, when you run into a bully, just stare him in the eye. Don't smile, don't duck your head, you know, don't, don't frown, just stare him in the eye, and they'll soon go away. Well, this, this gentleman and I became great friends by the time I left, and I was fully in his confidence in doing my job. It did not come without a few raised voice matches, which I did not--hoped, hoped I hadn't--would not get involved in. But I just lost my composure a couple of times (laughter), but we ended up getting along very well. And someone said to me, because at the end of that assignment, is when I was promoted to brigadier general. Someone said to me, "The reason you were selected was because General John Hill said you were good, and he didn't say that about anybody" (laughter). Which was--you paid quite a price to deal with him because he was a tough man to deal with. Speaker 2: Well, to earn that kind of accolade I guess yeah, or to earn that kind of praise, you really--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: This John Hill was a tough guy--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, he was a tough man. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And is a legend, even to today, among older people who knew him. Story_ID: 674166 Speaker 1: So now, you were appointed brigadier general in '78 [1978]? Speaker 2: Yeah, in the summer of 1978, I was selected in, in--I was selected in the winter, and got promoted in, in, on July 1st, 1978. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, at this juncture, did you--now, were you surprised? Did you have any idea that you would, you would become a general in the [U.S.] Army at the, you know? I know when you started, you didn't think you were going to be--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You're, you're embarrassing me--be, be the--I tell people, I've always told people, and I still tell people, one must never expect to get promoted because the higher you get, the thinner is the plucking, and having had a chance as a major general to sit on a board that picked one star generals. And you get to see how you start the session off with about a thousand of twelve hundred records, colonels, and you cull down to about three hundred. Now, you cull that three hundred down to about thirty. Well, you're seeing, what you're seeing is that out of a thousand or more people, only thirty are going to get promoted. Or, surely, these people are not ineffective. Otherwise, they wouldn't have been, wouldn't be on duty anyway, so you're picking from over a thousand effective officers, three hundred very effective officers, and then thirty of the most effective, and potential. Officers with the most potential, so yes, you're always surprised. But you, you can kind of watch the, the environment, and tell whether you are still in the running. Whether you get selected or not is another matter. In fact, while I was there at Fort Hood [Texas], there was an officer who was so confident that he was going to become a general, that he went to Korea on, on travel, and had them to make all of his general officers' uniforms. Well, for two years in a row when he would have been eligible, he didn't get selected. And so, I tell people, whenever you hear somebody say, "I'm up for promotion and that's--," don't say that--'cause it doesn't have to happen, and you can be fully qualified, but you're not the, the best qualified--just fully qualified. But success breeds success, and there are many successful people in, in--and in the service, success in the service is, is a lot more identifiable than it is out in the, in civilian life because as a young officer, if you don't get certain kinds of assignments, then you're not going to go, but so far. If you don't get to go to certain schools, you're not going to go, but so far, that you constantly are passing through gates, and they're very identifiable gates, so that when promotion time comes, the folks who are selecting get to see you in comparison with, with many others. And, and you get to succeed or fail, based primarily on your experience, as well as how you performed in that environment. Of course, character, and whatnot are always, always a part of this, the problem, of this, the situation. Story_ID: 674167 Speaker 1: How would you compare [U.S.] military, the military promotional procedures to those in private life? Speaker 2: Well, there are some industries today. I don't know whether--what they were thirty years ago, but there, there are some industries today that, that are quite informed by record of people's success or failure. The services have been doing that for many years. Back in World War II [WWII] and up into Korea, and whatnot, promotions were handled significantly more decentralized. But by the time we got to the '50s [1950s], we had begun to centralize selection for promotions and whatnot-- Speaker 1: So, just a question, so you're saying that in the past, would it be possible for a general, say, to promote another man--I mean, just raising by himself or-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --sure, earlier. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Until about when, would you say? Speaker 2: Yeah, you, you did it, you could do back during World War II and before. In many cases, you could do it by putting the person in the job, you know, at the, who is a lesser grade. Now, you can say, all right, now I need to have him promoted, and so that people back in Washington [D.C.] would promote him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we went to centralized promotions and selections for assignments, and whatnot. And it got more and more, as, as we got into the late '50s [1950s], and into the '60s [1960s] is where, where it really took off to the extent that the boards would be larger. The people who sat on the boards were selected centrally, so that they would have a balance of combat arms people, logistics, administrative kinds of experience among the members. They would have people from females, minorities, et cetera. There would be representation on, on all of these, so, so that you got a much fairer look, and the board would report out its findings. And right after it reported out its findings, a deeper investigation--what do they call it now--vetting, a deeper vetting would take place of the individuals before they would be selected. And, to the extent that people who had problems that had not been detected, particularly all, once you got to colonel and general, they, they would--well, we'd pick out, we'd find problems with people. And that is pertaining to private life, and not necessarily in the service, things of that nature. But, but I would say that the military system for selections that existed from about the time I left, and I suspect up until now, and I know very little about it now, were much superior to what went on in society, and whatnot, you know, otherwise, even civilians in the service. Story_ID: 674168 Speaker 1: So, in July the 1st, eight--1978, I was promoted. By then, I wished General Shoemaker [Robert M. Shoemaker] had still been the corps commander [of the III Corps], but he wasn't. By then, Lieutenant General Fuller [M.D. Fuller] was the, was the corps commander. And I'll just say--he and I did not get along very well (laughter). I'll just leave it with that. My wife [Naomi Lewis Brooks] and children had a wonderful time also in Texas. I, I had a wonderful time everywhere I went--I did. I am not a person, a person hard to, to find fun or, or to find, to find pleasure because I don't, don't seek a lot of things. But my, my daughter [Marquita Brooks] rode horses there. In fact, General Shoemaker's wife [Tuke Shoemaker]--the day that I took over my command there, Mrs. Shoemaker came through the line. And I had my daughter, who at the time, was about thirteen, was down on the, on the end of the line. I can remember--well, maybe she was about twelve. And Mrs. Shoemaker said, "What are you doing this afternoon?" My daughter looked at me and says, "I don't--," and over at me and her mother--I said, "You're not doing anything." She says, "I want you to go home and put on your jeans, and I'll come by and pick you up at such and such time." So, Mrs. Shoemaker, who had a farm down there, she had horses and et cetera, came by and picked her up in a pickup truck, and took her to that farm. And one day, one afternoon, taught her to ride a horse, and brought her home about six o'clock at night, filthy dirty (laughter) and said, "This is the toughest kid I've ever taught." She said, "She fell off the horse three times, and was willing to get back on" (laughter). But, those, those are the kind of, kind of events that took place in our lives, in our lives down there, so it made it for, made a wonderful ex- a wonderful experience. Story_ID: 674169 Speaker 1: Upon leaving Fort Hood [Texas], and being selected for brigadier general ended my, therefore, my second consecutive command. For a logistics officer, that is most uncommon. It was in those days anyway. Well, now as a brigadier general, I'm going to another command, so that's my third successive--command in succession. And to be brutally honest after that time, more than twenty years of service, that was probably the command I, on the job, I liked the least. Speaker 2: The job in-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in, in-- Speaker 1: There, I was-- Speaker 2: --Virginia at, at Fort Lee (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --there I was. At Fort Lee I was commander of what was, and then called, the Troops Support Agency [Defense Commissary Agency]. And its job was to operate one hundred and eighty some commissaries around the world to control and manage the clothing and textile systems within the [U.S.] Army. In other words, if we want to change a uniform, my office handled all of that process for the Army. If we want to change the, the menu in the dining facilities, my, my operation handled that, and with several things of that nature. Food and textiles was primarily what we were involved in. And I, I say, it was not my favorite, most favorite assignment because if I had, if I had to define myself, I would say I am a troop soldier. You know, I would much rather be with soldiers than, than doing anything else. I consider myself a natural commander, and I loved that everywhere I went, never was afraid of it, and I always enjoyed it. I, I used to tell young officers who worked for me, "If you're afraid of your soldiers, you'll fail and I'll know it, and so will they." But so, I traveled all the time. I, you know, I would get in--I had a, an airplane from a pool, a dedicated pool of small planes, and leave my station there in Petersburg [Virginia] on, like, say seven o'clock on a Monday morning, fly down to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, now at Fayetteville [North Carolina]. See that commissary, visit the commander, may go to one unit or so, and by one o'clock or two o'clock in the afternoon, leave there, and fly down to Augusta, Georgia, and look at the troops at Fort Gordon [Georgia], and go into a dining facility, and look at the commissary, and see the commander, and then get in an airplane about four o'clock, fly someplace else, have dinner there with the commander, get up in the middle, middle of the night, and go visit the commissary. So, I just did that over, and over again. And then I had--over a hundred of them were outside of the United States, mostly in Germany, but I had units in Alaska, Korea, Japan, the Philippines, you know, Hawai- Hawaii, Hawaii, et cetera, as well as Saudi Arabia, Italy, and, and so they kept, kept me going much more than I liked. But, of course, we survived it. Story_ID: 674170 Speaker 1: The commissary business in those day had just gone through a revolution. The post commander at the several posts around the [U.S.] Army were responsible for operating their own commissary. In about 1973 or '4 [1974], a decision was made, and then they began a process of converting them over to being the responsibility of a centralized organization, which was that Troop Support Agency [Defense Commissary Agency]. Well, posts had neglected, most posts had, had neglected those buildings, the equipment, and whatnot, and they were mostly in terrible shape. But immediately upon turning them over to the Troop Support Agency, "Well then how come my commissary is so bad? How come it's so cold in here?" Well, a lot of things were--'cause one, they neglected investing in them and, two, to get a job on a post as a civilian, you, you are put in a competitive pool from which someone is selected. Well, to work in the commissary, that competitive pool was supply clerk or supply specialist. Well, you could be working down in the motor pool on the post as a supply clerk, or you could fit in that pool, too, so you could get hired into the commissary with absolutely no experience whatsoever. And that went all the way up the line, too, to the commissary officer. So, you didn't have merchandising experience. You didn't have managerial experience, didn't have any of that, didn't know the territory as it were. So, it made it very difficult to, to have an effective store. I remember as a second lieutenant in Alaska--a first lieutenant in Alaska, I went into a commissary, and there was a sign on the conveyer that said, place items on conveyer in following order--canned food, so and so, and so and so. I thought to myself, who would have the nerve to be so impersonal, you know? That's not merchandising, you know. I said I'll never let that happen if I ever got, get the chance. I didn't expect to be the commissary, to be a commissary officer, or run the commissaries but I figured one day, I might be the commander who could, who could change that. But it was those kinds of attitudes that people were dealing with so we had, had that entire culture to change. There was no automation in the system at the time. And I got the responsibility of initiating the program that brought in a Computerized Management System. You've got bills coming every day because you have the bread man who comes to the store. You have the milkman. You have health and beauty, beauty aids people bringing products in, and you've got all these bills to pay, and, and to keep up with, keep up with all that at a store is a pretty tough job. So, we instituted the system. It took longer than, than my tour to, to get it done, but I got it started. So, that, that I consider the major, my major accomplishment. Commissaries are built with money--a surcharge that when people shop in a commissary, military commissary, a percentage, in those days, it was 4 percent. I don't know what it is today--was, was added on to the, to the, your bill to, for modernization and maintenance of the system. That does not come from appropriated money. Appropriated fund money pays for the salaries of the employees, but the food and the, and the maintenance of the building are paid for by the patrons. So, we raised enough money through that system to begin a long range plan to replace these old commissaries. And more than, more than, thirt- let's see, thirteen were replaced or, or started the replacement while I was there. And many, almost of all, the old ones have been replaced in the, in recent, recent years. But after three years of that, I had, had enough. Story_ID: 674171 Speaker 1: The [U.S.] Army then decided that I should then go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], where I now am responsible for the procurement of all of the food, clothing, textile items, textile equipment, like a duffle bag, or a web belt or whatnot, helmets, uni- all uniforms, and all medicine, medical equipment, and medical supplies for all the [U.S.] Armed Forces, the VA [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], and some other agencies. Speaker 2: So, what year is this in Philadelphia? Speaker 1: This is, this 1981-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --three years later. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you're in procurement, you're handling that, and so what, so this is on a level where you were--this is more of a wholesale kind of a--(simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: Oh, very much so. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. Speaker 1: We managed it. We bought it that which was to be stored. We stored it. I had a, a factory with thirteen hundred sewing machine operators and cutters, et cetera, whatnot, pattern cutters, et cetera, working under me. We, we let the contracts for the purchase of all of the uniforms and whatnot that we let out to private enterprise. We supplied the, the commissaries in Europe and, and over-, and other overseas areas because they don't have access to, direct access to, to wholesale vendors as, as they were back here. Back here, the, the wholesale vendor can just pull this truck right up to the commissary and unload it. But overseas, they couldn't do that, so we had to order into Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania, these, these items, load them in vans, pull the vans to Bayonne [New Jersey], put them on a ship, and shipped them to Europe, or wherever else. And we did that out of Oakland [California] for, for the West Coast, which made it very difficult to, to have fresh items in, in the commissaries. We bought some stuff, some things, produce, et cetera, locally, and then we bought a little meat in Europe, but very little in, in the Pacific. But for the most part, we supported the stores out, out of the United States, and that was quite an operation. When, when you are buying, let's say a shirt, a military shirt, uniform shirt, the, the bidders bid in four and five digits below the decimal. In other words, let's say, we want to, they're going to bid to make a green shirt, a dress shirt. They might be at fourteen dollars, six, eight, seven, five, two (laughter) behind the decimal point because it, it is so narrow, the percentage, the, the profit margin. To get these contracts, you know, you got to do that in order to, to win them. But we're, we had very little trouble, but there were some, some instances where people would bid at a point in which they couldn't manufacture it. Now, we're in a fix. We've got to go out and cancel the, the offer, the invitation, and start again because if, if you kick out the, the winner because of, of not being in, you don't believe he's able to produce it. Now, you've got the problem of, of him protesting so, and that could last for as much as two years. So, to keep the products moving, you got to go start a new, a new procurement, and leave that one hanging until it's, it's resolved. But, it was quite an interesting assignment. Story_ID: 674172 Speaker 1: There, I got saddled with two more major automation installations. You know, I hear all of this ruckus about the affordable medical insurance-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --deal, but I'm telling you, having been through it five times, bringing up any kind of an operation of that nature is traumatic and it, it will take time to get it done. Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause currently for those who are watching this at another time, the website that creates public accessibility to the Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] has been malfunctioning, has a lot of glitches, right? And they're currently trying to fix that. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: So, so you're dealing with another big computerized system. Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the problems, one of the problems that you have is (laughter), we have contracting practices that require low bidders. That's what I had when I attempted the first--attempted automating the commissary system was, was--the low bidder came and started his work. And they, they showed me the first--they put on a demonstration for me, and it's his first example of how he, how this is, was going to work. I left the room and said, "This is a total waste of time. We got to get somebody's--a much better contractor than this." Well, it takes another year or two to get that resolved, to get, get to it. We used combinations of bidders, contracting officers, contractors, and what-not. And so, it's very difficult under our procurement systems to get these things done. If you, you went to what you think is the best guy, then you'd have a hundred protests, and you'd have the--the political pressures from other areas would, would get involved and what-not, so you'd have to go through this laborious process. But we, we were attempting to do it for the purchase of, of putting an automation system for the purchase and management of, of food items for the troops. And we call that troop issue. Well, if they, we had a system for shirts, and we had a system for parts, and things of that nature. So, if somebody has a, a Jeep, and the starter goes out, he orders a starter. If there is a starter available, it's shipped to him. Well, what that then is referred to as there was a demand for one starter. So, you say, all right, we know now that that we need to remake so many more starters. But if you order string beans in, in the number ten can, and we don't have string beans in a number 10 can, and we give them to you in a 303 or some other kind of can, you still got the string beans. Well, is there a demand there for string beans in a number 10 can, or 303 can (laughter)? And so, you've got to have a different kind of system. If you ask for string beans, and there are no string beans, and we give you mashed potatoes, do you record a demand for mashed potatoes, or do you record a demand for string beans? Well, that sounds like a simple matter, but it required a totally different kind of demand management system, and I got stuck right in the middle of trying to get that off the ground, which I found to be a quite rewarding experience. We had several of those kinds of experiences. Story_ID: 674173 Speaker 1: Let me go back just a moment. When I went to Sacramento [Sacramento Army Depot, Sacramento, California], they had just completed in, in May--I got there in July--they'd just completed in May, the installation of two CDC [Control Data Corporation] five thousand--6000 computers [CDC 6000]. It took a building bigger than a gymnasium to house the two computers, all of the ancillary equipment, tape drives and libraries, et cetera. Today, the watch or the telephone in your pocket will do almost what one of those would do, except the printing part, all right. It had not gotten off of the ground well. So, when I got there in July, there are twenty-five people. I'm just exaggerating. There are people looking over your shoulders to, "Why it failed, why is it not working?" So, had to go through that with, with the computer system there. We got it to run it right, took us about six months to get it done well, get it to, to performing like it was supposed to. So, I've had a career of walking into troubled installations (laughter), of, of automation systems, but in every case, we finally got them, got them up and running. So-- Speaker 2: And, and you worked right up until the, I guess, the technological revolution in terms of computers, and I mean, desktop computers and that sort of thing, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, see, we were going through it. And by the, when we get to my experience in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], that's the beginning of PCs [personal computer]. Before that, it was large machines that, that you're attempt- attempting to, to use with no, no desktop-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --support. Every- all the, everything, everybody has delivered each morning a big stack of paper with, you know, printouts, did work the printout. You put those back, mark those up. They go back to somebody who keypunches new cards. And that night, they go into the machine, so you're dealing on daily with batch process. Of course, all of that's gone, and we're complicated and, and complexed, I guess, you'd say, that the situation significantly now. But that experience also gave me a great opportunity to deal with some tough logistics problems. Story_ID: 674174 Speaker 1: I was also significantly involved in the community, as I seem to have gotten in most places, not so much when I was at Fort Lee [Virginia] because I was gone all the time. But in the other three, significantly, but, but there in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I was on the Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] board. I was president of the Federal Executives Association [Philadelphia Federal Executives Association]. That's the, the informal league of, of federal agencies. That includes the post office [U.S. Postal Service], the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], the Secret Service, Social Security [U.S. Social Security Administration], et cetera and et cetera, which brought quite a bit of exposure, and, and work, I should say. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, is this, so as you go towards retirement, you're fairly well ensconced in the community of Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Yes. And that's what got me out. I, I got to Philadelphia in the summer of, of 1981. In the summer of 1982, I was promoted to major general, two stars. When Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] was elected mayor, having met many of these people in my community outreach, my name came up as a candidate for managing director. That's equivalent to city manager. The--I was called in, invited in for an interview, and was selected in January--in December, I guess it was, 1983. Well, I asked the [U.S.] Army--I, I called down to the chief of staff and said, "Listen, I, I've been invited to get out, and come be the managing director of the City of Philadelphia. Is it possible that I can hold my grade," and because you have to have three years in grade. If under certain circumstances, it would benefit, you know, the, the services, which that would certainly have benefitted the service to have, to let, release me, you know. "Can, can I do that?" Well, General Schiermeier [ph.] said, "Absolutely, we will put, put it in that way." Well, it had to go to OSD. And when it got to OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense, that is, it lay there until way up into January (laughter). Well, I'm antsy now because he--they need to announce this. So, I went on, and said, "Well, I'm going to--I'm going out, but what my grade determination is, hadn't been decided," so I said, "we'll go ahead and let it go." And so, I, I just said, go ahead and announce it. Well, about a week after they announced it in January, out comes the decision from the secretary of the defense's office--said, "No, you've got to go back a grade." So, I ended up retiring as a brigadier general, rather than as a major general. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then I went, then I retired in January, and went right, went right to work. Speaker 2: This is January of '85 [1985]? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. And my, my junior council (laughter) (unclear) into the law, and found a law that says, you can't be a city employee in, in Philadelphia, and also be an active duty military person. So, I had to, when I retired, I had over almost five weeks' worth of leave stored up, that I had hoped to take that leave because you're better off to be paid, while on leave, than you ought to draw the leave money. So, I had to, I had to draw the leave money, as it were, and go ahead and retire, and go ahead and retire. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But then, I would--did that for, for two years, for almost two years. Story_ID: 674175 Speaker 1: Your function as city manager, we were saying off camera that Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] has a strong mayor form of government, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, and Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] was in that position--(simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: Yes, the, the managing director controls the ten service departments of the city, which includes public property, licensing, and inspections, health, human services, water, streets, fire, police, etcetera and, and the records. And, as such, their budgets are through you and, and their supervision comes from you. So what the city manager does, what I did was attempt to, to gain some influence into how they managed their, their resources, which is, which is probably the greatest problem that a city has. You're dealing with entrenched practices which, most of the time, are very wasteful and to, to manipulate that is not an easy task. Of course, I learned when I was in graduate school at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.] that a--the effective way of management, the most effective tool that a senior manager is through dollars. Okay? Now, you squeeze the dollars, or you move the dollars, and you can force people to have behavior that, that accompanies that. So, that, that's where you spend most of your time, but you, but as a city manager, you get into a lot of things that are disruptive to your time. I, I developed a practice because everybody wants to see you. And what's on everybody's mind is money (laughter). So, I was finding myself sitting at my desk at seven--eight o'clock at night trying to clean up my paper, and at six o'clock in the morning trying to clean up all of the stuff I had to read and deal with because I was in meetings all day. So, I said, I know how to handle this. When all of these advocacy groups, et cetera, want to see me, I would, I told my administrative assistants, schedule these folks for, start the first one at 6:00, and then schedule one at 6:30, and another one at 7:00 at night. Well, all of a sudden, the number of people who needed to see me started to decline (laughter). Speaker 1: 'Cause that was on their time, right? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. If I've got to work, they can work, so I'm going to do my paperwork in, in my, during the day, and I'll see them in the evenings. Well, it declined. I was not what would one call, let, let's say, let's say what I was, rather than what I wasn't. I was committed to not waste money. I was committed to that, as best I could. One day, a group wanted to see me and my--they put them in my conference room. And I walked in and I walked around the table, shook everybody's hand, and sat down. And the lady at the, to, to my immediate right, says, "Before we start this meeting, let me make one thing clear. My health is my right." Well, I made the mistake of saying, "Whose right is it to pay for it?" So, the meeting went downhill from there but, you know, while people have rights, all rights have to be paid for. And when there is a bottom to the bucket, and there's nothing else to pour out, something has to give. And, of course, that's what our, our entire society operates in that environment. Well, that became, that's one example of, of the kind of thing that you are constantly involved in. Someone came to visit me once and asked, "How do you like what you're doing?" I said, "I could not have gone to the JFK School of Government at Harvard [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and learned in five years what I've learned here in six months." The combination of the several influences that include unions, desires of the people, and they're very close. You know, that's really local politics and the people are right there. And, and their competing desires make that a, made that a very difficult job that required quite a bit of, of--what should I say--management by juggling to get it done. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: But I enjoyed that, I really enjoyed it. Story_ID: 674176 Speaker 1: Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.], the first black mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] elected in what--'83 [1983], '84 [1984]? Speaker 2: He, he came in, in January of '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Okay, January of '84 [1984]. Chicago [Illinois] had just elected its first black mayor in '83 [1983], Harold Washington. Detroit [Michigan] had a black mayor [Coleman Young]. So, what was your, so, was your relationship with Wilson Goode a good one? Speaker 2: Well, we were, you know, we were on a first name basis, but our management styles were very different. Speaker 1: Now, did he select you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Our management styles were very different. He had, he had, had the job just before me, but we would, we, we met several times during the week, during the week, you know, for various and sundry purposes. But I had a, a friend who had been a college mate of mine. The city had six commissioners, a six--not commissioners--six senior players. Speaker 1: Cabinet members or-- Speaker 2: Cabinet, in the cabinet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of them was the finance, director of finance. His name was Richard Gilmore, who had been a college mate of mine who, I today, think had some influence on getting Wilson Goode to come look for me, who had been a senior vice president in a couple of banks, different, the larger banks there in Philadelphia, had worked for (unclear) and somebody else, you know, what-not, and had a full business, high-level business experience there in the city. But, and while he was my personal friend, he and I had to always battle over money. I'm needing more--he's finding less (laughter). The way Philadelphia is organized, the tax collector is outside of the government, outside of the cabinet. The controller is outside, but the solicitor, the finance director, who handles basically the, the finance, the, the expenditure side of, of the budget for the city, you know, we're, we're part of the cabinet. Story_ID: 674177 Speaker 1: My job was to deal with, with the unions, and deal with the management organizations. I enjoyed getting up at five o'clock in the morning, and going down and watching the dispatch of the trash trucks, or going at ten o'clock at night, and seeing the police going to a precinct, and watch the police make arrests and whatnot. Any time a fireman, or a policeman, or any other city employee was shot, anything of that nature, you were there. I don't care what time of night it was. Anything from a five alarm fire up, you're there, so it was quite a demanding job. I bought a house in the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so that I could live right downtown. And I used to jog the street oft-times about six o'clock in the morning. And so, in, in that city, you get security, so there I would go with my security. I was doing what I used to call police call. We would go down, go down to Main [Street], run down to Main, downtown Philadelphia to see whether the streets had been cleaned up the night before and whatnot from, from the evening's hoopla. But it was, it was a tremendous experience dealing with licensing matters, health matters, etcetera, yeah, as well as human services matters, all the, all the folk who are homeless--that Sunday, you, the, all the housing projects, whatnot. On the Saturdays, we would go, and go out into neighborhoods and just go, go visit housing projects. And one of the, one of the sad commentaries would be, I was in a housing project one weekend when they--it was the cleanup weekend. And the housing, the director of that particular development says, "I'm going to take you around here to Mrs. So and So's house." So, we went to see Mrs. So and So's house, and she let us in, gave us a glass of Kool-Aid or something. It was on a hot day, Saturday morning. And then, we went out and we, we went to another house not half a block away. She says, "Now this is the daughter of Mrs. So and So back there." And we go further, "Now this is the granddaughter of Mrs. So and So." So, there's three generations caught up in public housing. But all of that was a part of my responsibility and, and which made for a wonderful, wonderful experience, but very, very physically and psychologically demanding. Story_ID: 674178 Speaker 1: One of the--well, I guess this is a kind of a low life of the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is the MOVE crisis of 1985. And so, can, I don't know what you want to say about it 'cause you said it's still litigation around that and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That got, that got started as a, what I call a push-push situation where one, one individual would push, and the community, or the government, or the people would kind of get out of the way. So, they'd push it a little further, and they just push it a little further. And it just came pushing until it got to the escalations that it had several years before and, and then you had this second escalation. But as the city managing director, my job there and my only job there, was to coordinate the activities of the fire department, the police department, the health department was out there, water because a lot of water was being, being consumed. And human services because we had to, we knew, at some point, we'd have to house the family or something, so that was really what my role was there. Speaker 1: Well, let me just say that for those who are watching that don't know what we're talking about. Let's see if I can summarize it, and correct me if I'm wrong. The MOVE organization was sort of an unusual organization of individuals, they're living in a house, in a row house in Philadelphia in the--was that the north side of Philadelphia or, or the-- Speaker 2: No, it was in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: West Philadelphia okay. And they had, they believed in some sort of a natural way of life, where some didn't wear clothes and then, people were, neighbors were complaining about waste, you know, in the house, in the building, noise, you know. There's a loud speaker on the building at one point. It escalated where the, there was a constant broadcast coming out of the building. And the, so the neighbors really called upon the city to do something to abate the building, right. Is that right so far? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then, and, so in an effort to do that, the City of Philadelphia met with resistance on the part of the individuals inside the building. Some of them were armed and so, this is a crisis that the city faced and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's what, that's what brought that to a head. Speaker 1: And the resulting actions by the city--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Didn't turn out, didn't turn out like it was hoped it would have. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: It was just, you know, some failures as the records there that didn't show, you know, didn't, just didn't, things didn't occur so that, that was a result. Speaker 1: Yeah. The mayor [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.], we interviewed him, said he didn't know what was going on. He said, he didn't know. And the-- Speaker 2: Well, he knew (laughter) because I told him-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --what was going to happen. Story_ID: 674179 Speaker 1: Back into January before that, I had visited my parents. And my sister who, at the time, was assistant, an assistant superintendent of schools down here in Northern Virginia, said, "Dad [Houston Brooks, Sr.] has prostate cancer." So, I said, "Well, you're still working. I've got one retirement. I can manage. I'll come home." So, I went back in January, and I told Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.], "I'm leaving in March." He said, "Please don't leave in March--wait 'til June or July." I said, "All right, I'll do that." So, my departure from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was purely at my own discretion. I had a four year contract, which was good, unless there was some sort of malfeasance or whatnot, and some kind of misconduct or whatnot, was good for two and a half more years. So, I didn't leave under any kind of pressure, other than to go take care of my father, and that record is abundantly clear. Now, he denied it. He ignored that in his public statements, but that's life. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but then, when we left Philadelphia, I went back to take care of my father, who had to have a hip replaced, and never really recovered from it. He ended up with a blood sugar diabetes, diabetes in such a, to such an extent that we couldn't get it balanced, so he, he couldn't walk. So, we had to put--after, after we put him in the hospital to have his hip replaced, he came home. And they sent a nurse, a male nurse to the house to take care of him, to for--well, after the man left the first time, my mother [Evelyn Lemon Brooks] looked at me and said, "That man is not coming in my house again." I said, "Why?" She said, "I don't want him in this house." Well, my mother had been a very protective woman over the years because my father was a minister. And in order to keep all of the in- invasions into your life by parishioners and community and whatnot, to keep it out of the personal life, she maintained that wall for her family. And I suspect it had to do with the instinct, for instincts from that. She didn't (unclear). What that meant, I then became the nurse. So, for almost eighteen months, I went to that house every day, except Sunday. And my sister would do it on Sundays, would go home Sundays. And I would bathe him, I would exercise him and whatnot, and stay there from seven o'clock in the morning until seven, eight o'clock at night. I did that for a year and a half. I thank God I did it. At his, at, at the wake, just before his funeral, I was smiling, talking with someone. And one of his former deacons said, "How can you smile at a time like this?" I said, "I did everything that was humanly possible for him. You know, I can smile." Story_ID: 674180 Speaker 1: And so, my father [Houston Brooks, Sr.], after he, he died, I started to consulting, and work was coming faster than I could handle it. I had an oil, a, a, an oil company, a middle man company in Texas who was attempting to get into selling oil to--fuel, fuel to the government who needed, wanted me to help them develop his plans, et cetera, et cetera. So, I would fly to Las Gallinas, Texas, which is east of Dallas [Texas], and work with him. And one morning at about five o'clock, I was leaving the house. And my wife [Naomi Lewis Brooks] got up, and I had a taxi cab out there waiting for me, and I said, "Gee, this is like old times." She, she said, "I thought you would never get the message." And said no more. So, I went out and got in the cab, and went to Texas, and I thought it while on the airplane, what on earth is she telling me? And I decided I'd quit. So, I told the guy that I'm not coming back. He said, "Okay, I'll double your fee." I said, "No, that's not it." He--I finally gave it up. And we went and bought a thirty-four foot motor home. Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute--this means, you really retired, right? Speaker 1: (Laughter) You bet--and began to see the world, the United States, anyway. So, we go to Florida for a month or two in the winter, and go to Mich- upper Michigan, and to Minnesota, and to Cape Cod [Massachusetts], and all, and various sundry places, and, and spent quite a bit of time in it. And then, my mother [Evelyn Lemon Brooks], by then, is in her nineties, became difficult to deal with, began to develop dementia. And I couldn't leave that on my sister. Just she, she and I were the only two living in the area--I couldn't leave that on her. So, I began to slow down and one, one year, I only was out four nights out of the whole year. Well, that's much too much money to let sit for, to, you know, for, you know, for to get four nights out of here in it. So, I sold it, and got out of that business. Well, my mother made it to 101. And for the last four years of her life, every day, seven days a week, at noon and at supper time, I or my wife, or my sister was there in the nursing home. And I would say to anybody, the most successful experiences in a nursing home are those which are carefully watched and visited by the family. My mother was taken care of better than we could take of her at home. My sister didn't want to put her in the nursing home. She said, "She'll fall, and break her hip." Well, she fell it and broke it at home, and that's why we had to finally put her in a nursing home at ninety-seven. Well, she made it to 101 and one month, and had no pains, blood pressure better than mine, but the dementia had gotten to her, and she just wore out. Story_ID: 674181 Speaker 1: While in retirement, I worked on a lot of angles in the community. I was first a deacon in my church where I just became emeritus about three years ago. Speaker 2: What's the name of your church? Speaker 1: Alfred Street Baptist Church in Alexandria [Virginia], and I was an adult Sunday school teacher there. And that's where I also got involved in--the homeless shelter was through the church. But I was a--I started off just as working at the polls one year. So, they said, "Oh, listen, we need you to be, to run, be, be the--in charge of the polls at some place." So, I became the head of a, of a poll the next year. So, then, they promoted me to be a supervisor, so then, I had twelve to fourteen other polls and precincts that I supervised during elections in the preparation. Virginia didn't, it doesn't have chad. At least, Fairfax County [Virginia] didn't have chad, like Florida, but had, they had chad. I would have been a chad counter because we are the people who came in after the election and verified, through a canvas, the accuracy of the, the reports from the various precincts. And I did that for more than twenty--I think twenty-three years. Speaker 2: The chads are the holes, the perforated holes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's right. You know, in Florida, they used a punch card. And if the, if the, if you punched it, and the little piece didn't fall out, it might close back down, and the reader wouldn't pick it up. Speaker 2: That was the hanging chad--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Hanging chad, that's where that came from, yeah. But we didn't have, didn't have that in, in new Fairfax County, but we, but so, but you had to prepare the machines, and then read out and manage the, the results. The other thing I did was I became involved with the American Bar Association and, even today, I'm a member of the American Bar Association council on the accreditation of law schools [Accreditation Committee]. Their, their system, as a result of a court decree several years ago, they are required to have a minimum of three non lawyers on their council. Today, they have a college president from California. They have a CPA [certified public accountant] from Baltimore [Maryland], and me as, as members of that council. And we adjudicate decisions made by an accreditation committee on actions for law schools if they want to change their curriculum, if they want to change their locations. And then, they get, every seven or eight years, they get a visit to make sure what they're doing is in compliance with the rules, so, and then, we adjudicate their results of those. And, and now I sit in full retirement with two sons [HistoryMaker Brigadier General Leo Brooks, Jr. and HistoryMaker General Vincent Brooks] and a daughter [Marquita Brooks], and four grandchildren, and one and a half, or one and one on the way, great-grandchildren--child. Story_ID: 674182 Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your family. I know you have two celebrated sons, but you have a daughter [Marquita Brooks], too, and you mentioned that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, my daughter is, my daughter is an attorney in Washington, D.C. I think I mentioned, way back in this interview, when she was in high school, high school. And a low expectation teacher, a guidance counselor, said she wasn't college material, and wanted to put her in a class called math for living. I said, "No, she's going to take algebra." Well, she took algebra--she passed algebra. She's now a law school graduate. I simply say that to let you know that if a parent doesn't have expectations and leads the family, the family doesn't get led, but so, she's a successful attorney now. My two sons--one is, is retired. He retired as a brigadier general and is now a-- Speaker 1: That's Vincent, Jr. [HistoryMaker General Vincent Brooks]? Speaker 2: No, this is Leo [HistoryMaker Brigadier General Leo Brooks, Jr.]. Speaker 1: No, no, I'm sorry, Leo, Jr., right. Speaker 2: This is the oldest one, and he's now senior vice president, corporate vice president of a major aircraft corporation. And the other son is an active duty four star general right now, and the commander of U.S. Army Pacific, having prior to that, served as commander of the Third Army [U.S. Army Central], which had been Patton's [George S. Patton] during World War II [WWII]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a-- Speaker 2: And then before that, he commanded the, the 1st Infantry Division whose headquarters are at Fort Riley [Kansas]. He took it to, to Iraq. And, of course, before that, he had been assistant division commander of the 1st Calvary Division at Fort Hood [Texas], and went with it to Iraq, yeah, yeah. Both of the sons are military academy graduates who decided to stay in, in the service, yeah. Story_ID: 674183 Speaker 1: It's unusual for sons to follow directly in their father's footsteps, especially in the, in the occupation that you have excelled in--that, that being in the [U.S.] military as generals. So, I think, aren't you the only African American at this point whose sons are--followed you as generals--(simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: It, it is, it is very common among Caucasians. It's, it's quite common, three and sometimes as many as four generations, and to have multiple children to be academy graduates, and to rise to the rank of general, and whatnot. It has never happened before for African Americans--it has never. So, when our two sons [HistoryMaker Brigadier General Leo Brooks, Jr. and HistoryMaker General Vincent Brook]--and I say ours because they're my wife's [Naomi Lewis Brooks] as much as they are mine--our two sons, you know, succeeded in, in reaching that rank while we were very happy. We're also sad that it's taken this long for it to happen in America. Story_ID: 674184 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: (Laughter) In life or in the [U.S. military] service? Speaker 1: Well, in your career and the service, I guess? Speaker 2: There are some other assignments I might liked to have had, but using Booker T. Washington's expression, "Drop your buckets where you are," you, you take the cards you're dealt, and you try to play the hand, and best you can. And so, I, I just leave to the providence of God and the fortuity of life that, you know, the circumstances that came my way did. The good, the bad, the painful, as well as the joyful, my life, 'til now--and while I don't want to sound like it's, this is my obituary--has been wonderful. And I just thank God that I was able to get to where I got for a little boy off of Elbert Avenue in Alexandria, Virginia, who couldn't go to school in his own neighborhood, who was one of five children. God's been very good to me, and, and to which I'm life--if there's anything that I might have done that I didn't do, I might have been a minister. There were times in my life when that urge rose. Circumstances at the time didn't match as far as I thought, so I didn't do it, but I might have done that. If you asked me in life, what would I like to have been able to do that I never, that I wasn't able to do, there are two things. I would have loved to have been a master organist and, secondly, I would have loved to have worked in an old fashioned hardware store. I dearly love, and when we travel, particularly when we had the RV [recreational vehicle], we'd go through towns. I'd always get to go see the old hardware store if they, if they had one, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting 'cause I was going to ask you like, what you got out of the travel, you know, after travelling all over America. Well, that's interesting. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah. Well, of course, we carried, we carried golf clubs, fishing tackle, and whatnot in the, in the belly of the RV, so that we were always ready wherever we went. Story_ID: 674185 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. What, today, then, looking back at your career again, would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: My what? Speaker 1: Professional legacy, your legacy in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, legacy, legacy (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I would like to think that there are hundreds of young people whose lives have been changed because they listened a little bit to what I had to tell them. I guess I'm bragging when I say in the church that I'm in [Alfred Street Baptist Church, Alexandria, Virginia], there are at least ten deacons who, to some degree, got there because of my leadership, and their listening--not string pulling, but listening to the extent that they followed some practices of mine and, therefore, I was able to recommend them. I spent a lot of time advising people about, you know, how to succeed by work, not by association, but by work. And there are people who constantly contact my--or run into my children (laughter), who recall instances (laughter), in which I had influence in somebody's life. One man tells the story of how he was a captain when I was a brigadier general. And he, he was a minority, and was concerned about how they had changed his assignment. And he sought me out, got permission to come to see, to my office to see me, and laid it all on the line. And he says, "And your answer was, 'Shut up and go back to work'" (laughter). And that's really what it was. And he had a good assignment. You take the cards you're dealt, and you play them the best you can. I did that--that's been my theme to life. My son put in his high school yearbook, "If the world gives you lemons, make lemonade." Well, and, and that's kind of what I tried to, to teach people, you know. "That's all right. They mistreated you. What they meant for evil, you use for good." And, and it works. So, I, so, if there is a legacy, it's my influence upon so many, many young people. Story_ID: 674186 Speaker 1: Likewise, we always ask this question, too. What are some are your hopes and concerns for the Black community today? Speaker 2: I have always felt and I feel it stronger today than ever, that our exit from the various travails will only come from our own exasperation with contentment among our- among ourselves, meaning we have to, or we will, make advances based on our fight, even more so than our politics. Money is good, and money is necessary. Support is important. (Unclear) are important. But to break the chains of poverty, the chains of crime, the train--chains of health, and, and, and the other things that pull us down, will come most out of individual efforts, as opposed to out of programs. Yes, the program is important, they're there, but you don't come out of it because the program is there. You come out of it because you want out, and you have to, to dig to get out. There just too many examples, and we could sit here for three days, giving you examples of people who grew out the vicissitudes of their lives by their own tenacity. Story_ID: 674187 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to address before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: You didn't ask me whether I loved my wife or not. Speaker 1: Well, all right (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) I do, very much, we've been married next--in two weeks, it will be fifty-eight years. And, we've known each other since children. Our parents have known each other, or knew each other, since we were, were children. Speaker 1: Okay. Well congrat-- Speaker 2: What's your last question? Speaker 1: --congratulations. I think we got the courtship, at least in the beginning, and some of the early years. Story_ID: 674188 Speaker 1: But the, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERUPTION) Speaker 1: I would like to be remembered as a person who lived a life, shedding pieces of it into other people. I, I am not concerned about being remembered for accomplishments, but for service. My family was service oriented--meaning to others. As a boy, I saw my father [Houston Brooks, Sr.] bring people off of the road during the Depression [Great Depression] to our house. He'd pick them up, hitchhikers, families, and my mother [Evelyn Lemon Brooks] would feed them, before we'd put them back on the road. I've seen, I've had so many examples of how to be a giver that, that's what I consider to be the legacy I would like. My father had an expression, "I will help you if you let me." I never used that expression, but that's really been the, the premise of my life, and that's really what, what I'd like to see folks remember, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, well, thank you very much. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: All right...