 Story_ID: 101355 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Ellen Rochelle Brown, E-L-L-E-N, R-O-C-H-E-L-L-E, last name, Brown. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 10th, 1949 in Denton, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay, it kind of threw me off there (laughter). And, ma'am-- Speaker 2: Is that okay? Speaker 1: --what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the community affairs director for KDFW FOX-4 in Dallas [Texas] and I'm also the executive producer of our public affairs show, Insights. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August the 13th, 2007. This is actually, or would have been, my mom's birthday today, so. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Oh, we're at the station, at FOX-4, on our Insights set. Story_ID: 101356 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People Magazine-ish type questions we ask as a warm-up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they just require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Ah, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what is it? Speaker 2: Chicken, anything chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Ah, yes, fuchsia. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Springtime. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I have two. I like Geneva, Switzerland and I also like Miami, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "It is what it is." Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101357 Speaker 1: All right now I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Her name was, was Earlene, E-A-R-L-E-N-E, Mable, M-A-B-L-E, Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No Punch, that was her maiden. Do you want her maiden name? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Punch. Speaker 1: Punch, okay. P-U-N-C-H? Speaker 2: C-H, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 13th, let's see she died in 2003, she would have been seventy-five in 2003 so that was four years ago, so she would have been seventy-eight today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She died at seventy-four. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 2003. Speaker 1: Okay, and, is there a, is there a story behind her name Punch? Speaker 2: I really don't know. Speaker 1: I heard of the British figure John Punch, I think it's a mythological figure in Britain, but you don't hear very many-- Speaker 2: But ours is so many--there are so few Punchs, always there's someone related to them, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And more of them keep popping up these days so-- Speaker 1: So, how--what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Probably to my grandparents. My mother was one of eight children, two girls, six boys and she was born in Altus, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Altus? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: A-L-T-U-S. Some of the kids were born in Oklahoma, some were born in Texas. My grandparents were Randal Punch, R-A-N-D-A-L, was my grandfather, and Amy Punch. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: What did they do, what did they do for a living? Speaker 2: They were field workers and so they traveled quite a bit between Oklahoma and Texas and all around Texas they picked crops, they picked cotton, things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story in the family about how they came to Oklahoma? Is there a story about the end of slavery and migration or anything like that? Speaker 2: Well I tend to think my grandfather met my grandmother somewhere in Oklahoma because she's Indian, she's half Indian. I think she's Cherokee. So, they met there, I guess, and got married and continued to roam back and forth between Texas and Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay, so there's no story beyond, beyond that that you know of about where your grandfather came from? Speaker 2: No, I know that my grandfather was born in East Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Down around Henderson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He came from a very large family. I think there were like sixteen or seventeen children. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now do they, do they have any stories about what life was like when they were working as pickers, you know? Speaker 2: My mom used to have some stories because my grandmother was always ill. She was, I mean, from the time they were little, she was always ill and so the two girls always had to take up the household duties. You know, they'd make lunches for the boys and my grandpa before they'd go out into the field. They would can, they would quilt. My family is not a family of means. I mean, they were barely making it back then. So they would take care of all those household things. They moved quite often because they didn't really own a home. It's kind of like sharecropping, you go from place to place to place, working, and, and I remember her telling me stories, though, and my aunt as well about when it was really tough they'd have to leave the house and go to the fields to work and my mother used to tell me how she used to put dirt in the cotton sack because, you know, she just didn't like it and it was really hard work and-- Speaker 1: What to make it weigh more? Speaker 2: Yeah, to make it weigh more but, of course, you know, my grandfather hated that because somebody would discover it and you couldn't count that, that bag of hay--bag of cotton. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was really hard work, you're talking about? Speaker 2: It was very hard work, yes. Speaker 1: Any stories about the communities they lived in? Did they live in predominantly black communities or did they just kind of-- Speaker 2: They were predominantly, predominantly small black towns, especially Henderson. We've been back to Henderson several times since I was born and it's, it's a very small rural town. They still have dirt roads and those little small rickety bridges that you go over, you know, and you go over little lakes and little streams to get to, to our relatives' homes. And surprisingly, a lot of peopled stayed there. I mean, as people got more education, you know, they would leave those towns and go to bigger towns but surprisingly a lot of our family remained in that small town. The other thing that my mother always taught, because they didn't get a lot of it, was education. I mean, they were working to survive so oftentimes they would miss school. As a matter of fact, she only went to eighth grade for a long time and then after she married and everything, she finished school and went to college and things like that. But, for the most part, nobody on her side of the family got an awful lot of education because they would go to school in the spring but they'd have to work in the fall. So they were doing like half school so it was really hard for everybody to finish. Story_ID: 101358 Speaker 1: Okay, now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, his name was John Henry Brown. Speaker 1: John Henry Brown. Now is there a story behind the John Henry Brown name? Speaker 2: I'm not real sure and it's kind of interesting because my father's side--I never knew my grandparents on that side, that side of the family. My dad also came from a fairly large family. I knew some of my aunts and uncles but I didn't know my grandfather and grandmother because they died like long before we ever came along. My dad was from a big family. He's sort of near the end and they died, you know, before he ever got married and had children but he used to tell us--he's deceased too, he died in 2000. He died in 2003 and my mom died in 2004. Speaker 1: Do you know his date of birth? Speaker 2: Yeah, November 11th, let's see, he died at seventy-nine in 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I should have had these dates down. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he died February 24th, so he wasn't quite at his birthday. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he used to tell me these stories about how he met my mom [Earlene Punch Brown]. I mean, they met like downtown somewhere, you know, one of those little general stores, or something like that, and my mom was like really tired of working, working around the house, and working in those fields, so when he came through and asked my grandfather [Randal Punch] for her hand in marriage, my grandfather, of course, said "Yes." I mean, she was fifteen years old and he said, "Yes" because times were so hard. If you can find somebody who can take care of your daughter, then that was cool and he was also going to the military so they knew they would have a guaranteed income. And so they were married for quite a long time. Story_ID: 101359 Speaker 1: So, I guess that was-- so they get married around 1945 or so, I guess or, well in the '40s [1940s], during the War [World War II]? Speaker 2: They were married five years before I was born, so they were married in 1944. Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944], okay. Speaker 2: June 23rd, 1944, I think. Speaker 1: And he was on his way to the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: Yes, he was in the Army. Speaker 1: Okay, did he serve in World War II, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did he go overseas or-- Speaker 2: I think he did go overseas because he sent my name back by mail. He actually named me via the mail. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He didn't talk about the Army at all? Or where he went? Speaker 2: Not very much. I know he did go to France-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for a little bit. Speaker 1: Okay, that's overseas, certainly. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's overseas. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So did he have any stories about how they were treated during the War? Speaker 2: No, he never talked about it-- Speaker 1: Never talked. Speaker 2: --a lot really. He did talk about how he learned to box. I didn't know you could learn to box in the military but he did and he used to do competitive boxing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he liked that. Speaker 1: All right, now he's from-- Speaker 2: He's from Hillsboro, Texas. Speaker 1: Hillsboro, Texas, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum, which is not too far from Dallas [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's B-O-R-O-U-G-H? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, no, it's H-I-L-L-S-B-O-R-O. Speaker 1: Okay, Hillsboro, Texas, okay. Story_ID: 101360 Speaker 1: So, well, when you think about your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: It's funny, I only have one sister [Donna Brown Beasley], there were two siblings. I look a lot like my mom [Earlene Punch Brown] but I act a lot like my dad [John Henry Brown]. My sister looks a lot like my dad and acts a lot like my mom and my, they were such a cute couple because my mother was taller than my dad and I used to look and go, "Hum", 'cause I like really tall guys, right. So, I said, "What did you see in him?" But, you know, they were a cute couple. So, but the thing I learned from my dad, I think, was patience, and I'm probably the most patient person that you will ever meet, especially if there's something I want or something that I'm trying to do. And the thing I learned from my mom is that she was very good at organizing and stretching a dollar and, I mean, she could make--yes, people would say, "Make do" but she made do like in very fine fashion with very little money and I think that's the thing that my sister has learned to do and I, of course, learned the other part, the softer side. I know how to make people feel good and, and tell me things, and things like that. And it worked out really well when my parents started to get ill because my sister, who actually has a background in accounting and business, handled all of their financial affairs, which I didn't want to do, and I, on the other hand, was able to work with the doctors and things like that at the hospitals. So it's worked out pretty well. Story_ID: 101361 Speaker 1: Okay, now you just have the one sister or-- Speaker 2: I have one sister [Donna Brown Beasley]. We have a small family. Speaker 1: Are you the oldest? Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I always tell people, we'll have a family reunion every day 'cause there's so few of us left. Speaker 1: Are you the oldest or-- Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you were born in Denton? Speaker 2: I was born in Denton, Texas. Speaker 1: Texas, okay, and that's close by here? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: That's not too far. Speaker 2: It's about forty miles from here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I even remember my doctor's name, Dr. Whitehead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was born at Flow Street Hospital, no longer exists. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: And I remember when I was--I don't remember when I was born, but they told me a story about when I was born. My mother [Earlene Punch Brown], after my dad [John Henry Brown] left for the War [World War II], my mother became--she went to the Madam [C.J.] Walker Beauty School and she became a beautician, you know, they called it beautician back then, and we set up a country beauty salon in our backyard. We had a, we had a one bedroom house with a bathroom outside and so she had a little house built outside where she would do hair and she used to make us play around there and everything so, but she did that while my father's in the service. Speaker 1: Okay, well that was a, that was a, you know, lucrative occupation. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, to become a beautician. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I'm saying-- Speaker 1: Be trained by Madam Walker, that was-- Speaker 2: --she was really like, I can make do woman. She did that and she sold, you're probably too young to remember this, they used to sell dresses out of catalogs with the big swatches in 'em and she did that for a while 'cause it was a perfect opportunity when the ladies came to the store and show 'em these big books with the swatches of fabric in it and have them order dresses too. So I guess she was an entrepreneur way back then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, so your--did your father do primarily farm work or did he-- Speaker 2: After he came back from military, he was primarily--did just odd jobs, day labor kinds of things until Dallas [Texas] started booming and then he went into construction work. So, he had a job in Dallas where he would, you know, catch the bus everyday and come down here and work. And they were building all these skyscrapers downtown and it was so funny because after we moved to Dallas, and even before we moved to Dallas, we'd come down here and drive around and he would go, "That's my building, and that's my building." You'd think he was the architect but, and his specialty was bricklaying. That's a lot of buildings were made of brick back then. Speaker 1: Well that's quite a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a bricklayer can make good money. Speaker 2: Yeah, he learned it, to be a bricklayer. Speaker 1: Now, I suppose the season down here is longer for that because it stays warmer? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, did you see all the cranes? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And we moved to Dallas when I was seven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that would have been in 1956, I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah. Or '57 [1957]. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Story_ID: 101362 Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, and they're all fun. Most of my childhood memories are about birthday parties. For some reason, we used to have the best birthday parties when we were little, and I think it was because I have an aunt, Aunt Bertie Johnson [ph.], and because she never had children, it was like having two moms. She and my mom were very close. And so it was always like having two moms. So they would throw the best birthday parties and my Aunt Bertie still, well she still owns a home, it's on a corner lot in Denton [Texas]. So we'd wave at people and everything and they'd see all the balloons out but we had some fantastic birthday parties in that yard. So I remember that. I can remember back probably to maybe the age of five or six 'cause I remember school and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 101363 Speaker 1: Okay, now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I'd like to say those good smells from the kitchen, like a lot of people have, but I didn't have that. My mother [Earlene Punch Brown] was like way ahead of her time. We ate out when it wasn't popular to eat out. I mean, it was, and that sounds funny 'cause they didn't have that many restaurants back then, but it was not unusual for her to pack us up and say, let's--they used to have this part of, a part of Denton they used to call "Shack Town" and that's where a lot of the black restaurants and other black establishments were. And so we'd--she'd pack us in the car and we'd go down to Shack Town and get some burgers or some barbeque and just sit in the car and watch people and eat. It was so funny but we were sort of Dairy Queen babies. This was also pre-McDonald's. So, and I think Dairy Queen was a big fast food thing but my mother--it's not so much as she disliked cooking, I think she liked going out. So we would do a lot of that. Speaker 1: And she [Earlene Punch Brown] spent a lot of her money as a, I mean a lot of her time as a beautician? Speaker 2: Yeah, so she worked a lot. Speaker 1: Doing hair so she-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --she, it was hard to, I guess, cook for everybody? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: But she did it as-- Speaker 2: But even after we grew up and she did other things, she just still maintained that love for going out and going to good restaurants. And I think that I got that from her too. A home cooked meal is great but I love going out to eat, too. Yeah. Story_ID: 101364 Speaker 1: Okay, now was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, it's funny that you said that because, yep, it's funny how your parents just try to recreate their lives through you. My mother [Earlene Punch Brown] was, this is so funny, my mother always wanted to be a drummer. She loved drummers and so I think one day she thought one of, either my sister [Donna Brown Beasley] or me would grow up to be a drummer but that didn't happen. She put us in piano lessons and I can remember we used to have to save coke bottles to pay for piano lessons and I think a case, back then, like twenty-four bottles would pay for one lesson. So we were constantly picking up bottles and stacking them in the--those little wooden cases in the kitchen and everything to make money for our piano lessons. And I took piano for thirteen years before I went to college and I was actually a music major for the first three years of college and then our broadcast department opened and I switched majors and it just hurt her hard. She was like, "Oh, there goes" 'cause I was going to be a music teacher. She goes, "Oh, what happened to being a music teacher?" I'm going, "Oh, I can't stay in a room all day." That kind of terrified me so I think I ended up in the right business but I think I may have disappointed her a little bit by not going into music. Speaker 1: Well, do you miss not playing the piano? Or do you still play? Speaker 2: I do still play but not as well as I did back then. Yeah, if you don't use it, you lose it, as they say. Story_ID: 101365 Speaker 1: Okay, now was--did you play in church? Speaker 2: I did play for church. I played for a junior choir. We attended Mount--well in Denton [Texas], our first church was Mount Pilgrim C.M.E. Church. It still exists today and I still have relatives there, cousins, and the church we joined when we came to Dallas [Texas] was North Park C.M.E. Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's where I played for a junior choir. Speaker 1: Now is the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church popular in Texas? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we've got a lot of C.M.E.s. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: We have a lot of C.M.E. churches, but very few of them are large. Speaker 1: I think C.M.E.s started in Louisiana. Speaker 2: They don't turn out to be Potter's Houses, let me put 'em like that. Speaker 1: Okay, yes, it started in Louisiana, I believe, right after slavery. Speaker 2: Really. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Colored Methodist Episcopal and then it changed to-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --Christian Methodist Episcopal. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, well, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was--I suppose with most families, most African American families, church was a big social outlet. It was where you went for your summer activities, it's where you went, you know, at least once a week for prayer meeting. It's actually, I think, where we learned a lot of our skills, too. I mean, I think I learned to speak in church because we never missed a Christmas pageant or an Easter program or anything like that where we had to memorize something, you know, to say. So that was, that was good. Story_ID: 101366 Speaker 1: Now did you have any mentors in the church or in the community that-- Speaker 2: Oh, God, did we have mentors in the community. That old phrase about "It takes a village" is so true especially back in those days. I remember when we moved to Dallas [Texas], we lived at 60--well, first we lived in South Dallas, and then we moved to 6922 Lockheed [Ave], and it was, it was like a big deal 'cause we were sort of blockbusters. I think we were the second black family to move on that block. And as the neighborhood started to brown up a little bit, there was a lady on the street over from my mother [Earlene Punch Brown], I'm trying to remember her name, but she used to host these luncheons for little girls, or young ladies rather, like twelve-ish, and she'd invite us over in groups and she'd prepare like a formal lunch because what she wanted to teach us was social graces. You know, how to eat, how to hold your fork, how to sit, things like that. And so all the mothers in the neighborhood were really anxious to get their daughters into this woman's home to go to one of these lunches. And they were a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You can, okay. Speaker 2: And then, of course, there were other people like the Mrs. Ferguson who was on our street and her mother, what was her name, oh I don't know. Some of the kids called her "Big Mama" so I'm going to call her--Ms. Henrietta (laughter), Ms. Henrietta. That was the house where, after school, if your mom wasn't home, you know, we didn't have latchkey kids back then, so if your mom wasn't quite home, you can go by Ms. Henrietta's. And the thing I remember about there is Ms. Henrietta used to make butter sandwiches, butter and jam. And I never quite understood butter and jam 'cause I loved meat but I mean it was, it was very nice for her to do that as I look back. But I was just going, butter and jam, what is this woman doing? So, but all the kids used to stop by there and it was a very reliable and safe place, you know, for your child to be and so our house was like three or four houses down. So, at that time, mother is working, I think, in a cafeteria for a while so she would, you know, as soon as they'd finish their duties, she would come through and get us and we would go on home, so. Story_ID: 101367 Speaker 1: Okay, now what about school. Now what school did you start at? Speaker 2: My elementary, well, my very first school was Fred Moore in Denton, Texas. That's where I attended first grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Now who is-- Speaker 2: And Fred Moore went from grade one, right through twelve. It was the only black school in Denton and Fred Moore himself was a big educator in Denton and that's why the school was named for him. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Is it Fred R. Moore by any chance or just Fred Moore? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the woman I keep talking about who's my first grade teacher was also my aunt by marriage. She--her sister married one of my uncles so that's how we kind of came to be part of the Fred Moore clan. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is an all-black school, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, in those days, all right. And, so when you're in the second grade, I guess, you moved to--or first grade-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved to Dallas [Texas] 'cause that construction work got good so we were able to buy a house and we moved to Dallas and then I went to Phyllis Wheatley Elementary School for one semester. That's when we lived in South Dallas. And then the next semester we moved to North Dallas and I attended K. B. Polk Elementary School. Speaker 1: K. B. Polk. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: P-O (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: P-O-L-K. Speaker 1: --L-K, okay. Is that the grade school you finished at or? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, so do they have a middle school here? Speaker 2: Well we went through, we went through seventh grade. Speaker 1: Through seventh? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then it was the seventh graders--we were the first class to go to the Booker T. Washington High School. They increased the number of years at the high school here so we were the first class, and youngest class, to be at the Booker T. Washington High School. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: You know I went through my entire education right through high school without attending an integrated school which is kind of interesting, I think, and everybody goes, how do you do that? And I was going, well, we lived in Texas because all the other parts of the country were, you know, going through their integrations by then and we didn't have that. Speaker 1: Well you could do it in other parts of the country, too. Speaker 2: Yeah, really? Speaker 1: You could do that, yeah. In my hometown in Dayton, Ohio, you could do it. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: You could do it in Detroit [Michigan]. You could do it a lot of places, Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's why SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] is such a shock when I got there. It's like, you go from all black to like you're the only one, almost, so. Story_ID: 101368 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: I always liked the arts. I liked the painting. I liked--oh, I loved homemaking. I even have a picture over there I was going to show you where I wore this awful dress to the prom because I made it. I mean, I was determined to make my dress for the prom. So, but I loved homemaking. I liked the cooking. I liked the sewing. Girls took cooking and sewing, and guys took shop and something else. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right. Did you have a favorite teacher in school? Or favorite teachers? Speaker 2: I had a favorite teacher in elementary school, Mr. Callahan [oh.], who was a math teacher. And this is so strange. When Mr. Callahan got tired of seeing us eat like little piggies in the cafeteria-- everybody was really into these social graces back then. So one day, we came to class and Mr. Callahan had all these plastic forks and spoons and knives and paper napkins and he actually took our desk and did a place setting and he showed us, okay, now this fork, you use this--first you go here, blah, blah, blah. And it was really interesting. I'm going, this is a math class and he's showing us how to do that. So he was one of my favorite teachers. As I mentioned earlier, Irma Hall, I think, was a really good teacher for us. Irma Hall--you know there's always a teacher at school. She was a high school--but Irma Hall--there was always a teacher in school that would kind of mentor the girls. There was always like a go-to teacher if you needed something, and that's what Mrs. Hall was. You could go to her with personal things. We could go to her with, you know, things regarding school. She was over a lot of the organizations and activities, you know, for the girls and things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, and so just for the record, this is [HM] Irma P. Hall-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --who's now known as-- Speaker 2: Big Mama, it's her soul food. Speaker 1: Actress, right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In soul foods-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Big Mama. Speaker 2: Yeah, and she was over like our little theater department and stuff like that, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. She was in "[The] Ladykillers" with Tom Hanks. Speaker 2: Yeah, that one. Speaker 1: Okay. She's you know, she lives here in Dallas [Texas], again, now after-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and we still love her. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Everybody who went to her class, loves her. Story_ID: 101369 Speaker 1: Okay, now was TV or, television and movies important to you growing up? Did you like-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had--in Dallas [Texas] we had two black theaters. We had the State Theater, which is not too far from the studio here, or was not too far from the studio here, since been torn down. We also had the Forest Avenue Theatre. Erykah Badu recently bought the Forest Avenue Theatre and revived it. So it's now a the showroom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the Forest Avenue Theatre actually sits on what is now Martin Luther King Boulevard. It used to be Forest Avenue. So it's right in the center of South Dallas which is, you know, a big black community. Speaker 1: Okay, you say what used to be Martin Luther King? Speaker 2: No, no, it is now Martin Luther King. It used to be Forest Avenue. Speaker 1: It used to be Forest Avenue, okay. Speaker 2: The State Theater sat on State Street which is here near the station and it's part of what they call Uptown and we used to go to both of those theatres. We'd go on Saturday morning and mother [Earlene Punch Brown] or daddy [John Henry Brown] would drop us off and we'd take--we'd never have more than like 50 cents. You could stay all day. The features were a lot shorter then and they were in more of them. So they could drop you off and you could have popcorn, hotdogs, whatever you want, you know, for the time that you were there and they'd come back and pick us up. So, that was fun. I was trying to think of some of the movies back then, but that was a fun thing to do. My mom used to tell stories about some of the little towns they lived in. They could only go to the movies at midnight on Saturday night and that was considered the time that colored people could go to the movies. And then they had to sit in the balcony. I thought that was kind of interesting. But they would have some like final runs at night for the black communities, for the black citizens. Speaker 1: So you never had to do that in Dallas? You had your own--you had two theatres you could go to and didn't have to be bothered with that? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh we had segregated theatres then. We had the Majestic Theatre and the Palace Theatre, were two other movie theatres and those were segregated. And if you went there, you had to sit in the balcony too. Speaker 1: But they were, there were theaters in the black community where you wouldn't have to-- Speaker 2: No, those two theaters were downtown. Speaker 1: Downtown, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were downtown. Story_ID: 101370 Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the movies and television. Did you have favorite movies? Speaker 2: Um, I'm trying to remember. I remember the cartoons. I don't remember so much about the movies. We had "Felix The Cat" and "Mighty Mouse" and all those things but I don't remember the movies so much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember like some real blockbusters that came through that we would see with our parents like "Imitation of Life" and I'm sure you remember that one? Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a big one. Speaker 2: And, what was the one, "Cabin in the Sky" with Lena Horne, all those. When all those came through we would always see those like with the family, with our parents. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about television. Did you have television? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, did we have television. Now you hit on something I love. We had television and, of course, our first TV screen was about this big and a big box. And it was in black and white and we used to have game shows and things like that on TV and I just--I loved, absolutely loved that. And I remember at one point, just before color TV came in, or maybe about the same time that color TV came along, they had these--nobody remembers these except me, they had these plastic shields you could tape on--you remember that? You could tape on your TV and that was supposed to make it color. Speaker 1: My aunt had one. Speaker 2: That was so funny. When you think back-- Speaker 1: They were tinted blue on top-- Speaker 2: Yeah, blue and-- Speaker 1: --green at the bottom, red in the middle. Speaker 2: I remember that. I always thought that was so funny but we were getting down. We had color TV and so that, that was good. And then, of course, after that we got a bigger screen, smaller box. Speaker 1: Now did, did you remember seeing any, any black people or any African Americans on television when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember "Beulah." There was that show with Beulah. I'm trying to think of some of the really old ones. I'm sure there was some more. There were some sitcoms that had--most, of course, most of the people in those were, you know, servants or maids. Oh, the one with Rochester. Speaker 1: Yeah, Jack Benny. Speaker 2: "The Jack Benny Show" ["The Jack Benny Program"]. All of those. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever think about, you know, being on television when you were growing up yourself? Speaker 2: Not then. I do remember we used to have one show called "The Howdy Doody Show" and this is kind of ironic because I used to love "The Howdy Doody Show" and here I'd go skipping around and my first job was actually working on a children's party show so that was kind of interesting that that would progress from there to that later in my career. But, yeah, I used to love "The Howdy Doody Show". Story_ID: 101371 Speaker 1: Now what about black radio? Did you have a black radio station? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we had the best black radio station in the area, it was KNOK radio and it was more than just a radio station, it was actually, it was like an icon in the community because--well, they, they signed on at sunup, they went off at sundown and they would always end at sundown with Jesse Jackson [HM Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]'s speech, "I Am Somebody" and you'd find yourself saying it with the radio, you know, just all, I am, I am somebody, somebody, you know, and that was always, that was always very inspiring, I think, to hear that at the end of the day but it was sign on at sunrise and sign off at sundown. And they had some-- Speaker 1: So did that one start--I'm sorry, but did that one start when you were a teenager or-- Speaker 2: I was probably, probably, I think it was earlier. Speaker 1: Because Jesse Jackson didn't emerge on the scene until about '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Okay, it had to be about then. When he had his big pretty afro and everything. But they would use that and they played black music part of the day, it would be sort of rhythm and blues, part of the day it'd be sort of jazz and they played gospel music. Speaker 1: Okay, probably early in the morning? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was good. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101372 Speaker 1: Now were you a good student in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Dallas, Texas]? Speaker 2: I was a great student. I was valedictorian when I graduated. My best friend--I mean I was salutatorian. My best friend was valedictorian and we were separated by like maybe a point. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school. As a matter of fact, I had five years perfect attendance between the seventh and the twelfth grade. I don't know why, but I did, but I have a certificate for each year. I think I still have those somewhere. Speaker 1: Now were you involved in clubs and student government? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was very active. I was in the National Honor Society, Future Homemakers of America, I was Miss NDCC, National Defense Cadet Corps. I was their little queen for a while. I was an attendant once for "Ms. Booker T.," all the high schools had that. I didn't win but I got to be an attendant at the coronation and a lot of things like that. I did a lot of organizations. Story_ID: 101373 Speaker 1: Now I want to go back a little bit 'cause I didn't talk about this but, when you were in high school, I guess when you were a freshman or maybe it was in eighth grade, [President] John F. Kennedy was assassinated here in Dallas [Texas]. Speaker 2: I remember that. Speaker 1: And what was that like for you? Speaker 2: I remember that day like it was yesterday. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was in band practice. We had actually wanted to go down and the school had said, tell the parents, if you want your child to go, you'll have to come and pick 'em up and take them, you know, 'cause they didn't want to be responsible for taking us down there like a field trip, you know, and it's a good thing, and then, you know, making sure we got back. So my mom [Earlene Punch Brown] had to work that day and she couldn't take us. So I had to--we had to stay at school. And we were in band practice. I will never forget it and somebody called Mr. Gray [ph.], he's one of my favorite teachers too, they called him Mr. James Gray who was our band director, and he came back in and it was just the look on his face. I didn't know, I don't think any of us knew exactly what was going on and he told us that the president had been killed and had been shot downtown and, of course, when things like that happen, it's kind of like 9/11, you're not sure what's going to happen after that. You're not sure if you're safe. You're not sure if you need to leave and go home. You're not sure if you need to stay there but I think after that, they started contacting all the parents and told them to come pick us up 'cause I know, you know, mother showed up pretty quickly and got us and took us home. So, but that was a horrible day. And then, of course, we went home, we were absolutely glued to the TV set for days. I don't think we even had school the next day. I can't remember what day that happened on but I don't think we even had school the next day. It was just like 9/11. You know, when 9/11 happened, you're glued to the TV set for days. It's the same sort of thing and let's see, I think at that time, 'cause I was in high school, I think my mother had changed jobs and I think she was actually working like at Parkland Hospital [Dallas, Texas] by then. She ended up being a manager in one of the departments at Parkland. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that, of course, was the hospital that Kennedy-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, where-- Speaker 1: --was brought to after he was shot. Speaker 2: --they took him. Exactly. So, somehow, she got away that day and came to pick us up. Speaker 1: How did it feel being in--living in Dallas in those days? Did you have a sense that the whole country was looking at Dallas at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't know, I mean, you just didn't know, you didn't know if, and we didn't use the term, "terrorist attack" back then, but you didn't know if that was something that had been done by somebody in another country, you know, our president. You didn't know if it was somebody here that just didn't like him, you know, you just didn't know and it was so funny because Kennedy was such a loved president. I mean, of all the presidents, he may have been the one that people liked the most, you know, I mean on both sides of the political spectrum. So, and of course, we all loved Jackie [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis]. I mean, we were all watching to see what she was going to wear that day with the little pillbox hat and a suit and everything. So it was just, it was just a horrible thing to happen. I mean, people were crying and I guess being a kid, it affected us a little bit differently, you know. I suppose grown people were worried about their jobs and, you know, what was going to happen with businesses and things like that. And we were just worried about, you know, what's going to happen to us the next day or what's going to happen to mommy or daddy and where they work or, you know, 'cause kids are always worried about security, their security, so. It was a God-awful day. Story_ID: 101374 Speaker 1: Now being around a beauty shop-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of discussion about the Civil Rights Movement and politics in those days 'cause those were the, that was a heyday of the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Yeah, back in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This is going to sound funny, but not so much. I think, I really think Texas was kind of slow in getting into the whole full movement. I think in Denton [Texas], back during that time, the whole issue was just about survival and there was a big push for education. Everybody wanted to get their kids educated because they wanted them to be a little bit better, you know, than they were, a little bit better off than they were. So, I think the push was more toward education. I mean, everybody loved [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] and all that stuff but I don't think as far as like getting out, talk about getting out in the streets or making big major changes or, you know, heavy duty integration and things like that, I don't think that happened, not as quickly as it did in some other parts of the country. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I remember that--actually, I remember that kind of thing happening, I was out and working. The first demonstration I ever remember here in Dallas [Texas] was in 1972 or it might have been '73 [1973], there was a confrontation downtown between police and some civil rights workers. I remember Ralph Abernathy came and I was a reporter then and I went out with Bob Ray Sanders, we worked at the same station, public television station. And I've always been a scaredy-cat and I think that's why I didn't last in news too long. And I'll never forget Bob Ray said, now there could be tear gas because we were, I mean, it was right downtown here and he said there could be tear gas. So, you need to wet your finger and figure out which way the wind is blowing and we'll go in the opposite direction, you know, if there's teargas. I'm looking like, how am I going to know that? So, I kind of took my cues from him. But there was never any tear gas and this is so typical of Dallas. There was never any tear gas. Everybody met at the street corner, downtown, Ralph Abernathy was there, the other marchers were there and they talked it out and went home. Everybody talked it out and went home. We've never ever had a clash in Dallas where buildings were burned and things like that. Speaker 1: A riot or something like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, no riots as in other parts of the country. And I just--that's kind of interesting and I don't know, maybe it's because we were so late getting into the whole, whole civil rights issues, especially the marching part. Speaker 1: Okay, it sounds like it maybe wasn't as-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but we're seeing it revived-- Speaker 1: --conflict wasn't as intense here. Speaker 2: Yeah, but we're seeing it revived again, though, with our Hispanic community. We've had several marches of late with the Hispanic community about immigration. So, we're seeing that, that process evolve and now it's with another ethnic group. Story_ID: 101375 Speaker 1: Okay, so now--so you enjoyed high school? We can take it that you really enjoyed high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was fun. It was a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I enjoyed college more but because my, my parents were very strict. They were like exceptionally strict. I didn't even date till I was sixteen. I mean, my idea of seeing a boy was he could come over and sit on the front porch till dark. No porch lights. If we had to turn the porch light on, it's time for him to go. So that was, that was about the extent of my dating until I pretty much got out of high school. And like my, I think it was senior prom, the one where I made the God awful dress that I wore, I had to actually go out and find my date 'cause, you know, we just didn't--we weren't around that many guys. I had to go out and find my date and I had to find somebody who was tall enough for my hair 'cause I had this big--we used to wear these things, chignon or big things on top of your head and I was determined to find somebody who was taller than my hair. So, so, but we really didn't date that much in high school but once I got to college, it was like, hello (laughter). Story_ID: 101376 Speaker 1: Now how did you decide on which college to go to? Now you're president of the National Honor Society so you're going to college. Speaker 2: That's an interesting story 'cause I had scholarships and things like that and as soon as school was out, the girl who was valedictorian, Durlene Reed and I decided, well we had applied to North Texas University [now University of North Texas, Denton, Texas] because I knew I couldn't afford a private school. Didn't even think about it. So we enrolled in North Texas. I mean, we were--we graduated in May, we were there in June, we were roommates and one day my mom [Earlene Punch Brown] called and-- Speaker 1: You see, that quick? You graduated from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Dallas, Texas]-- Speaker 2: High school. Speaker 1: --in May? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is 1967, right? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: And then went right to North-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'm telling you, we had to get out of the house. Speaker 1: --Texas, okay. Speaker 2: You don't understand. You don't understand. Speaker 1: So this is North-- Speaker 2: All of our parents were strict back then. Speaker 1: --this is North-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum, North Texas-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --State University. It has since changed to the University of North Texas. Speaker 1: And where is it now? Speaker 2: It's in Denton. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, no, we were bound and determined to get out of that house. So we got, oh we got some scholarships there and everything. Well, one day, this is about nearing the end of the first six week summer session, my mother called and she said, how would you like to go to SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas]? And I laughed 'cause SMU costs an arm and a leg. Absolutely costs an arm and a leg plus there were not, you know, that many black people going to SMU. So, I said, oh, oh, that could be fine. I knew it was a really fine school and I was going well, yeah, that could be good. And she said, well, I got a call today and they'd like to offer you a full scholarship and you can stay on campus. And I was going, "What?" She said, yeah, they want to offer you a full scholarship and I never applied to this school. But what had happened at that time, this was like 1967, and they had such a low ratio of black students at the school at that time. They were actively recruiting and quickly and actively recruiting 'cause you know the Civil Rights Movement was still getting hotter back then and I, again, typical Dallas-- Speaker 1: And there was money attached to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the enrollment of minority students? Speaker 2: Yeah, but still, typical Dallas, we don't want it to happen here, you know, we don't want to mess with our buildings and our city. So, they were actively recruiting people and I suppose the local students were the easiest to get ahold of so. Story_ID: 101377 Speaker 1: I took a scholarship and so the second semester I went and enrolled in SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] and I took a, oh what do you call those, it's kind of like a pre-course you take to kind of prepare you, kind of like a preparatory course -- Speaker 2: Like a-- Speaker 1: --'cause, I mean, I knew it was going to be hard and so I voluntarily took like this preparatory course the second semester and I'll never forget though the fall semester. I went to check into my dorm and I got there first and I decorated my room all in orange and pink and everything, and my mom [Earlene Punch Brown] helped me, and then this other girl came and she was, she was black and her name was Rose, I can't remember, 'cause she was only there a little while, her name was Rose something. Her father was a minister here, I think, somewhere in Hamilton Park. And he looked and he introduced himself and he said, have you seen any other black girls in this dorm? I said, no sir, I haven't. I think we might be the only two 'cause I'd already been there six weeks during the summer and there was like nobody. And I was excited. I said, I think we might be the only two. And he said, okay, excuse me. And he left and went downstairs and he came back. She never unpacked. He took her out and sent her to Prairie View [A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] because he thought that, because we're the only two black, I think he, I think he thought they took two of us so that we could room together because they didn't want to go through the whole process of finding a white girl who wanted to be a roommate with us. I really think that's kind of what was happening back then. And so, my freshman year-- Speaker 2: Is that your, is that your sense of the atmosphere there? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, it was strange and so it was so bad. I'll tell you what happened. I had a room all my freshman year by myself at half price. I loved it. I absolutely loved it 'cause I'm a bit of a loner anyway. So, I mean, I had a great time but I was the only girl in that dorm that had a room by myself. Speaker 2: So they made no attempt to find you a roommate and-- Speaker 1: No, it was too late. The semester was starting and I suppose they'd have to poll the parents and that kind of thing. Second year, I signed up to be a sophomore sponsor and I got a roommate that year, her name was Ann Livingston [ph.], she was from Northbrook, Illinois. Do you know where that is? It's kind of a lily neighborhood and she was like really into "our" movement kind of thing. So she asked to room with me and we got to be great friends. It was very, very interesting though because Ann loved dating our local, so-called, "black militants." It was just real interesting and I, on the other hand, was dating a "white" guy and all of this at the height of our little Civil Rights Movement. But we used to talk a lot about Northbrook because she said, this is so good for me and I'd go why? She said "because the only black people that I've ever seen were, were workers, you know, going in and out of Northbrook, like maids and nannies and people like that, you know, garden people and stuff like that." And I was going, "really?" And that just didn't compute to me and so it was just really really quite interesting. And she always wanted to go over to my house and things like that and it was so funny. And then when I was dating the little white guy, his name was Bill White, you see I thought it'd be cool because I thought if we married, I'd be Rochelle Brown-White 'cause hyphenated names were in then too. So, I thought that'd be really cute except we didn't marry because he wanted to be a poet so I didn't think he could support my lifestyle on a poet salary. But anyway--those times were just really really quite interesting and they'd--you smile, but they do make you smile because it seems so ridiculous back then. And then our house, where I grew up was--SMU sits in Mockingbird Lane and Hillcrest. Our house was maybe five miles down Mockingbird Lane, then our street ran into that street. Now SMU sits in the middle of these million dollar houses, even back then, and there is our little house and then we paid $7,000 for it. But anyway, whenever I took Bill to my house, my mom's house, my parents were divorced by then, whenever I took him home, she said "make sure you call me" and I'd go why, and she goes, but you really need to drive to the back. But I think she was worried about some kind of backlash, you know, from the community of something like that, which is, in a way, is a reversed prejudice that was kind of going on then. And so we'd do that and then when I went home with him, and it was a first time I ever flew, his parents bought me a ticket. I got there and his mom took me, he's from Houston [Texas], his mom took me all over Houston. It was like, I didn't even get to see him while I was there. We just went everywhere and she started introducing me to all of her friends. This is Bill's girlfriend, this is Bill's girlfriend and I thought, what is this all about? It was so funny but those were just crazy times we were living in. Story_ID: 101378 Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't get, you didn't really have any mean confrontations with anybody around dating Bill White? Speaker 2: Not really. We had, we had, we actually had a--well, the school paper called it a sit-in, I brought that too when I was at SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] because on this one day, we decided--we had an organization called "The BLACCS". I guess every college had an organization. I forget what it stood for. It was B-L-A-C-C-S, but we wanted to go to the administration and present our demands, one of which was, of course, to recruit more, you know, black students to the university at that time. So we went to, we went, we tried to get an appointment with the president, our little representative group, and he said "no." So we decided to put masses together and there were so few of us, other people in the community, like from Bishop College [Dallas, Texas] and, we had Bishop College then, that was our big black college, and they--some of those kids decided to come over and join us and we had this little march right down the center of SMU up to the president's office, and some of us went in. But the thing is, the guy [Willis M. Tate] was so nice. He ordered lunch and everything for us and then he left. We told him what we wanted, he left, he said, well you all think about this and I'll be back. Well, they thought what we had done was to run the man out of his office somehow, but we hadn't. We were just sitting there waiting for him to come back. And so all the people outside, TV cameras came, everything, 'cause they thought we were having this humongous sit-in. It was funny 'cause we looked out the window and went "Oh, look at that. Where are those people coming from?" It was so funny. But we finally came to like some sort of agreement and they did a greater recruiting effort and did some more of those, sort of preparatory courses, so once you got there, you would be successful and-- Speaker 1: Okay, what did they establish, an Upward Bound Program or something like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had Upward Bound and, I'm trying to think what else we had. We had a couple of programs like that. Story_ID: 101379 Speaker 1: And the other thing that happened, and you may remember a football player named Jerry LeVias. I think he went on to play-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --pro-ball. He and Walter--this other guy named Walter somebody, they used to--at SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas], they used to have what they called Old South Week and somebody would dress up like a colonel and the thing, one of the things we protested was they still had like the slave auction thing set up, you know, like a stand where similar to where they used to have-- Speaker 2: During these days when they had this-- Speaker 1: Yeah, similar to the way people used to have slave auctions and stuff like that. Speaker 2: Was this a Greek thing or what was it? Or just a-- Speaker 1: It was just like an old tradition at the school. It was sort of like a parade. Speaker 2: What's the name of it again? I'm sorry, what's the name of it again? Speaker 1: It was called Old South Week. Speaker 2: Old South Week, okay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. It was just their way of honoring the old South and it was sort of like a parade and, you know, lots of the kids would dress up and stuff like that but we didn't like that. Speaker 2: How did the blacks feel? You didn't like it? Speaker 1: We didn't like it at all, that's what part of what led to the protest. But I remember this one day, Jerry LeVias and Walter, I wish I could think of his last name, the student union at SMU is very nice, or was very nice, but they had this huge patio and you go up some more steps and there's the student union. Well, they used to take the Confederate flag, it was humongous, and hang it all across the student union, behind the patio. So, you know, as the parade was passing by, and they put all the dignitaries on the patio and everything, well Jerry and Walter climbed up on the roof and kind of hid and as this guy came by who was supposed to be this big Colonel or something, waving his sword and all that stuff, they clipped the strings on the Confederate flag and it fell and you would have thought all hell had broken loose. I mean, these people went crazy. It was crazy. I think they got reprimanded and almost kicked out of school and everything. But finally, Old South Days ended so-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And you're going, this is in the '70s [1970s], in Dallas? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's all, it's still all over the country, I mean that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just slow. I mean somebody probably did this in the '50s [1950s] somewhere else but-- Speaker 2: No, they were still doing this--similar things and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but-- Speaker 2: --in other schools. Speaker 1: Yeah, but those were our little efforts at civil rights-- Story_ID: 101380 Speaker 1: Oh, and back to my roommate Ann Livingston [ph.], who was dating the local black militants. Speaker 2: Who was that? Who was that? Speaker 1: Who was she dating? Speaker 2: Yeah, do you remember the name of the-- Speaker 1: Fred, what was Fred's name? I can't remember, but he's doing something, even today. Nothing even close to what he used to do. But anyways, she got pregnant by one of them and, of course, her parents thought that was absolutely taboo and because it was a black baby, they sent her off to one of those homes for girls and she had to give the baby up. But she used to keep in touch with me, you know, periodically after that but I thought--I always thought that was kind of sad. But you know in our, in our communities, I don't think that happens very much. You know, if you ended up pregnant, you just kind of kept it and the family took care of it but where she came from, that could not have happened. So that was pretty interesting. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the other thing about that was that I didn't quite understand--that's why college is such a learning experience and why it's important to meet some (unclear). The other thing I didn't understand, her parents were very well-off and when she got her check every month, the rich little white kids got checks every month, we just got five dollars here, five dollars there, but they actually got checks every month and-- Speaker 2: From their parents? Speaker 1: Yeah, from their parents and when she got her check every month, she would immediately turn it over to some of the "black militants" who were working for the cause and I never quite understood that. I used to ask her, why are you giving them all of your money, you know, and she was going, well I want to help the cause and blah, blah, blah. I'm going, okay, you know, but I never quite understood that but she was very dedicated to supporting the cause. I think had her parents known she was giving her money away like that, they would have been a bit upset but-- Story_ID: 101381 Speaker 1: Okay, now you were a music major, right? Speaker 2: I was a music major, piano and I played flute. I was in the wind ensemble and I took singing lessons and I was going to be a music teacher. And then, let's see, this would have been around 1970, I think, I think it was 1970, SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] hosted the first, well it was a film festival, USA Film Festival, that's the name of it. I worked on that. That's a big deal nowadays. A lot of famous artists come through to that but I worked on that and I was just, I was smitten. I was going, this is what I want to do. To tell you the truth, I should have been Spike Lee. It just didn't happen quite that way but I met [Federico] Fellini and I met Andy Warhol and I met all these, you know, famous directors and producers back then and I just, I knew that is exactly what I wanted to do. Speaker 1: So there was a decent film department, I guess, at SMU? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Oh yeah, we had a great film department. Speaker 1: And Federico Fellini showed up for this festival? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And Andy Warhol? Speaker 2: Yeah, "[Fellini] Satyricon" was his big movie that was out then. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: So there was, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I checked and I had just enough credits to switch majors and I decided I would switch to television--well it was called television--broadcast film arts, (unclear) BFA in broadcast film arts and I also took some television classes while I was there but I knew my heart was going to be in film and I was going to be this famous movie producer. But, as life would have it, by the time I graduated in '71 [1971], the opportunities were in television, for black people, so that's where I ended up going. Story_ID: 101382 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--after, I mean, did you have an offer right away in television? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had my first job in 1970. I worked as an intern on the Bozo Show but it was a paid internship so I was happy about that. And it's kind of interesting-- Speaker 1: Turn on the "Bozo", so there's a local Bozo show here? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a local Bozo show here. Speaker 1: In Dallas [Texas]? Speaker 2: We had our own Bozo. I know you all--I think it started in Chicago [Illinois], didn't it? Speaker 1: Yeah, it originated at WGN in Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, but we had our own Bozo and our Bozo was real interesting 'cause he didn't particularly care for kids and he smoked. He was a terrible Bozo. He smoked, he drank. Speaker 1: He sounds like the prototype for Krusty the Clown? Speaker 2: Yeah, and my job, exactly, my job was to get there, I had to get there, the show started at four. I think I had to get there like about three and the kids came about three, three-thirty and my sole job on that day was to get them past his dressing room to the studio because his dressing room just had like a curtain up there, it didn't even have like a real door, so you didn't know what you were going to hear passing. You didn't know what you were going to see but I'd always go check first to make sure his curtain was closed and then get 'em to the studio (laughter). Story_ID: 101383 Speaker 1: So you were an intern for The Bozo Show for a semester we were talking about? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that may have been the semester before I graduated, like the first semester, senior year, maybe. Speaker 1: Here in, here in Dallas [Texas]? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was an independent television station. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's also when I got my first car which is another story because my parents couldn't afford a car. I was at SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] still and I called my dad [John Henry Brown], I talked to my mom [Earlene Punch Brown], and she said, "well call your dad and see what he can do." Even though my parents got divorced when I was sixteen, they were both, they remained friends. I think they just got married too young. And they remained friends and so, I mean it was, we had a happy childhood growing up because we had good relationships with both of our parents. But I called daddy and I said, "you know look, I got this internship and I have less than half an hour to get from my last class over to the TV station." He said, "Oh, baby, that's good, that's good." And I was going, "But I need a car. Is there any way you can help me out?" And so he said, "yeah, I'll get you a car." And I'll never forget. He came driving up to that dorm, and please note, the car of choice then by most of the students was the mustang, that was the era of the mustang, and these kids had 'em. And he came driving up in a '56 [1956] Oldsmobile rusty, dirty, the seats all torn up, but it ran so, I've always been good about taking things and turning them around, so when he drove up, I said, oh my God no, no but I went downstairs and I was looking at it and some of the other girls came down. That was a cool thing though about SMU because the other kids were having experiences through us that they never had either, you know, some of the little really rich kids. So they came down and we were all looking at the car and I decided to name her Betsy. So from that day on, the car's name was Betsy. And so this rusty old car and I would go to my little job every day and we'd do the Bozo Show. That was really funny. One day, though, I went down and cranked it up and Betsy burned. The distributors caught on fire and they had to call the fire department but luckily it was near the end of that semester so my internship was just about up. But Betsy burned, bless her heart. Story_ID: 101384 Speaker 1: Okay, so as you're approaching graduation, you were, were you basically looking for a job, I mean a-- Speaker 2: No, I had another job already. I went to the--from the independent station--all of our stations are kind of lined up in Dallas [Texas], right down the street to the public television station and Father Bob McGowan, who is a Jesuit priest, had gotten a grant to produce a show called Roll 'Em, R-O-L-L, 'E-M, and this one I really loved because it was a show that would profile young filmmakers and here I am going back toward film again. And so, everybody's running around shooting things on that little--it was a little bitty 8mm tape back then, 8mm cameras and we would find young people, like teenagers, you know, young adults who had done short films and we would feature those films on the show and then have them on the show to talk about them. So that was good. And I also learned that Jesuit priests can get anything. I mean that man, we had the best equipment. We had everything. We had a great set. He was really good. Father Bob was really good. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of that station in-- Speaker 2: KERA-TV. Speaker 1: K-E-R-A-- Speaker 2: Yes, still in existence. Speaker 1: --TV. Speaker 2: The other station where Bozo was, was KD--KDNT, I think, back then. Speaker 1: K-D-N-T. Speaker 2: Yeah, it has since changed. It was Channel 39. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So I went in as a producer and host of that show and that was like the day I left college we started doing that. Story_ID: 101385 Speaker 1: Meanwhile, I had heard about a fellowship program for news, which was the Michele--oh, it was Michele Smith [sic, Michele Clark] Scholarship Program at Columbia [University, New York City, New York] and she used to be a network correspondent. I think she may have been the first black network correspondent. She got killed, remember, in a plane crash? You may remember her, but her legacy was that they were gonna have people of color come to Columbia and we did a crash course in journalism during the course of a summer and I did that, I think, in 1972. I think it was '72 [1972]. It may have been '71 [1971] but I think it was '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was a lot of fun because what we did during that summer, they literally threw us into the streets of New York City and we covered news and we went back and did the newscast at Columbia at the end of the day. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: Michele Clark Fellowship Program. Speaker 2: Michele Clark, okay, that, yeah, now that, there you go. Speaker 1: Yeah, Michele Clark. Yeah, I had to remember. Michele Clark. Speaker 2: There we go, 'cause I was trying to think too 'cause I knew it was something different. Speaker 1: It was Michele Clark. Speaker 2: All right, and had you ever been to New York City before? Speaker 1: No, just--I went for my interview and then I, you know, I went back a few weeks later to do this fellowship and it was like-- Speaker 2: Had you been very far from Dallas before? Speaker 1: No, as a matter of fact, we were afraid of New York. I mean, you guys did bad things up there. Bobbi Humphrey, the jazz flautist, you may remember her? She went to SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] very briefly and I remember we all stayed up one night trying to talk her out of going to New York. She took her student loan money, she got her check and she bought a plane ticket. She said, no, I'm going to New York and I'm going to be a jazz flautist and this and that and that and that, and sure enough, she made it. She went to enough of those festivals and met enough people that she made it. I was going, "wow." Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a phenomena when she came out. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah she was. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, now we would tell her, and she's really, she was really little, we were going "oh, you're going to get killed. Somebody's gonna rob you. Somebody's gonna." She said, "phew", and she went on her way. Speaker 2: But was she in New York when you got there? Did you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, once she went she never came back. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: She's been there ever since. Speaker 2: So you weren't in touch with her now, necessarily? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, we still stay in touch. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 1: 'Cause she comes home periodically. Her family was still here. So she comes home periodically. And sometimes she comes through performances that are Black Academy of Arts and Letters and things like this. So we stay in touch. Speaker 2: With Curtis King and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Curtis. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, you're in New York so what happened that summer? Now you went out to cover news in New York? Speaker 1: Yeah, they set us up like a little news station at Columbia [University, New York City, New York] and we had, we had technical people, they were actually teaching us how to be journalists. We had technical people. They had photographers, professional photographers, who would help us. Bob Schieffer, I don't know if you remember him? Speaker 2: Yeah, Bob Schieffer, right. Speaker 1: Was actually running--yeah he was like one of my mentors. Speaker 2: With CBS. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. I was in his group and he would go out with us and they actually taught us the ropes of covering news by doing it. I was going, "Wow, this is kind of exciting, maybe this is what I want to do." So, that was, that was very very interesting 'cause I think news in New York City is like, unlike news anywhere else. I mean the transportation issue alone is, I don't know how they do it now, but I mean there were days when we would have to get on the subway, you know with the photographer, and he'd sling his gear over his arm. We had to get on the subway just to get to Queens [New York City, New York] or Brooklyn [New York City, New York] or somewhere to get our story and get back on the subway and get back to school. So, that whole piece was quite interesting. And then, you know, we'd write our own newscast, and they would critique it and help us write it and stuff and they would actually, you know, present it on the air, so that was fun. Speaker 2: Can you remember-- Speaker 1: Not on New York air, but on, you know, our little local system. Speaker 2: Can you remember a story that you covered? Speaker 1: Um, yes, well, no that was at NBC. That was a later one but I don't know, I always liked to cover like the museums and stuff like that so I don't remember any like really breaking hard news that I covered. I always went for the other stories. Speaker 2: Public interest stories? Speaker 1: Yeah, public interest stories. Story_ID: 101386 Speaker 1: So that was for the summer of '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then the part of that program, the station that sponsored you, had to guarantee your job so I was already at KERA and they had back then, the old newsroom formats and so they agreed to--Jim Lehrer, as a matter of fact, hired me to come back and work on the newsroom show. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was broadcast out of Dallas [Texas]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Was it Jim Lehrer? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Jim was here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, by the time I got back, Jim had a new job (laughter) so Lee Cohen became the news director and I worked with her 'cause I think the Jim Lehrer Show must have started about that time or something but he got bumped up to do another show for PBS. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The MacNeil/Lehrer Report, I guess. Speaker 2: Maybe MacNeil/Lehrer Report, that was it. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was about the time. Speaker 2: But I liked him so much. I liked Jim Lehrer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was very supportive during that whole-- Speaker 1: He had a number of people--well, yeah, Jim Lehrer and the, I don't know why I can't think of the press secretary for LBJ [President Lyndon B. Johnson], you know who I'm talking about? He's, he's, anyway, well-- Speaker 2: We'll think of it in a second. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: I do that all the time. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the one that always interviewed Barbara Jordan-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Bill [Moyers], I think it's Bill, oh gosh, I can't, well-- Speaker 2: It'll come to us. Speaker 1: Yeah, it'll come to us. It'll come to us. Speaker 2: But anyway, I came back and did that for awhile and that's, that--during that job, of course, is where we had the little march that we had to cover. Story_ID: 101387 Speaker 1: And then, I really did like New York a lot and I wrecked my car. I had bought myself a new Camaro and I wrecked it. I absolutely totaled it. And so when I got my insurance check, I took it and I packed five bags and my cat and I didn't tell my mom [Earlene Punch Brown] till like a day or two before I was going to leave that I was moving to New York and she's going but "what are you going to do?" And you know, she hadn't been there either so, you're thinking the same things. New York is dangerous and all that kind of stuff. Didn't have a job, I'd never do this again in my whole life, but I went back, I stayed with a friend and in two weeks I had a job. My first job there was I worked with the speechwriter for Julian Goodman who was president of NBC News. I was a great typist by the way, I could do seventy-five, eighty words really fast. So, you know, he would--sometimes he would dictate and I'd produce the speeches and copy so that Mr. Goodman could read them, you know, wherever he had to go. So, that was my first department. Then, shortly after that, it wasn't even a year after that, they opened the Northeast bureau of NBC News and there was a job there for a researcher, actually I applied for unit manager, which I'm glad I didn't get 'cause I wasn't real sure what that was and now that I know, I didn't want to do that. But, I did get the job as researcher and I worked with six correspondents. Speaker 2: Was this 1973? Speaker 1: This would have been '73 [1973] probably. Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 1: Bill Hunt [ph.], Betty Rowland [ph.], oh, several of 'em. Speaker 2: It was Bill Moyers I was trying to think of. Speaker 1: Oh, Bill Moyers. Speaker 2: Yeah, famous journalist from Texas. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: One of them anyway. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I think, is Dan Rather from Texas too? Speaker 1: I still like Bill Moyers. Huh? Speaker 2: Is Dan Rather from down here? Speaker 1: He's from Texas too. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's from Texas too. Speaker 1: He was down around Houston [Texas]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Dan Rather, Moyers. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of folks came out of Texas. Speaker 2: Jim Lehrer. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, so then I worked from June and got Goodman to the Northeast bureau and that was fun 'cause I learned a lot of good skills there. I almost became like a detective. I could find anything and almost anybody. And the cool thing about that job is, the net--what I discovered was the network correspondents traveled so much and they'd come to work in the morning, they could end up in the Mideast. The Mideast War was going on then, as it is now but, but they could come to work in the morning and end up, you know, over in Beirut [Lebanon] somewhere by nightfall. It was just, it was a crazy kind of lifestyle that they led. They were always packed. And we had an open account at Saks [Fifth Avenue], across the street, you know from NBC, so if they needed a trench coat or something like that, you know, I'd run over and get it for 'em. So I was basically at their, their--really help make their end. Also because-- Speaker 2: I wondered where they got all those-- Speaker 1: Yeah, because we didn't have portable computers and things like that back then. I would research a story they were working on, give them like a packet of information, you know, before they ran out to get the plane and stuff like that. So it was really kind of like reporting but not being on camera and I really enjoyed that. We had a good time. I was also there during the time that Betty Rowland had her bout with cancer. I don't know if you remember that? She wrote a book and then she ended up doing a movie called "First I Cried". But that was so funny 'cause there was one other old lady in the bureau, I'm trying to remember, other than that it was just Betty and myself and I remember the day she came back to work 'cause she had a mastectomy and all the guys were kind of scared because things were different times and all the guys were kind of scared to even look at her or talk to her, you know, 'cause they didn't want to think they were staring. And she walked in and she looked--she said, it's the left one and everybody just kind of went "phew." But I enjoyed all of those guys. They were, they were a lot of fun. Speaker 2: Okay, is there any particular research that you did that you really remember more? Speaker 1: This is going to sound so silly but the thing, the story I really remember most that I really liked, we had--New York at that time, the aquarium had the first, I think the first female whale in captivity or something, her name was Francis. And I did all this research on Frances, the whale and about whales and stuff and I mean I'm an expert on whales. Ask me anything. But, Francis gave birth while we were there so I had to like actually go down and cover that story and that was, that was a lot of fun. Story_ID: 101388 Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were you in that position at NBC? Speaker 2: I was there until, I think, 1975 and I was kinda, kinda yearning to be a reporter again after that. And so my news director, this sounds so funny because I never really sought jobs but that's just the way the times were. My news director said, I said, I think I want to be a correspondent, Jeff, and he said, okay. He said, well we need to get you trained so I'm going to send you, see if we can get you into another station, one of our affiliates, and have you get some training. And, so they found me a job in Rochester, New York, at WROC-TV. And that was a good job, I liked that a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, so you did basically reporting? Speaker 2: I was a reporter-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and an anchor-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and also, they also, I also did a midday show which was half talk, half news and I was also the voice of, what was her little thing called, the voice of, it wasn't Francis, Molly the mule (laughter). Molly the mule did children's news on Saturday morning. So I just pre-taped that with a hand puppet (laughter). That's not on my resume. I don't want anybody to know I was Molly the mule at one time but it was just fun. I volunteered kind of to do that. Speaker 1: That seemed like a strange choice for a character, I mean, Molly the mule, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a hand puppet. It was Molly the mule and she did children's news on the weekend. So it was, I mean, it was interesting 'cause she had to write in on the various-- Speaker 1: Can you still do the voice? Speaker 2: "Hi, I'm Molly the mule" (laughter). But you had to, you really had to learn to write very simply, which was good training for news because, you know, they always tell you you need to write so that a thirteen-year-old can understand it. So, but you're writing for children so it's even better. And we'd take, you know, some old video or something like that and do a little newscast. I mean, they were short little newscasts but I really enjoyed the show that I did at noon, the midday show because we'd get a lot of, as entertainers were coming through, they would stop by, you know, and do our show. Much like the show we're doing now. So that was good training for that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, in those days in these jobs and internships that you describe, were you the, the only black person, I mean, the first one to get to these a lot of times or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, sometimes like, I think there was one other black reporter, I remember briefly when I was at WROC[-TV], but not many. It was always like, well you know this, one would replace one. I got the job here because May Watts was leaving so I became the new May Watts. So it's just, I guess it's just the way the times were back then. So if there was an opening, you know, you got it. And then, covering news in Rochester [New York] was pretty interesting because, because of the weather. It was just so different. I mean, I was there for the blizzard of '77 [1977]. Ooh, I've never been so cold in my life. I had more wrecks. I kept sliding off the road, it was just, just terrible. And I also experienced my first strike. The reporters in my station went on strike. That was pretty interesting. Speaker 1: Hum, so what happened during the, I mean, did--how did you continue during the strike if the-- Speaker 2: Well, we were all members of AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists] and there were certain things we wanted, like more money and, you know, better working conditions, the usual. And so we told the company what we wanted. Our main thing, though, this is so silly. It's so silly how things pop up. The main thing we wanted was no time machine. The station wanted to install a time clock, you know, where you punch time cards. And we argued that journalists don't work by a time clock, and you really don't, 'cause even when you go home, especially if you're producing something, even when you go home, you're reading magazines, you're talking to people, you're, you know, you're coming up with new story ideas. So it's like a twenty-four-hour job. Journalism is a twenty-four-hour job. So we really protested their wanting to put in a time clock and we didn't mind being salaried but we just didn't want to have to punch a time clock. They said you only get paid for the hours you were actually in the building 'cause that's crazy. So that was our major protest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think the news director did the news and, you know, some of the engineers still came in to do their job and stuff, but that was fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was also during the better days of AFTRA 'cause we kept getting paid while we were on strike. Speaker 1: AFTRA doesn't have the same kind of benefits or support. Speaker 2: I bet they don't. Speaker 1: Okay, so, how long were you in Rochester? Speaker 2: I was in Rochester, I guess, from '75 [1975] through--I came back here [Dallas, Texas] in '78 [1978], January '78 [1978]. Story_ID: 101389 Speaker 1: Okay, now what brought you back to Dallas [Texas] Speaker 2: Rochester [New York]. I sent that resume out, and this is the truth. I actually sent resumes like to Hawaii, to the Virgin Islands. I love water and I love warm weather. I figured I could just go work on some island, you know, why not? They all have TV stations. And nobody really answered and then one day, Sheldon Turner [ph.] called me. He owned the first television station where I worked, where the Bozo Show was. And life was so funny how things worked, but he wanted to buy another television station here and he was going to turn it into a business station. Remember they used to run all these business shows and the tickers and all that kind of stuff. Kind of like the CNN thing. He had that vision way back then and he wanted to--had to make an application to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and he said I would like for you to write a letter to talk about my efforts to bring more minorities into the business, blah, blah 'cause you had to submit all that stuff to the FCC. And I said, oh, fine, 'cause, I mean, he really did, he gave me my start and all that. And he hired a lot of women at that station, too, which was kind of taboo back then. And I said, okay. And I wrote him a nice letter and he got it and he liked it. I said, now I need a favor. He said, what? I said, I need to get out of this cold weather. Who do you know? And he said, well let me check around. And he called back, I guess, about a week or two later. And he said, do you want to come home? And I said, not really. And he said, well there's a job that--we were CBS then, he said there's a job opening at the CBS station, I think you'd be really good at it if you come home for a while. I figured, okay, I'll go home for two years. And I called the news director and I said, "Do you want me to fly down for an interview?" No, that's all right. So my first--the day I set foot in the station was the day I started working here. It was so funny. I just sent him tapes and he said I knew the community and people knew me. I mean, he even kind of remembered me a little bit from the other stations, so-- Speaker 1: So this was a CBS affiliate? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were CBS affiliate-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then we went through that whole change. Remember when some of the CBS stations became FOX and a confusing change, everybody did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So then I came and I came as a morning anchor, an education reporter. Story_ID: 101390 Speaker 1: Then in 1980, this show that I worked on started, Insights, and it started because there were people protesting outside our building. It was time for us to submit our application to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and the community said that we had a lack of programming relevant to them. We were doing a monthly show but we didn't have anything regular for the African American community. So, three days we went on the air with a weekly show and we haven't caught up since. But, Joe Bell was the executive producer of the show back then. Oh, I have to nominate him for HistoryMakers. If you want somebody who can--and he was a Tuskegee airman and just a real historian kind of guy but he was our executive producer back then and then I was the host. Then when he retired, then I just kind of coat-tailed him and I became the EP. And--but it started because people were outside protesting. And, you know, in a strange sort of way, that makes you feel good because people really care about you and what you're doing. They knew, I don't know if people say, if you're in the station, you don't have as much power as you think you have, you know, whether you're the anchor. The only people who have power in a TV station are the people who hire, fire and handle the money, and that wasn't us. During the '70s [1970s], and especially the '70s [1970s], they took everybody and put 'em on the air. They did not put us in management jobs. Very few people were in management jobs. So-- Speaker 2: I think that viewers-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in a black community, I know-- Speaker 1: They're smarter about that now. Speaker 2: Yeah, but in those days, they figured if you were on-- Speaker 1: But back then, we were just happy to see somebody on the air. Speaker 2: Yeah, they figured if you were on, it was your show and your-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I mean, if you were on the air, you could do whatever you wanted to do. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And they wondered why you didn't do this. Speaker 1: But now, now I think viewers are savvier, you know, they do want to see people in management positions and things like that so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yup. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: But anyway, that's how this show started in 1980. Speaker 2: Do you know, do you remember what group, you know demonstrated for you? Speaker 1: It was called the, if I call this guy's name, you'd know him. This--the--it wasn't the organization for the Free Flow of Information, it was something, something for the Free Flow (unclear) Marshall. He doesn't live here. He lives like Chicago [Illinois] or New York or something but he had this national organization. We had a local group here. (Unclear) Marshall, is that his name? I'll have to ask Joe and get you the exact name but he sort of put that together and he's doing this all over the country. So he'd wait until time for his station's license to come up for renewal and then that's when they'd go in for the kill. Speaker 2: Now, what's-- Speaker 1: Which was a good strategy. Speaker 2: Now, as we speak here, 2007, FCC has really changed. You can't-- Speaker 1: It's almost non-existent. Speaker 2: Yeah, FCC used to mandate that stations-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --fulfill certain-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --obligations to the community in terms of fairness, the Fairness Doctrine-- Speaker 1: Uh-hum, then they relaxed everything. Speaker 2: --Public Affairs programming. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And if they didn't fulfill those obligations, what happened? Speaker 1: Then your license could be challenged or you could lose your license. Speaker 2: That's right. So, management felt compelled to have public affairs programs and-- Speaker 1: Right. But the cool thing about here, and we lost most of our public affairs programs in Dallas because of that, but the cool thing about here is for some reason, the managements we have had here, and I've lived through maybe three or four management changes and about three sales, but the show has lived through all of that and for some reason, management still believes in keeping the show. I don't know if it's insurance or if, you know what I'm saying, or if it's-- Speaker 2: Well, I guess-- Speaker 1: --but it is a pretty good little show and I think the thing that has made us last for so long is I've tried to keep it very grassroots. I mean, you'll see people on our show that you will never see on news or "American Idol." You know, if, if Ms. Martha wants to call and have her, you know, four-year-old tappers on, we can have 'em on. And we got a big audience, you know, so it's kind of interesting. We've always tried to keep it pretty grassroots. Now we also get a lot of big names. We also, you know, make it available to those people too. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So you get good feedback from the community? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: And the station does get some, some positive, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we're always sold out. I mean, we're paying our way. We sell our spots, so-- Story_ID: 101391 Speaker 1: Okay, Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: All right. Now, yeah, just in recent years, I think, under FCC [Federal Communications Commission], under Michael Powell, deregulated it to where there's no-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, like for example, FOX sells most of its air time. We were, we have very little time set aside for public service announcements. Most of the time is actually sold. So, so we don't get to run as many PSAs. We try to run the local ones and we try to run the ones for things that we sponsor but I have right now in my office, a big box of PSAs, you know, from national organizations and we just--we don't have any place for them to run them so. And it's kind of a shame but that's the business. It's kind of like football, it started out fun and now it's really a real business. I think that's what happened with television. And also, the other thing that surprises me about this show [Insights] is, we have had so many timeslots because we, we used to be on at ten-thirty at night, on Sunday night, which was a great slot, I thought, because people were back from church, they're in for the evening, and that kind of thing. Then, all of a sudden, what came along, the sports shows and, of course, if you could sell a beer commercial, it was a lot better than selling a grocery store commercial in Insights, you know. Speaker 1: Right, the sports highlights shows-- Speaker 2: Exactly, all the sports highlight shows so we lost our timeslot there and then we moved around to several timeslots on Sunday mornings, which still isn't bad as long as we get on early enough so people can still go to church. Speaker 1: Okay, now you haven't been on at five in the morning, have you or-- Speaker 2: We used to do a repeat at five in the morning. We still do a repeat on, like on Monday morning at one thirty. And so you'd be surprised at who watches those overnight things. It's like the same people who watch all the infomercials or, you know, or shift changers. A lot of people really watch at night. And the other thing that surprised me about this particular show is the audience that we get because--well we started out as an African American show but now we're pretty much an African American and Hispanic show. And so you think, okay, that's who's watching, but it's not who's watching, everybody's watching and it's real interesting. And one man told me once who happened to be Caucasian, he said, I watch because I feel like I can get to know those people. I can get to know people on your show, you know, and I was going, okay, good. And whereas he didn't get that same experience with news because news is just so fast, you know, it's, or you know, you've done it. Story_ID: 101392 Speaker 1: So a lot of community people that have organizations that are doing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --one thing or another can come on? Speaker 2: Like we had, just a couple of weeks ago, this woman whose--her name is Reverend Bernita Tyler and she's had a program, I guess, for the last six, seven years where she gets new school shoes for children. And she called, she said, "Baby," they all call you Baby, "Baby, I'm having trouble this year." I said, what's wrong? She said, normally I have like a thousand pairs of shoes by now and I only have three hundred pairs of shoes. I need some more shoes. So, I told her to come in. We had her on the show. Then we have this other thing that they do and use one of our anchor lady's does, it's called "Hometown Hero." I had her do a hometown hero with her and then I think we did a little PSA for her and stuff like that. And she finally got her shoes. So, I mean, that's just kind of the power of the media but it's the power of the media working for the little person too, so- Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101393 Speaker 1: You said when you started, you had a staff of four? Speaker 2: I had a staff of four. Well, there was Joe Bell [ph.], who was, of course, the producer and executive producer, there was me, we had a photographer, editor and we, we always had a secretary. I mean, we had our own, like, little wing at the building. So we were--for all practical purposes, we were an independent unit and we covered stories not just in Texas, we'd go to Oklahoma. We covered like the black towns of Oklahoma. There are several towns in Oklahoma that are still black. Speaker 1: There were thirty black towns-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at one time, Lawton, Boley. Speaker 2: Yeah, we covered those. Speaker 1: A bunch of 'em. Speaker 2: We covered rodeos. We'd go to Houston and do trail rides. We'd do all kinds with the black cowboys. We'd do all kinds of things but, of course, as the business changed, and as funds were allocated a little bit differently, that's the (unclear), as long as you're allocated a little bit differently, the staff kind of started to dwindle. So now we were pretty much in-house and I, you know, I call on newspeople and their stories a lot and follow-up with maybe somebody on set. Speaker 1: Okay, now what other ways has the show [Insights] changed? I think the scope of the--I was reading that now you really refer the show as covering the diaspora of--? Speaker 2: Yeah, because we started out as an African American show and probably around the mid '90s [1990s] or so, the station decided that we would cover all ethnic groups in our area but our two major ethnic groups, notice I didn't say minority groups because of the census report, our two major ethnic groups are African Americans and Hispanics right now, especially Hispanics. That group is growing very quickly. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Dallas, what are the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and our Asian community's growing as well. Speaker 1: Yeah, what's the proportion of, of-- Speaker 2: It used to be. Speaker 1: --African Americans, Hispanics and Asians? Speaker 2: About five or six years ago, it was a third, a third, a third. I mean, we were pretty average but now I'm sure that Hispanic number has grown by leaps and bounds. I think they probably outnumber us because we're so close to the border and it's just really interesting. And it really is interesting getting into that community because you may think one thing about something but then you--when you zero in on that family, then you start thinking another way, you know, about some things. So it's been pretty interesting. Story_ID: 101394 Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of the memorable shows from Insight-- Speaker 2: Well, of course-- Speaker 1: --right, that's the name of the show, Insight? Speaker 2: Yeah, Insights, with an "S". Speaker 1: Insights. Speaker 2: Of course, I always enjoyed the entertainers that we've had coming through and probably my most fun interview, no most interesting, not most fun, most interesting interview, may have been with Richard Pryor. We got him and he was over at the Hyatt Hotel and I had my photographer back then and I dressed up really cute 'cause this was Richard Pryor. And we went over to do his interview and the photographer gets all set up and for some reason his camera jams. I mean, he's having like a bad day. The camera absolutely jams not too far from the station, so he decides he'll come back and get another camera and he leaves me there with Richard Pryor. And what I didn't know about Pryor was that he's pretty introverted. I thought we'd be laughing the whole time but he's really quiet, I mean he's quiet. And so I had to just pick around to try to find things to talk to him about and he had a suite and I noticed that his bedroom door was open. So I saw this like chest, it was open like this, it was full of shoes. I said, "You like shoes, don't you?" He said, "Yes." "Have you been to Neiman's?" He said, "as a matter of fact I did go to Neiman's, let me show you what I bought." And he just opened up. He was showing me all of these shoes and everything. So it was a lot of fun. That was my first experience with the comedian, he was kind of introverted. The craziest interview I've ever had, we went out to do a story on "What is Funk?" with George-- Speaker 1: George Clinton? Speaker 2: Clinton and the Parliament Funkadelic. They had a show here in Dallas [Texas] that night so we went over to the hotel. First they were late so we had to sit in the lobby and wait for 'em. Then in comes all these people and we go up to the suite and we were setting up and George says, and this is also right after he had said that he stopped smoking dope. I don't know if you remember that. But he made this big-- Speaker 1: I remember him saying-- Speaker 2: --grand statement about how he was no longer smoking dope. So we're setting up in the living room part of the suite and everything and I'm going [sniffing] I smell something. And he said, "excuse me" and he went to the back room and you could hear him, he was yelling at these people, "Don't smoke yet while the crew is here," blah, blah but it was coming all under the door. It was just hilarious. And actually-- Speaker 1: About what year is this? Is this when-- Speaker 2: Oh, this had to be like the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s], okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause that's when I had a crew, early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Richard Pryor too? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the funny thing is, when we got back to edit, that was the one story I don't think we could edit. I couldn't write a track 'cause he didn't make sense. I've interviewed two people who didn't make sense. I wonder if I should say this 'cause they're going to pull this up on the Internet, Millie Jackson and George Clinton. They don't-- Speaker 1: No, it doesn't go on the Internet. Speaker 2: Okay, they don't give you bites. They don't give you good bites. They ramble and so the photographer was very clever and he was also our editor. So what he did was, he went to the show that night and he shot some of the show and he used the music and he just used these little quick words from George and it was really quite an artsy piece. I never had to do a voiceover or anything. It was just like, "And here's George Clinton on funk", you know. So that was, that was interesting. Believe it or not, my most interesting story was not over--a celebrity, was not here, it was in Rochester [New York]. You know I told you about all that snow? When Bill Cosby was a new comic, he was performing at, oh what was our school up there? Brook, it was a college. Oh, what was that college? Speaker 1: Stony Brook? Speaker 2: No, it was--oh, I'll think of it in a minute. But he had, he had a performance at this college and we'd been trying to get him that day to be on our noon show and he couldn't make it. So I knew where he was staying and he got snowed in after the show. So I called him, and I said, "Mr. Cosby, can we come by and get an interview with you?" And he said, "Oh, why not." He said he was snowed in so we went by his room and did an interview. That was really good and it seemed like just a year later, he absolutely blew up. Oh, I also interviewed [President] Jimmy Carter in Rochester. Remember when everybody's walking around saying "Jimmy who, Jimmy who?" And because I wasn't like the "big" time reporter on staff, they sent me out to cover Jimmy Carter. He was at a local shopping mall, then all of a sudden who won that year? Jimmy Carter. Speaker 1: That's right 'cause I've never heard of him either. Speaker 2: Yeah, so those were two, two kind of big interviews. Then, of course, we've done Isaac Hayes. You mentioned him. We've done, we've done just about everybody who's come through Dallas. Story_ID: 101395 Speaker 1: Okay, and you've done some travel too associated with the show [Insights]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we used to travel, you know, around the state and stuff like that but I also do some travel writing, like freelance travel writing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I've gotten to go to quite a few places that I've enjoyed doing. Speaker 1: I was reading about-- Speaker 2: I write for different websites and magazines. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: I was reading about a tribute you took in association with a publication of Stella--"How Stella Got Her Groove Back", you went to the Caribbean and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh, I loved, I loved the Caribbean so I've been there a lot. Speaker 1: All right, that's, okay, so, is that a lot of what you do? I mean, I mean is-- Speaker 2: I do that kind of--I have a lot of vacation time so I do that in my free time 'cause, of course, we're not allowed to do it with the station, you know, and take a crew and everything. But when I have some downtime, I love doing that. And I have a very good friend who has like a huge travel website called travellady.com. I even named it for her. And I kind of got started in this because, oh this was about ten years ago, but when you got invited on a media trip, you could take a person with you and her husband was a doctor and so he was like way too busy to go so she asked me if I wanted to go, and I said, oh, yeah. And so I, you know, I kind of started writing my own stories and stuff and that's how I got to do that. But they really are working trips. I mean, you belong to the travel bureau when you get there. So, but it's still interesting. You get to see all those places. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 101396 Speaker 1: Now do you have like--what's your philosophy about public affairs programming? Speaker 2: Um, I guess my philosophy is that if indeed the "airways" belonged to the people, you know, as the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] says, then so does public affairs programming. It's a little bit different for news because it's not as restricted. We can take a longer look at things. We can flip it over, turn it around, do whatever we want and take another look at it whereas news just doesn't have that luxury of time. They have to meet things, they have to cram into a newscast. So that's, that's sort of been the thrill and why I like it so much. Speaker 1: And how would you say it's different from say, cable access or something? Speaker 2: Resources. If you're at a commercial station, you have many more resources and you have a greater audience. That is your greatest resource. You have a built-in audience if you're at a commercial station. If you're at a cable station--well maybe not in Chicago [Illinois], but like here, our local access stations, you have to really build your product to get people to watch. That's kind of hard. Speaker 1: What do you think of something that people should organize around on some level? Because I think public access is even fading. Speaker 2: Yeah, I do think people need to rally around public affairs programming because when it's gone, that's it. That is it and it's disappearing all around the country because, as I said, they can take that half hour and sell it. So even if they stuck an old "All in the Family" in, it's going to make a lot more money than a public affairs show is going to make. So if you see a station that has a public affairs program and it's been there for a long time, the station's probably pretty committed to the community and to that show. Story_ID: 101397 Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hope is that we continue to grow, that we're prosperous, that we have all that we need, that we're loving, that we participate in the world. My fear is that children aren't going to get it, in a strange sort of way. I guess it sort of, this is crazy, but I guess it's sort of how our parents felt when we did things like, wear mismatched bobby socks to school and things like that and they couldn't stand it. But the things that kids are doing now are things that are killing them and things that are setting them up for, not just a life of failure, but a life of illness, maybe, you know, a lot of kids are going to be handicapped and stuck behind these drugs and, it's just crazy. It's crazy all the things that are happening. As a matter of fact, I'm going back to a show, we did a show, there's a nightclub here where there's a rap song, and it may have been a local rap song called "Put Your Hood Up." Silly me, I thought they meant like the hoodie on the jacket. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And there was a shooting that night and some kids got killed and stuff and so somebody said, well I know the cousin of one of the boys who got killed and I said, "Oh, well, let me talk to him." And I said, "what's this thing with put your hood up?" And he laughed. He said, "No, ma'am, it's not about, it's not about the clothes, it's about the neighborhood you come from." And this rap song, at a certain point you're supposed to shout out your hood, you know, South Dallas, Oak Cliff, you know, wherever your--Carrollton. You shout out your hood, that's what that meant and after awhile it gets kind of rowdy and people start fighting and if you've got more people from this hood than that hood, I mean it's just kind of silly but it ended up in some kids' lives being lost. And so I invited that young man to the show and he brought his girlfriend with him and they explained a lot of things I don't think adults really understood about how young people are thinking today. And granted this young man did not come from "the hood" as we're thinking about. His parents were teachers. I mean, he was from a very middle class family and there were things like, he said, well, we shouldn't have to wait for things. I'm going like what? He said, well, if you see, if you see your buddy, your guy or your dog, whatever he called it, if you see your dog and, you know, and he got his girlfriend in a car with some twenties on it, then you want some twenties on your car. I said, what's twenties? At first he had to explain that to me. And I said, why, why is that so important 'cause I thought people steal wheels and I thought people would jack you up and shoot you to take your wheels and stuff. We see those stories all the time. Well, you just want it, I mean, that's the way to roll. That's the way to roll. I'm going, okay, does it bother you that this could get you killed and he said, "no." And I just went--I mean those are the things I don't understand and those are the things that I fear about our young people. And if this is a phase, I hope it's over soon. I just--I don't get it. I still don't get it. We did a whole show and I want to submit that one eventually for some kind of an award 'cause I know I must have looked absolutely crazy, looking at this guy. I mean, he, there were just so many things like that he talked about. And the young lady with him, she comes from a family that's not of as many means as he is and she talks about how her mom had a lot of problems with drugs and stuff like that so she ended up being the head of her household. She has some younger siblings to raise and she talks about having to juggle the money and how she wasn't able to date when she was fifteen and sixteen 'cause she was working and, you know, things like that. And so she said, when you have an opportunity to get something, even if you get it illegally, it's like, "yeah", you know, "I got it". I'm going like, but it doesn't make sense. Aren't you afraid you're going to go to jail? And she said, not really, we don't think about that. We just want it. We want it now. So, I think kids don't have the sense of delayed gratification maybe that we had. I talked a lot about my dad [John Henry Brown] and the one thing, I think he taught us was, that you can wait and it's even sweeter sometimes when you wait, you know, especially if you end up being a part of acquiring that like working and saving your money and getting it. But a lot of young people now don't feel that way and it's absolutely frightening. It's very frightening. As a matter of fact, out in my neighborhood, we have kids who are like really mischievous. They leave mailboxes open and they paint the fences and stuff and on the house next to me, they painted some letters and some numbers and stuff. So I wrote 'em down and I thought I'd ask this little kid what they were about. He says, "Oh, that's just a gang symbol." I'm going "Gang, I've got a gang in my neighborhood, oh, no." And he said, "yeah, as a matter of fact, this means Carrollton, Texas and this means this is the gang's number." I mean, he's like really explaining the stuff to me and I'm going like, "Whoa, I bet a lot of adults don't know that." You know, we pass by that stuff all the time. We have no idea what it means. So, that guy eventually washed it off his fence but it's just I think we need more forums like that so we can kind of understand. Speaker 1: Right, I think you're right. Speaker 2: And I don't want to keep losing our kids. Speaker 1: You're right. Story_ID: 101398 Speaker 1: Tell me, when you think back at all the things you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Major thing that I would do differently? Probably not. The only thing I think I would have done differently is I may not have worked as hard as I have worked putting in so many hours because as I get older, as I get old, I'm getting old, I realize how precious time is and there is so many things that you want to do and so, I mean, as I lose members, and I told you I came from a very small family, I had Thanksgiving dinner year before last, this is the year after my mom [Earlene Punch Brown] died, there were seven people at my table. That was it. That was everybody and so that's when it kind of clicked that, you know, time is really precious. And so I try to spend--I still have an aunt left and I have an uncle left and I have a sister and then she has two grown children, so I try very hard to spend as much time with them as I can. Speaker 1: Typically, what kind of time are we talking about on a daily basis and during your career? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean a time could be a phone call. I call everybody in my family every day. Well I always did though with my mother, anyway. Speaker 1: No, I mean your work day. I mean, what kind of time were you talking about? Speaker 2: Well, my work day. My day varies because it depends on what I have to do which it sounds like really nice but it depends on what you have to do. Sometimes I come in--usually I try to get here about nine 'cause we usually have some kind of meeting about nine or nine-thirty, but if I don't have any appointments that afternoon, I might leave, you know, and go do something or go out to the community and visit somebody or something. The other part of what I do now, we do lots of outreach projects in the community like festivals and stuff where you can go out, you know, and give away stuff. So I have to plan those. So I have a lot more meetings out and site inspections and just setting up all that stuff. So, it's pretty varied. Then, that's usually like a Monday, Tuesday, and then by Wednesday, I'm kicking into show mode, the producer mode, getting ready to get the show together for Friday. So, if we have any interviews to do or something like it, I usually do them on Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday so we can post them on Friday, post the show on Friday. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's pretty flexible. Sometimes it runs over into the evening. You know, if you have something to do, sometimes it doesn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I'm, I have quite a bit of liberty at scheduling my time, you know, as I need to so that's been really nice. Story_ID: 101399 Speaker 1: Who are some of your heroes in the broadcast world? Speaker 2: Oh, in the broadcast world? Well, Michelle Clark, of course. Loved Ed Bradley. Ed Bradley and I got a [Alfred I.] DuPont[-Columbia] Award the same year. I will never forget that. And I have to tell you my Ed Bradley story 'cause I had the biggest crush on Ed Bradley. I mean, like a bad crush and he was coming to town to do a speech and we went over and we shot some tape, and this was in the '80s [1980s], and we shot some tape and everything and then I sat down to do my one-on-one with him and it was like that scene in Broadcast News, sweat just started to pour. I mean, I had my new little dress on and everything. I was just dripping and I said, "Well, Mr. Bradley, I need some preliminary information before we do the story." He says, "I'm thirty-nine, divorced with no children." I went [drops to the side] (laughter). I just went oh my God, I'm messing up this thing here. I mean, I was going to--that is exactly what I wanted to know (laughter). But, we had, we had a pretty good interview. That was probably the most nervous I'd ever been, sitting face-to-face with Ed Bradley. I think he was a real icon and he was really cute too but that was probably--he was one of my heroes. Oh what's the woman's name, oh God, I should be able to remember this. She was one of the first anchorwoman, [HM] Iola Johnson, I think who's already on your website. I went over to Channel Eight once to interview for a job over there and they told me no, I looked too much like Iola. I'm going, I don't look like Iola, we just have the same hairstyle. That was back in the day. So, Iola Johnson, Pauline Frederick's, that was the other woman at NBC I was trying to think of. Loved Barbara Walters. Loved Barbara Walters to death. I think she was at NBC too. She was doing those early Today Shows when I was there and I just--I have so much respect for her and, of course, the queen, Oprah. We all love Oprah. I like Oprah because of her business aspect to the whole business. It's like she took it to another level. She used the unaired part and she learned the business and then she went and got her own and that's, that's a lot. That's a lot to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And very respectable. Story_ID: 101400 Speaker 1: Now you received many, many awards. Which ones, you know, I don't want to put you on the spot, but which ones mean the most to you? Speaker 2: Well, the [Alfred I.] DuPont[-Columbia] Award, I think, was a biggie. We got that one for a series we did, well this was when I was in youth, I guess in '78 [1978]. It was entitled, "Children Having Children" and teen pregnancy was a big deal then. And we interviewed these young girls in the Dallas [Texas] school district who were pregnant. As a matter of fact, I want to do a follow-up on that. I want to try to find these same girls and--'cause their children may have children now, but it was just kind of shocking. I remember the youngest I interviewed was eleven, I think, and pregnant and I said, what's the worse thing about being pregnant? She said, my mom won't let me ride my bike. I'm just going, oh, my God. So, yeah, we got a DuPont for that. Our show has received, well just last year or year before last, I think we got an commendation from the State of Texas for being one of the longest running shows in Texas. We went before the state legislature. That was kind of awesome and they gave us an award. The City Council has recognized us two or three times on our anniversaries. We've done--oh, we got an award from NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], that was kind of special 'cause it's like getting something from your kinfolks. We got best Public Affairs show in the country. Then we've gotten a couple of Emmys, some Emmy nominations and our local awards like the Matrix Awards and, you know, the Press Club Katie Awards from the Press Club and things like that. We've gotten probably almost every major award at least once. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 101401 Speaker 1: Now, tell me, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there, is there, what today would you say is your, would you say is your legacy? Speaker 2: All the people we've had on the show, I think one, I have two, three bios, but I think the one we sent in said, "She's been putting people on TV for more than thiry years" and that has been kind of the joy of it. I mean, we're here and we sort of drive the ship but it's really not about us, it's about the people who watch us. That's kind of my philosophy. So, I hope, you know, that when I'm gone that the show continues and there will always be people to be on it. So I think that's been the biggest legacy. If we can keep this show or something similar to this going, you know, in this market, that'll be a wonderful thing for our hometown people. Story_ID: 101402 Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have children at all? Speaker 2: I don't have any children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I ran too much to get married, so--(laughter). I've had a very longtime friend and he has children but after I fell out of baby mode it's kind of like, eh, let's just keep having fun so--but I love children. I have a little grandniece and my niece--I have a niece and nephew and they each have one child now. So I'm going through that whole thing where it's kind of like being a grandma, you get to play with 'em and they drive you absolutely crazy but it's so much fun. Speaker 1: Okay, and your sister [Donna Brown Beasley]'s still alive? Speaker 2: Yeah, my sister's married, and as I said, she had the two--well it's so funny, we did things like totally different. She always, she has known since probably sixth grade what she wanted. She wanted a wedding, she wanted a husband, she wanted a car, two-car garage, she wanted a dog and two kids. That's exactly what she has. I mean, that's exactly what she has. She could care less about going to Europe. You know, she's like really into her family and making sure that everybody's safe and happy and she does all those things at church and then when the kids were little, she did all those things at school and all that kind of thing. Me, on the other hand, if something came through that had wheels on it, I wanted to be in it, on it or go wherever it was going. So, I'm--we're actually lucky to have been, you know, to have had such different personalities like that 'cause we now do some business dealings. We do some real estate stuff and she's really good about handling all the money and the finance. So she did that with my parents, too, when they became ill and as I said, I'm really good about the other part. I'll go out and find a house and she'll say, we can afford it or we can't afford it and take care of the rest of it, so, so we're a pretty good team. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: For there to have been only the two of us. Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to raise before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well, no, I'm just sorry I don't know more about my family. This really makes me want, makes me want to go out and start searching my family tree now because, you know what, I never even--well, I told you that, that I don't even know the names of my grandparents on my dad's side. It's really interesting. Speaker 1: You're not alone. You're not alone. Speaker 2: I remember I was going to call somebody this morning to see if anybody knew because they were, I mean, they passed so long before I ever got here and nobody ever really talked about 'em. I just came from one of those families the whole thing was to survive, I guess, you know, two generations ago, yeah, two generations ago. So, it's been pretty interesting but now I really do want to search my family tree. I even want to do one of those swabs and find out where we're from. I know we probably had some relatives in some island though 'cause I feel so at home when I go to the Caribbean or you know to the West Indies or somewhere like that. I just feel like really at home. So I bet if I were to start searching I'd find something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 101403 Speaker 1: Well my last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a hard one, isn't it? I'd probably like to be remembered for--I'd like to be remembered as a fun-loving person, as having contributed something to, to the earth, to the world that gave me so much. I'm really concerned now about all of this global warming and all the changes to the earth 'cause, I mean, it's been good and I want it to be here, you know, for generations to come. So, I'm kind of getting that whole eco thing but I guess most of all, I'd just like to be remembered for having done some good. You know, having left one little footprint of good for somebody. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Oh, thank you. Story_ID: 101404 Speaker 1: Tell us about this photo and who's in the photo, when was it taken and what was the occasion or where. Speaker 2: That one? Speaker 1: Yup. Speaker 2: That's me, I was probably about four, five years old and it's probably taken in Denton, Texas. I'm all dressed up so it may have been close to one of those birthday parties or Easter or something. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Probably about four or five. Speaker 1: Okay, '54 [1954] or '55 [1955]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Just repeat the part about Denton, Texas. Speaker 2: It was in--we probably shot it in Denton, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay, good. Next. Speaker 2: Oh, that's me. I was at Southern Methodist University [Dallas, Texas], in college. I was probably like a sophomore. I think I went in afro-mode sophomore year so it had to be like 1968. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a shot of my mother [Earlene Punch Brown] and me at the airport. That's when I was leaving for New York. So that was probably 1972-ish. Speaker 1: Very good, next. Speaker 2: That was graduation day at SMU so that had to be June, I believe, of 1971. Speaker 1: Good, next. Speaker 2: That's me at WROC-TV in Rochester, New York with those old editing machines. Speaker 1: Okay, next photo, please. Speaker 2: That's a shot here at the station with our interns. I used to be over our intern program and that was probably around 1985. Speaker 1: Hold on a second. Got it. Speaker 2: Oh, that's a shot of my father, John Henry Brown, my sister, Donna Beasley and me. That was following a stroke, he had a stroke. Speaker 1: Year, approximate? Speaker 2: Probably, let's see, he died in 2003, probably like 2000. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's an awards program. It had to be something, I don't remember what it was, but it's an awards program. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, that's a shot of me and [HM] Smokey Robinson. He was here to talk about his new frozen food product and that had to be maybe 19--wait let me look at my hairdo, maybe, maybe, oh, that was, that had to be like 2002, something like that, I was in ponytail mode. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's a shot of my sister, Donna and me. I don't know why we always lean in and giggle. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: That's a shot of my very dear friend, Carla Winfrey, Oprah's cousin, and she used to be the host of our show. Speaker 1: If you could, because of the historical nature of the project, try to give us the timeframe. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, she was here--she left here in '99 [1999], so that had to be maybe '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Okay, good, next. Speaker 2: That's a shot of me with the statue at the Red Cross Museum in Geneva, Switzerland. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: Oh, that's a shot of my niece and nephew when they were younger, Candace [ph.] and B.J. Beasley, and let's see, B.J. looks like he might be about, what does that look like, about eight? Seven or eight? And he's thirty-one now, so--(laughter) Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You can do the math, okay. Speaker 2: Do the math. Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, that's just an old station glamour shot, head shot, and that was, let's see, big hair, big hair was probably late '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, got it. Speaker 1: That's a shot of the Bulldog Band from Booker T. Washington High School [Dallas, Texas] and I'm in there somewhere, I was playing flute, and this is also the group of kids I was with the day [President John F.] Kennedy got shot. And our band director, James Gray, is off to the right, over there, in his little jacket. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): where you are and can you identify the row? Speaker 1: Let me get it to her real quick. Speaker 2: I'm right here. Speaker 1: Right there? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. I always had a lot of hair. Speaker 1: Point out your row. Speaker 2: Yeah, right there. Speaker 1: Okay, good (unclear) your finger, okay. Next, all righty. Speaker 2: This was our prom and look on the back of that. Was that '66 [1966] or '67 [1967]? Look on the back of the picture. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]. Speaker 2: That was 1966, junior prom, with Leonard, I forgot his last name, but he was taller than my hair, so, and my homemade dress I made in high school. Speaker 1: Got it, good, okay. Speaker 2: It's ugly. Speaker 1: Do those individually. Speaker 2: Those are my grandparents. Okay. Speaker 1: Bottom photo first. Speaker 2: That's my grandfather, Randal Punch. He died '71 [1971] and my grandma-- Speaker 1: Rotate 180 degrees so she's at the bottom, please. Speaker 2: --Amy Punch and she died in 1956, when I was seven. Alzheimer's we know now, we didn't know anything about Alzheimer's then. Okay. Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: Is that it? Thank you...