 Story_ID: 131043 Speaker 1: [My name] is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer. And I wanna state that Cheryl Burton is, for posterity's sake, is very, very important to our organization because she helped us launch The HistoryMakers here in Chicago [Illinois] on November 7, I think, it was 2000 [November 7, 2000]. Speaker 2: Yes, so that's fourteen years ago, yeah. Speaker 1: Years ago. So she's very, very important like a sweet angel. Speaker 2: Oh, man, don't make me cry 'cause it's, don't do that today (laughter). Story_ID: 131044 Speaker 1: So you want to state your-- Speaker 2: Oh, my name is Cheryl Annette Burton, Cheryl, C-H-E-R-Y-L, Burton, Annette is my middle name, A-N-N-E-T-T-E, Burton, B-U-R-T-O-N. And I was born on Christmas Day, 1962 [December 25, 1962]. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is Tuesday, May 19th or May 20--let's see. May 17--what's today, the 20th, 19th? Today is the 19th. Speaker 1: It's the 20th. Speaker 2: Today is the 20th [May 20, 2014] (laughter). Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: Dah (laughter), I'm a good interview (laughter). She doesn't know what day it is. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Today is Tuesday, May 20, 2014. Speaker 1: So I'm not-- Speaker 2: It's 83 degrees outside in Chicago [Illinois]. Okay. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We are at 190 North State Street, the headquarters of ABC-7, Eyewitness News [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a TV news anchor, a television news anchor for ABC. Story_ID: 131045 Speaker 1: Now, we ask five People magazine-ish questions, short answers-- Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, wow, really? Thanksgiving meal, the Thanksgiving meal, that whole, the turkey, the dressing, macaroni and cheese, greens, cranberry sauce and the meal for Thanksgiving, and turkey, yeah, um-hum, yummy. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, God, purple because it, it's royalty. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Oh, that's hard. I was born on Christmas [December 25, 1962]. The holiday season is my favorite, the holiday season, yep. Speaker 1: And favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Ooh, probably, South Africa. I don't know. I have lots of places, South Africa. I'm trying to hit every wonder of the world and every continent before I pass away, and I've done five of each. So, yeah. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, God, favorite phrase. That's kind of interesting. Probably "God is good." Story_ID: 131046 Speaker 1: So I wanna start out by asking you about your parents. So can we start with your father? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: His name-- Speaker 2: His name. Speaker 1: --and what you know about his growing up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and his family background. Speaker 2: Very opposite of, for my parents. My father's name is Simpson Leo Burton, and he was born on Christmas Eve [December 24, 1928], which is very cool. I was born on Christmas Day [December 25, 1962], and he was born on Christmas Eve. He was born in Birmingham, Alabama. And he was in the Rosedale, he kind of grew up in the Rosedale-Homewood [Homewood, Alabama] area of Birmingham. He--I just saw some pictures. He was in the Homewood Theater Company, in the choir. I had no idea that my father could sing. But he is one of three sons, and his mother is Edna Burton and father is James Burton--I mean Simpson. I'm sorry, Simpson Burton. And she worked for the Rockefellers. She was a maid. My father's descendants are not college educated. However, all three of his siblings, they are all college educated, but his parents are not. And my father was many things. He was a, you know, a visionary. And he was one of the African American--we can start in high school and then college. He went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] with [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.]. He's an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity] with Dr. Martin Luther King. My father also went to Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] where he met my mom [Hattie Burton]. That's where he eventually graduated from Miles College in 1957. And he also went to Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama] as well, but, you know, most of his schooling took place. And then my father went to Washington, D.C. to go to law school. And he thought he was gonna be the first African American president of the United States of America. So he thought if he went to Washington, D.C. to study law, he would be immersed in the legal, political system that would get him closer to the White House, and all the time, my mom and her--their five children were back here in Chicago [Illinois]. And she was raising them, and he was sending his paycheck home. He had a little bitty apartment which we went to visit for the very first time last January. I had never seen his apartment, and I took pictures. And it was very emotional because he lived in a really small apartment next to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] because, you know, we had no money. There were five children back in Chicago, and he was chasing his dreams. He used to be a precinct captain here in Chicago for [HM] Todd Stroger's father, [HM] John Stroger. And so he had political aspirations ever since he came here. But if we go back to--my dad enlisted in the [U.S.] Army--I mean in the [U.S.] Air Force. My parents moved from Birmingham to Cheyenne, Wyoming to follow their dreams. And so when they went there, he enlisted in the Air Force, and my mom went there as well. And she was educated and she could be--she could teach typing. And she, the reason she had to teach typing was because in Cheyenne, Wyoming when my parents moved there, they would not allow a black woman--they were called Negroes back then, to teach white children in the City of Cheyenne, Wyoming. So my mom was educated and had degrees, but they wouldn't allow an African American, a black, a Negro woman to teach their white students. So my mom ended up typing, teaching typing in the Air Force, and my dad had enlisted in the Air Force. So they made a living that way, and two of my sisters were born in Cheyenne, Wyoming. And then afterwards, they moved to Chicago. Speaker 1: So what made them move to Cheyenne? Speaker 2: Because my dad enlisted in the Air Force. Speaker 1: And that's where he was stationed? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where he was stationed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, could this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and he played the clarinet, which, when I was in seventh grade, I joined the school band. And I played his clarinet that he had. Story_ID: 131047 Speaker 1: So did-- how far back do you know on his [father Simpson Leo Burton's] side of the family? Is it to your--his--your grandparents, you know, his parents, your grandparents or do you know further-- Speaker 2: I know, well, we--on his side, we are descendants of Choctaw Indians and slaves. So, but I know back to his grandparents was Daddy James and Mama Ruby. And they lived in Homewood, Alabama, and they had a house with a swimming pool. And that's where we learned to swim at their house. They were entrepreneurs. My father has been an entrepreneur as well. My brother is an entrepreneur. But they had a little store that sold candy and chips while you swam. And they let every, the neighborhood kids swim in their pool, and they made money and charged money. Speaker 1: So what was their business then? Speaker 2: They, well, my mom [Hattie Burton] said that they--let's see, they did hard labor. His grandparents, my father's grandparents did hard labor, as well as his mom [Edna Simpson Burton]. You know, she was a maid because they were not educated. But they had--they lived in Homewood, Alabama, and I remember we'd spend every summer in Birmingham [Alabama]. And we would go visit both sides of the family. And we'd stay at her house. Mama Ruby's house had no lights. They had lots of lamps with, you know, burning candles and things like that, and it was very scary. I remember I couldn't wait till daytime, every day. And they had a big creek running by their house, so I used to chase frogs and ladybugs and make earrings out of them because that was, they lived kind of in the country. And that was his grandmother's house, Mama Ruby and his mother would stay there because she would go visit her own mother. And he would come down for the summer when school was out because my parents had no money. So they packed the kids up in the Cadillac and drove down I-65 with, you know, Yummy pop and baloney sandwiches and fried chicken. And we'd spend the whole summer in Birmingham because that was free, free living and free food, (laughter) whereas if they stayed in Chicago, it would have a little bit challenging. But that's as far back as I can go, Daddy James and Mama Ruby were my father's grandparents, which make them my great grandparents. Story_ID: 131048 Speaker 1: Did he, did your father [Simpson Leo Burton] talk about growing up in Homewood or Birmingham [Alabama], did he talk about that at all? Speaker 2: He'd talk about it all the time. But we lived it, so we knew everybody. We, you know, I meet people all the time who say, I knew your dad from Rosedale. And Rosedale was considered to be the very uppity, you know, upscale African Americans. If you lived in Rosedale, Alabama, you had it going on. You know, you were very smart, you were slick, you were charming. But he talked about it. He just always had talked about dreams, and the cool thing is that, you know, they read the 'Defender' in Chicago [Illinois], the newspaper, the 'Chicago Defender,' and that was their source of information so they can move, make their way from the South to the North. And full-circle moment for me is I used to deliver the Chicago Defender as a papergirl at twelve years old. My father also was a paperboy in Birmingham, Alabama in Rosedale. So it's very cool that we both had the same job. And he did that, he was very enterprising. He would ride his bike, I rode my bike to deliver papers. When it was cold, my mom [Hattie Burton] drove me around to deliver the papers. But he was very enterprising. He had a dry cleaners, and he had a store, of course. He drove the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] bus when they first got to Chicago because that was a job that he could get right away, not knowing anybody and not being connected any kind of way. But he drove the CTA bus when he first got to Chicago. And then he started teaching. He also was a school teacher and taught at DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Phillips [Wendell Phillips Academy High School] and several other schools, which I meet people all the time that, they say my father changed their life. In fact, when he died--it was actually twenty-two years ago [July 10, 1992] because he died while I was interviewing to work here. So I know his death date and my start date at this job. And he died, and we put flyers around in McDonald's and in the law library because my dad used to love to go sit in the McDonald's in downtown and drink the coffee and talk to homeless people, talk to young people, encourage them to follow their dreams. And then he'd go in the law library and just talk to young students who were studying for law, law exams and he would encourage them, kind of--he was just proud to, you know, push them and encourage them. But he was, he was a visionary, and I look back and all the things, and, you know, this is a man who wanted something for his family. And it was very challenging and hard--and disheartening for him because of the fight, the struggle. He was smarter than so many people, but didn't get the opportunities that people who were less smarter than him. And that was a struggle. I think, I think it affected his health 'cause it was always a fight, a constant battle to be smart, to be better, to work harder and still be disrespected just because of his skin color. And that took its toll over the years. You know, you're growing up in the South, and my family though never talked about, never let race have any factor in determining your success. So we didn't walk around talking about people and their color. It was just "do", be smarter than everybody. My parents would come home every day and all five of their kids would be lined up on the couch. And there'd be an easel in the living room, and one at a time, each kid had to come up and say what they learned every day on that easel because they wanted to know if you were paying attention when you were in school all day. My dad always said, if you're gonna leave the house, you might as well as be smarter when you come back home. So if you're gonna leave out the door, you'd better be smarter. You better have learned something today. So that was pressure, like, oh, well, man, well, what am I gonna learn? You know, you're in front of your four siblings, and they've--well, we learned this today, and you didn't learn--oh, you didn't learn anything? You have nothing to contribute? Okay, we gotta talk (laughter). So you had that fear, you know, of making sure you did learn something. And education was huge in my house. My mom wanted four things for her children. She wanted us to be able to roller skate, swim, be college educated, and sew (laughter). Speaker 1: Those were the four (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Those are the four, and that was my mom--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Swim? Speaker 2: Um-hum, swim, and roller skate and sew and be college educated, have a college degree, not go to college, but have a college degree. And all of my sisters and brothers have post-graduate degrees and PhDs and MBAs and master's degrees. My mom has two master's degrees. So education was very big, and, you know, my father has his law degree, and he's also a teacher, and so education was very big in our family. Story_ID: 131049 Speaker 1: So talk about your mother [Hattie Burton] and her background and what you know about her family? Speaker 2: Well, my sister--when I was, you know, discussing that this was gonna take place, she said that, you know, my father's [Simpson Leo Burton's] descendants [sic, ancestors] were field slaves and my mom's descendants were house slaves. So it's very different. On my mother's side, everybody is educated. My grandparents are college educated. My mom and dad, you know, my mom and all of her siblings are college educated, and my mom has master's degrees, but on my father's side, they might go to high school, his parents and their grandparents might have gone to eighth grade. My father, though, and all of his siblings have post-graduate college degrees. My mom, she was born-- Speaker 1: Give her name too. Speaker 2: Oh, my mom's name, she was born Hattie Eloise Woods, and then she married my dad, and her name became Hattie Eloise Burton, of course. And she was born in 1930 [April 5, 1930], during the [Great] Depression. So she talks a lot about that, you know, being poor in the South. But her parents were entrepreneurs, of course. They had a store in the back of their house because they had to, you know, make a way and make money. They sold candy and cookies and bread. They'd sell a slice of bread, one slice of bread. They'd sell one cookie. They'd sell one cigarette, whatever they could sell, you know, or you know, one gulp in their cup and sell that. But so my mom was educated in a one-room schoolhouse, an actual little, red schoolhouse. There were kindergarten all the way up to twelfth grade in this one-room schoolhouse. And my mom had to walk miles and miles to get to school 'cause they lived in the country. And she said they would stop halfway between and build a fire to stay warm before they could get to school. So I like to think my mom was incredibly intelligent because she was going to school with people who were seniors in high school, and she was just five in kindergarten. And her parents were educated. So they made sure that their children were educated as well. My mom excelled and she skipped so many grades when they finally moved out of the country, my mom went from like kindergarten to third grade when she started school. And they didn't say anything because she was smart, and she got right in there. My mom probably, always wanted to be a teacher. Her sister was a teacher and her other sister was a registered nurse, and my mom taught forty years in the Chicago [Illinois] Public School system. She loved having children. And, actually, though they didn't plan on having five. I think my dad probably wanted one or two, but, you know how that is (laughter), so my mom's pretty cute. So (laughter), but so my mom went to high school, and she excelled very well. She, you know, she learned how to sew. Like I said, she wanted us to sew. We all had our own personalized sewing machines where each one was labeled with our names, and we had to sew an item. If we wanted to spend the night over a friend's house, you had to make some clothes. So that was very big for my mom, and then, of course, she goes to college. I think my mom was a virgin when she met my dad. I really do. I ask her all the time, and she doesn't answer. But I think she was, and they went to prom in a Jeep, and she thought my father was so handsome and so smart 'cause she was raised in the country, you know, and he was that slick, Rosedale [Homewood, Alabama], entrepreneur, you know, I've got visions and dreams. We're gonna move to Chicago. We, you know, we're gonna do things. I got plans. I'm gonna president and so she was very impressed. But he was very nice to her, but a go-getter, you know. He had a great spirit about life, and he was always doing something that would better the lives of his family, no matter what the risk. He would do that. And so they met, and mom's the baby of three girls, by the way. Story_ID: 131050 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: So your father [Simpson Leo Burton] is three boys--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but he's the-- Speaker 1: He's the oldest. Speaker 2: Oldest, and she [mother Hattie Burton] is the youngest. Speaker 1: Right, yep, that's, isn't that interesting (laughter). So then they started dating, and then they got married at her sister's house. So I have pictures over there, I think, yeah, I have pictures from their wedding day. And then, you know, they went to Cheyenne, Wyoming and started their life and started having children. Speaker 2: So how old were they when they got married? Do you know? Speaker 1: I think twenty-five years old. Speaker 2: Oh, so they were older? Speaker 1: Yeah, they were older. They were considered older for the Southern way, you know. And back in the day, that was considered old for my mom. Yeah, she was twenty-five. By then, some people had five kids, you know. My mom-- Speaker 2: So she had gone to get her education. Now,-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --where did she go? Where did you say she went? Speaker 1: My mom went to Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama], and-- Speaker 2: She went to Miles, okay. Speaker 1: --she graduated from Miles College as well. Speaker 2: They didn't meet at--but he went to Miles too for a-- Speaker 1: Yes, they met at Miles. Speaker 2: They met at Miles, okay. Speaker 1: Yep, they met at Miles College, yeah. So, and then, of course, like I said, my mom was a teacher in the [U.S.] Air Force. She was the typing teacher, and she taught all of the veterans and everybody in the Military how to type because her mother [Dasie Woods] made sure that they could type. That was very important because, you know, back in the day, they would tell, you know, women of color, the only thing you can be is, you know, a secretary. And that was pretty much it. So, of course, my mom's parents thought they could be anything, but they did say, you know, make sure you know how to type. And my mom was the same way. We always had to take typing in high school, no matter what kind of high school you went to, I had to take typing every year. So I was a really good typist, and, you know, I had great papers. I, in fact, I typed a letter to the principal of Whitney Young High School [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois] in 1976, asking him can I be a student at the school because it was just opening for that year for the first time. And principal lived a block away from my house, so I typed the letter, which I still have, asking him--because I wanted to be a doctor in eighth grade. So I thought Whitney Young would provide that opportunity, but I chose Lindblom [Robert Lindblom Math & Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] because they had Latin and most medical terms are written in Latin. So I chose an old school versus this new school with elevators and air conditioning and all of that. But I just wanted to make sure I could get accepted. So I had options. And I did, so the typing came in handy. So I digress, but, so my mom taught typing, and, you know, and they had the two children. And then they decided to move to Chicago for a better life because they said there was opportunities here-- Story_ID: 131051 Speaker 1: So do you know how--I know that two of the children were born in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Michelle and Shirley. Speaker 1: Michelle and Shirley, but, do you know how long they [parents Simpson and Hattie Burton] actually stayed in Wyoming 'cause that's-- Speaker 2: I don't-- Speaker 1: --very unusual. Speaker 2: Yes, isn't it unusual? I'm like what did you guys, what, you know, probably, it had to be at least five years because my brother was born here [Chicago, Illinois], and my sister--we're two years apart. So it was probably about five years, yeah. Speaker 1: And can you give your siblings names and birth order? Speaker 2: All of them? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay, the first one is Michelle Burton, and she's the oldest, she's a girl. And the next one is Shirley Burton. The next one is William Burton, and then me, I'm fourth, Cheryl Burton, and then the last one is Sherri, while Sherri Turk 'cause she's married. Speaker 1: She's married? Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's Sherri Burton Turk (laughter). Speaker 1: So you're saying--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My older sister's married too. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: My oldest sister is married too, yeah, but she goes by like Burton-Mays. But, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you, how many--what is the dist--I mean the age, the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We're two years apart, and we go from forty-nine to fifty-nine. Speaker 1: So you're exactly two years, wow. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so evenly spaced that way. Speaker 2: Yeah, my mom [Hattie Burton] was pregnant for a long, a lot. People are always making fun of my mom being pregnant because we're two years apart. You have to get pregnant, what like, four months after giving birth or something like or six months, and it was like, oh, she's pregnant again. You know, and nobody watched my mom's children. She was always with her kids, and it was like, oh, God, she's having another baby (laughter), you know. But all those people who talked about my mom, they look up to her-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and her children today. So-- Speaker 1: So, now, you're--are there four girls and one boy? Speaker 2: And one boy, um-hum. He's in the middle. Speaker 1: He's in the middle, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So he's after--no, he's before you? Speaker 2: Right, he's right next to me. Speaker 1: Right, he's right next to you. So he's the, you've got an oldest, older brother? Speaker 2: Older brother, right, who I wanted to hang with my whole life. I was a tomboy forever. I did everything, go-cart, build go-carts, you know, play four-square, play basketball, that was attached to the back of the garage. I was just right there. I fought his fights. If somebody picked on my brother, I was like, let me get my book bag, and I punched out many a people with my book bag, fighting with my brother and like, don't talk to my brother, and don't mess with my brother 'cause my mom always said, you know, you all take care of each other. You all can fight in the house, but when you get outside, it's, yall against everybody else. And that's always been the case, so, but I was like, hard, you know, don't mess with my brother, all the time. And it was just something. And I wasn't scared either. I (laughter)-- Speaker 1: That's cute. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wasn't. And he, I know I was a pest 'cause he's like, oh, God, are you coming with us again. I just wanna hang with my guy friends. I'm like, I ain't got nothing to do. I wanna go with you (laughter), you know. I wanna go with you, but I was, yeah, I was a tomboy, jumping garbage cans, climbing trees, all of that, broke, my front teeth chasing after a ball, jumping on a garbage can. Story_ID: 131052 Speaker 1: So what's your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest memory? Oh, wow, probably when my little sister [Sherri Burton Turk] was born, so I'm two years apart. She might have been like eight months, still in a, you know, a carrying thing or something because I hid her 'cause I probably didn't want her to be there (laughter). So I hid her behind the kitchen door, and my mother [Hattie Burton] could not find her baby. You know, she's running through the house, where is--and she gave everybody a whipping but me 'cause she figured I was too small to have done that. So all my other older siblings got in trouble. They got spankings because she thought that they had picked the baby up and hid her behind the door. My mom panicked looking for this little girl, and I'm like deety, deety, dee. I'm like (laughter), it was so cool 'cause I--she was gone. She was out of the way. And then (laughter), it's like she's gone (laughter), and they got in trouble, not me (laughter). That was so cool, yep, it was the coolest thing. Speaker 1: (Laughter). That's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I know, but that's my earliest, one of the earliest memories, and I remember Christmases so vivid because that was my birthday too [December 25]. And there were loads of presents and bicycles and my parents would hide them all over the house. So we didn't think we were getting anything. And you kind of like, the first one, like maybe at five. I was like, what are you all doing opening my gifts. It's my birthday? Well, and they're like, no, it's Christmas, and I'm like, no, it's my birthday, 'cause my birthday is Christmas Day. So that was kind of, you know, a rude awakening, and I always, I'm traumatized by it. And I had a birthday party at five years old and nobody came. It was on Christmas Day. So I had some really early memories, yeah. I mean I learned my lesson. I had a birthday party and nobody came 'cause (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's Christmas. Speaker 2: --'cause it's Christmas Day, like, so I've never, ever, ever had a party on Christmas Day. (Laughter) So. Speaker 1: You know what's interesting 'cause people say that it's hard when it's on a holiday period, you know, on holidays, especially Christmas. Speaker 2: Right, but nobody--my parents gave me both. Everybody ask me, did you get cheated. And I was like, no, never got cheated. Speaker 1: So you would get extra presents. I would get birthday presents and Christmas presents on Christmas. I vividly remember that. I don't ever remember not having both. And the, you know, the cards would say it, on the gift, you know, this is for Christmas and this is for your birthday. Story_ID: 131053 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So I want you to take, and you did a little bit of that, but I'd like you--to take you back to early, and, you know, in your life, I mean around, you know, past two years old. But can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 1: Oh, man, peanut butter, spaghetti. My dad [Simpson Leo Burton] frying his hair with a newspaper, this kind of like presser he made out of his hair. He would take, he would bind newspapers together, make a square, and then he'd heat it up on this black skillet, this flat-top black skillet and heat it up. It had like a, it was iron, and it had a handle so he could take it off and move it around. And he would get the newspaper hot, and my dad would slick it, slick his hair, part it to the, you know, part it to the side, and he would make his hair lay down with the newspaper, you know. And he was looking good, you know. He had that look. He didn't put Congolene or anything, no perms or any kind of product in his hair. But that's how my dad got, you know, to lay his hair down. He used the newspaper that he heated up on the stove with this iron skillet, this flat skillet. It didn't have sides to it. It was just a flat skillet, and he would, you know, so that's one of the memories. Of course, snow was huge 'cause we got a lot of it growing up in Chicago [Illinois]. I remember lots of spaghetti because it went a long way for five kids, and my mom [Hattie Burton] could make that. And it would just last. And I remember fried chicken, you know, going in the car, driving to Alabama. We had fried chicken a lot. And a treat, you know, which is still today, I love McDonald's. My mom would get McDonald's or White Castles [White Castle] every payday, which was every other two weeks. And it was just like joy. Oh, my gosh, deliciousness, McDonald's. You'd get, you know, a sandwich and a fry and Coca-Cola. And by the time she got it home, most of the coke would spilled in the car. But you got a little bit of it. So I remember those are some of the smells and doing flips in the grass. I'm, you know, I did gymnastics very well. So I was a ballerina and did that for thirteen years. So I would dance in the grass too, and I remember doing that. I would do flips out front 'cause it was safe then. You could flip, and you could play in your front yard and people would drive down the street and enjoy the show and I'd do a handspring or a back handspring or, you know, round up, and all of these gymnastics. But we, that was kind of, some of the smells in the house. What was your other question, was-- Speaker 2: Sounds. Speaker 1: The sounds, oh, on Sundays, which I still have that tradition, my dad would only let us play spiritual music and Christian music and gospel music. You couldn't have that--Sunday was always church. My mom was like, if you can go out Saturday night, you can go to church on Sunday. That was like standard in the house. So if you weren't planning on going to church on Sunday, you couldn't go out Saturday night. So we always had music playing in our house. My mom believed that every home so have a musical instrument. So we had a piano. My brother had drums. He had a guitar. We had my father's [Simpson Burton's] clarinet, but we always had music in our house, all the time, playing on, you know, the 45 [45 rpm records]. And my dad would listen to 'Open Our Eyes.' That's like one of his favorite songs because they would close WVON every night with close, the sound of the radio. That was the song that they would say goodnight to, was 'Open Our Eyes.' And that was music that we, one of the first spiritual music sounds that we've ever listened to. And I still love it today, James Cleveland, you know, 'Oh Happy Day.' That was another song that we played a lot in our house. And my father was very, very deep, and I'm very, very deep too. So I get a lot of that, his deep intellect because he just thought so far ahead of the game, and he just couldn't get it executed because of, you know, because of what he looked like. And, you know, because of the times, stay in your place, you know. We're gonna only let you go so far. But, you know, I have his DNA, and I, you know, environmental, you can't help be what you're surrounded by growing up. But, yeah, music was always big in our house, and it's still big in my house. Story_ID: 131054 Speaker 1: [My] sister went into cardiac arrest, and she was six months-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): We're back on. Speaker 1: --six months old. And she was blue. And at that time, Negroes were not allowed to go to the front door of any hospital, except for a hospital that was, catered to Negroes. But in Cheyenne, Wyoming that wasn't the case. So they had instructed my father [Simpson Leo Burton] to take my sister in cardiac arrest to the back of the hospital, which she probably would have died had he gone around to the back. And he got defiant. And he said, you know, my baby is dying. I'm coming through this front door. You're gonna have to kill me, arrest me, do whatever, but my baby is dying. And my father crossed those front doors and went inside. And my sister is gonna be sixty years old in September. Speaker 2: Wow, that's your--so that was Michelle [Burton]? Speaker 1: That was Michelle. Speaker 2: That was Michelle, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, you know, that kind of spirit lives on in me. You know, if my father was willing to lay his life down, I have to do something with my life to contribute. If he was willing to give his so that his daughter could live, you know, that's love. That's what parents do. And I'm like, wow, that's kind of amazing to me. And I can't let that go. Speaker 2: 'Cause, I mean I, you know, we have not interviewed anyone from Cheyenne. We did go to North and South Dakota. And I know that there-- Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: --are more--I mean there're not many there. But there're more in Cheyenne than we realize, but still, you know. Did they talk about the black community there or outside of--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I don't recall any. I mean all the pictures I have of my mom [Hattie Burton], and I don't think they, you know--my sister's godparents are Caucasian. They have godparents that are Caucasian. So they didn't have a lot of life outside of the [U.S.] Air Force. Speaker 2: So that--do you think that they were freed or felt freed at all after coming out of Birmingham [Alabama] and being in Cheyenne? They don't talk about that? Speaker 1: My parents never talked about that like being freed, or kept down. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Their life was about success, forward. They didn't look back. They didn't talk about anything like that. I wasn't raised in a house where that was even a discussion. You know, I had to learn a lot. Just like going to college for me. I didn't care who my roommate was gonna be. I didn't care where they came from or anything, social, you know, racial background, didn't care one bit 'cause we were raised, I mean we had some Caucasians living on our block, and there were maybe two families growing up in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois]. We grew up in Chatham. And there might have been two families. And they kept to themselves, and- Story_ID: 131055 Speaker 1: You know, they say Chicago [Illinois] is the most segregated city on a Sunday. And that's everybody went to their, you know, respective churches, and that was kind of--we were raised a lot in the church. I mean bible study. My parents [Simpson and Hattie Burton] made us do the Lord's Prayer every night, line us up on the bed, five kids, parents, and we'd put, you know, our hands in this position, and we would recite the Lord's Prayer. And I know it was on the wall at my house. It was a purple velvet version of it. So that's how I learned the Lord's Prayer, from this purple, velvet version that was, you know, decoration in my parents' room. It was wall art. You know, people have things on the wall. My parents had the Lord's Prayer on the wall. Speaker 2: So, so what was, what was family life? Talk about that, and you're in the, you're the fourth child so-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --what is family life like that, and, you know-- Speaker 1: And do you want me to text my mom and ask her Cheyenne [Wyoming] details? And then I can read it and we can-- Speaker 2: No, that's okay. No, you're-- Speaker 1: Are you sure? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, that's fascinating about Cheyenne. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I know. I need to get some more details for you 'cause you've not interviewed anybody. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, but they would, she would like some for me-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I think, I'll just text her and, as you were saying, your question, when you say life is, when though? Speaker 2: No, so I, well, I'm talking about, first of all, where are you growing up? Where is the house? Or do you go to different--do you live in different parts, you know, with the five kids or are you--do you start in Chicago in Chatham? Speaker 1: Yes. I was born at Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois]. My sister, Sherri, was born at St. Bernard [Hospital], and my brother was born at Provident Hospital. And when my parents came to Chicago, they lived in an apartment--actually, I think [HM] Jesse [L.] Jackson might have been their neighbors or something. The Jacksons, because my grandmother [Edna Burton] was the babysitter for the Jackson children [Santita Jackson, HM Jesse Jackson, Jr., Jonathan Jackson, Yusef DuBois Jackson, and Jacqueline Jackson]. Yeah, and we played with them growing up. So we played with the Jacksons, all of them, 'cause, you know, there's four of them, and their ages are kind of close to our group. And my grandmother was their babysitter. So I've known them since three and four years old because, of course, we went over to my grandmother's house because she had to watch us too. So, but we, but all I remember, the only house I've ever lived in was on 83rd Street in Chatham. Speaker 2: So is this your grandmother on your mother's-- Speaker 1: My father's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: On your father's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, my father. Speaker 2: So she came-- Speaker 1: She came before everybody. You know, 'cause she was working for the Rockefellers and she left her three sons back in Birmingham [Alabama] with their grandmother, Mama Ruby, those three sons because she had to do--I mean the Rockefellers in New York [New York City, New York], they needed a maid, and they were paying, and that's the only job she could get. So she left her three sons with their grandmother. And then she came to Chicago and then sent for her children. That's how that happened too. She came to Chicago before my mom and dad came to Chicago. Speaker 2: So do you know what year your parents come to Chicago? Do you know that? Speaker 1: Let's see, yes. My, let's see. My brother is 53, so 54 years ago, 54, yeah, 54 or 55 years ago they came to Chicago. Speaker 2: So what year would that--that would be-- Speaker 1: Let's see--so-- Speaker 2: It would be 1960? Speaker 1: No, my brother was, no, I was born in '62 [1962]. My brother was probably born in '60 [1960], so let's do. And you're close though. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're close though, so 2014 minus 55--54 is 1955 [sic, 1960]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So they came in 1955. Speaker 1: Yeah, 1955. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 131056 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So when they come [to Chicago, Illinois], what are they saying it's like here for them, you know, because they have three-- Speaker 1: They have two when they get here-- Speaker 2: Two when they come. Speaker 1: Just two. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: And then my brother was born here. Speaker 2: Okay, and they move in with your--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: They had an apartment somewhere on, like in the Jeffery neighborhood [Jeffery Manor neighborhood or Jeffery Avenue], over that way. Speaker 2: So what we call South Shore. Speaker 1: Yeah, South Shore, but I never lived in an apartment. My parents [Simpson and Hattie Burton], I was born, I came home into a home. My brother as well never lived in an apartment. So they lived there, you know, because they came here-- Speaker 2: Just to get a start--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Just to get started and staying with family. But then they bought a home in Chatham which was this, you know, up and coming, very upscale Chicago neighborhood and lots of African Americans, that's where they were moving when they were part of the migration. Of course, there was not the Dan Ryan [Expressway], you know. My father and mother talked about Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, the dad, all the time. They would watch the news. They would listen to the radio and what was going on in the City of Chicago, and my dad wanted to be a part of it. He wanted to be a part of the progress, the movement to better the lives of African Americans. Speaker 2: So Chatham is a very, I mean it was a desired location. Speaker 1: Very desired. And-- Speaker 2: Right, so can you talk about what, now where was-- Speaker 1: Upper middle class at the time, you know. Speaker 2: So what was your address? Speaker 1: 204 East 83rd Street. Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: And my mom still lives there. Speaker 2: Oh, she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And my sister owns the house on one side of her, and then a house three doors down from her, which is her home. So. Speaker 2: So what was your block growing up? You know, who lived on the block and, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's kind of interesting. We had, Ms. Steele [ph.] lived next door to us, and Ms. Steele was kind of a friend to the people that run numbers (laughter). Yes, she was a single lady, very beautiful. And she had friends that had lots of money and influence and she would go out with them and go to night clubs, you know. She was in the mix, and where they wore the furs and, you know, 79th Street, Rialto Theatre. She would go to theaters, and they had night clubs, the Cotton Club. They would go, but that was our next-door neighbor on the left side, on the east side. On the right side were the Keyes. They had two daughters, very educated, two school teachers. Their daughters today are very educated young ladies. One is a journalist and the other is a lawyer. And then down the block, a couple of doors down, who are my best friend today, we are still friends. It was a family of ministry, Mr. Little. He was a minister, Bishop Charles Little. He was related to Malcolm X 'cause Malcolm X, of course, his maiden name was Malcolm Little. But he was a cousin. So they had a church, and then around the corner--there were a lot of people who worked, you know, in factories, but they made a lot of money, postal workers, blue-collar jobs. But then we lived across the street from the Perkins [ph.], and it was the first mixed family I'd ever, you know, mixed meaning she brought her children, he brought his children. And they got married and had--I'd never even seen it ever happen. And so that was across the street from us, and then down the street, we had a couple of car salesmen, Mr. Brown [ph.]. They had one child, but, you know, working class, people who worked, some police officers in the neighborhood as well. Speaker 2: But those are all stable jobs too. Speaker 1: Very stable jobs, and, you know, every house had a garage and a backyard. And we played in the backyard a lot. I would wash my car in the backyard. I would practice flips in the backyard because I was a cheerleader in high school [Lindblom High School, Chicago, Illinois], which by the way, I never missed a single day of high school in four years. I had perfect attendance in high school. And so we really had fun. We had slip-and-slide in the backyard. We had water toys that we played with. It was very safe. We kept our bikes in the backyard, and, in fact, the very cool story is one of my neighbors would steal my bike every night and ride it to a job, and he would return it every night. He could come and walk and get it. He worked the overnight job from like midnight to 8:00. And he would take my bicycle and ride it to his job and then he would return it. And it would be there. And one day, I caught him, and I was like where, what are you doing with my bike? He says, I've been doing this for a long time, and I just put your bike back in the backyard. And he rode it every day to his job. And I said, okay, thanks for letting me know. It was just that cool. It wasn't a fancy bike or anything. It was blue. It was a Schwinn. It was old. It had two handles like that, big wheels with a back seat you could sit on. It wasn't, you know, fancy, but it was his mode of transportation to make a living for his family. And-- Speaker 2: And so he was an older, he was an adult? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was an adult when he took the bike-- Speaker 2: Okay, I see. Speaker 1: --every day. Speaker 2: So what did your parents say about that? Speaker 1: They, you know, at first were like, what are you doing in our backyard, you know. And then he explained, and he was like I need the bike so I could go to a job. It's the only way I can get there and be on time 'cause if he took a bus, the buses didn't really run, that he could get on time. And so after he explained it, it was fine. Story_ID: 131057 Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to church? You--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We went to Greater Institutional [A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois] growing up-- Speaker 1: Bap-? Speaker 2: --and Monumental [Baptist Church], Monumental was a big deal, Reverend Thymes [ph.] was the--that's kind of where we got baptized and where we went every Sunday. But Greater Institutional was also my nursery school, which I have pictures over there, that we would go to. But the church that the family went to on Sunday was Monumental. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: That was growing up, but I went to Crerar [Memorial Presbyterian Church] on 81st and Calumet when I became an adult. That was where bible study was, Girl Scouts, summer camp, track-- Speaker 1: Wait, when are you--what age are you going to-- Speaker 2: We're probably talking like ten, twelve. Speaker 1: When you're at Crerar? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's where I started going to bible study and Girl Scouts was held there and summer camp was held there and tutoring, choir rehearsal. I was in the choir at church. Speaker 1: Now, when you say "you" went, the whole family went? Speaker 2: The whole family went. Speaker 1: Right. So you changed. You-- Speaker 2: Right, we changed because it was closer. It was like four blocks from the house, and, you know, we were growing up because we wanted to get involved in things. And they had Girl Scouts, and they had bible study, and they had day camp. So we switched over because, and my mom [Hattie Burton], ultimately became a deacon in the church, and still is today, a deacon at the church. Story_ID: 131058 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So what are your schools then? What schools--what's your elementary school? Speaker 1: I went to, the first one was Jane A. Neil [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which is at 85th and Michigan, and then from there--that only went up to sixth grade. So from there, I went to Dixon, Arthur Dixon [now Arthur J. Dixon Elementary School], which was seventh and eighth grade, right there on 81st and St. Lawrence. And then for high school, I went to Robert Lindblom [Math & Science Academy High School] at 61st and Wolcott. And then I went to the University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana, and I don't have post graduate. That's my highest education (laughter). Speaker 2: So when you were in elementary school, can you describe--what are, what kind of child are you? Speaker 1: Oh, I was--my mom [Hattie Burton] said I came out and my head was up. I was looking around. She said it was up, sticking straight up. I wasn't crying. I wasn't doing all the baby stuff. She said I was looking around and my head was very strong. And it was up. I didn't need somebody to hold my neck up or anything. She said I was out there. And that's how I've been running ever since. I've always been juggling three and four jobs, and my mom would pick me up at one job, and I'd change uniform on the way to that job. I've always had a job ever since I was twelve when I was a paper girl, when I delivered, you know, the Chicago Defender, which recently I was on the cover of it. So that was a full-circle moment for me. I was on the swim team on Harlan High School while I was in elementary school 'cause I loved swimming. And I thought I could go to [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] or UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] on a swimming scholarship. That was kind of the dream 'cause I wanted to go far since so many kids in the house, I wanted to go as far as I could. But, you know, my mom was like, my money is going to Illinois. Now, you can go wherever else you want to go, but the money is going down to Illinois (laughter). So, but it was fun. I was adventurous. I traveled all over with my friends who were only children, so they needed companions. So I would go wherever their families would go on vacation. My mom would let me go, and I always worked. I always had goals. I always had dreams. I was an ice skater. I would try anything, and I was very generous and very compassionate at a very young age. My mom talks about one time there were a bunch of ants crawling over my grits, and I wouldn't kill 'em. Instead of killing the ants, so I could eat my grits, I ended up, they just messed up my grits and ate my grits because I couldn't see, you know, hurting the ants, and they were hurting my food. But she said from way back, she could tell I was a very compassionate person. But I had a fun childhood, and I loved being born on Christmas [December 25, 1962]. I always had lots of friends, but I was a go-getter. I went for everything. You know, people will tell you they're not surprised about any success I've had because I've always gone for everything. I've auditioned for everything. I've tried everything. I've dreamed about everything. And I've done it. Like if I said I was gonna do it, I said I was gonna do it, I did it. Story_ID: 131059 Speaker 1: So what things do you start with? You said you were in the Girl Scouts, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm still a Girl Scout. Speaker 1: So, you're still a Girl Scout? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm still a big Girl Scout. In fact, I just spoke at the 100 year anniversary in Houston [Texas], very powerful about how Girl Scouts matters and how it changed so many lives of young people. And my niece is now sixteen, and in fact, I'm going to Camp CEO, which is a Girl Scout camp, in a couple of weeks. And I'm gonna spend the night at Butternut Springs Camp [Camp Butternut Springs, Valparaiso, Indiana] which is where I used to go for summer. And I'm going to be a CEO and bring my value to twenty-five girls from across the state who are coming to spend a whole week with CEOs from across the state. The Kraft CEO, ABC, CEO, but these are all CEOs of big companies, Fortune 500 companies. They spend a week with the Girl Scouts and teach them value and girl scout was so important to me because I got to open up, just my thinking in the way I lived and what is possible. I mean I've lived in tents with women and, that I didn't know, and I didn't mind. It was fun. I learned how to make a fire, and I had, you know, badges were a big deal. I was, I've always been very competitive. I wanted my badge-sash to be full, you know. And you had to do projects and you had to do projects. There was criteria. I'm gonna get mine because I want my badge. And I was looking for it the other day because I was at an event, and they asked me, do I have it. And I can't find it. I know it's somewhere in my mom's [Hattie Burton's] house in closet full of little patches. But, yeah, Girl Scouts was very big. Speaker 1: So were you a Brownie and then-- Speaker 2: I was everything. I started as a Daisy, a Cadet. I was a Brownie, I was all of those things, and I have pictures, of course, of me in my girl scout uniform, but I was all of that. I was a Girl Scout for many years, and it's funny. I was in the troop with, you know, Stephanie Neely who's now the [Chicago, Illinois] City Treasurer, Sandy Reynolds--her name was Sandy O'Bannon. Her mother was our troop leader. So Kim Neely [Kimberly du Buclet], who, you know, ran for [Illinois] state representative or she, I think she was appointed state rep. So we have some very prominent young ladies that were Girl Scouts with me, and it was very impactful because Girl Scout teaches you survival skills, and it teaches you about being confident as a young girl. I think one of the greatest gifts parents can give their children is confidence so that they can go out in this world and believe they could do anything. And Girl Scouts was that for me. Plus, it was adventurous. I got to go ice skating on ponds in the middle of Wisconsin, and meeting girls that I would never have interaction with because they came from different parts of the state. And they weren't from my neighborhood, so I learned how they lived too. And it taught me, I could try out for anything. I've done, I've been in pageants, I've--you know, I was in the marching band at [University of] Illinois [Champaign-Urbana], and I got to go to the Rose Bowl, the Liberty Bowl in a marching band. And it was just a fabulous experience. Story_ID: 131060 Speaker 1: In that period, so you first join--do you think the [Girl] Scouts were the first thing that you joined, is that--'cause I'm trying to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think ballet was the first thing. Speaker 1: So ballet, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because I started that at three, and every year there was a performance. And also piano. I did piano, and we had piano recitals, and that was very big. My piano teacher was a nun, and she was very strict, and hit my knuckles with a ruler regularly if I didn't-- Speaker 1: What was her--do you know her name, remember-- Speaker 2: I couldn't--Sister, it was like Sister Sarah. I didn't know her last name because you wouldn't dare call her anything else, but Sister Sarah. I have a picture of her, you know, and me curtseying after my piano recital at a grand piano. Of course, I'm not sure what I played. But that probably gave me my confidence to perform in front of people. And I was always nervous, but it was fun. You felt like you accomplished something when it was over. But I would have to ballet because I-- Speaker 1: So where did you take ballet lessons? Speaker 2: At the YMCA on 83rd Street [Chicago, Illinois], and Enid Collins was my ballet instructor for so many years. And her daughter, Karen, was also in the classes with us. But my younger sister, Sherri, also went. So my mom [Hattie Burton] was basically a cab service, dropped my brother off at basketball at the YMCA, then drop us off for ballet classes. And then my other sisters were in high school by then, and they were doing their own thing, working at Sears and pep rallies and cheerleading and pom-pom's and things like that. So. Speaker 1: But when you think about that, this is--I mean it's five kids and you're in a lot of activities. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So it's not like you were deprived of any of those activities. You're, you're in everything. Speaker 2: No, I did. And I, you know, I think back and I, you know, I wrote my parents [Hatttie and Simpson Burton] a letter at twenty-seven, after I took my sister's class over. I was teaching her class when she went back to get her PhD. She took a sabbatical, and I wrote my parents a letter of gratitude. It was about seven pages long. And I talked about thanking them for loving me and encouraging me because I took that for granted. I had no idea that was something that was normal, that parents did that on a regular basis until I started teaching. And I saw that it was very different. Feeding me, I thanked them for that. I thanked them for saying that you're smart. I thanked them for loving me, and I thanked them for--they were broke all the time because I was always in something. Ballet costumes are very expensive, you know. Cheerleading at high school was expensive, even though I worked. But, you know, what people don't know is that my mom shopped at Salvation Army all the time, and she got us used Girl Scout uniforms, used ballet shoes. She would get us used tights, and we would just wash them and I looked just like the rest of the girls in my group. But a lot of our things came from second-hand stores. And we didn't know the difference. We were proud to still wear it because my mom bought it, and I remember the, you know, the prices would be twenty-five cents 'cause it'd be written on, you know, a little tag or something. But she would go to second-hand stores or thrift shops and find what she could for coats and shoes because there were five kids. And there was not a lot of money to, you know, supplement all of these activities 'cause I was constantly begging for money for something, school trips, you know, girl scout camps. And I felt like, well, yeah, I should be able to go. You guys need to find some money some kind of way (laughter), you know. So, and they did, you know, all the tutu's that I had, the toe shoes, all the lessons and, you know, we did more pancakes days, selling pancakes to raise money for costumes at the Y [YMCA]. And I would swim at the Y too, and then-- Speaker 1: And your mother had said swimming was-- Speaker 2: Very important to her? Speaker 1: Now, why was that? Where do you think that came from? That's what I'm--yeah, 'cause how black people say-- Speaker 2: Yeah, be-- Speaker 1: And don't, with girls and their hair. Speaker 2: Right, it's very, it's very common in the African American community that children drown. Of the people who drown every year, more, the majority are African American children. There are a lot of mothers, African American mothers who don't swim. And my mom just wanted to make sure we could do that because we grew up around a swimming pool. And she had seen it happen, and she didn't want her children to ever not be able to do anything. That was the thing. She wanted us to be able to compete on every level with everybody. There's nobody who's gonna say your kids can't do this, that. We could run, we could jump, we could bicycle, you know. We could sing, not really good, but, you know, we could play the piano. We could play drums, clarinet, I mean she didn't want her children to ever grow up and say, had any regrets. And we might not have been great at everything, but we got to try everything. Story_ID: 131061 Speaker 1: And, now you're also growing up in the '60s [1960s] in Chicago [Illinois] where there's a lot of activity. In those early years, you're still very young, so you're-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --not really aware so much of those, of what's going on and all of that. You, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I can't even tell you that there were any-- Speaker 1: Because even, really but you're eight in 1970. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So you're, so you're-- Speaker 2: I had, you know, I remember an incident, probably twelve years old, going down to Birmingham [Alabama]--like I said, I didn't have any incidents in Chicago, but going to Birmingham and I remember seeing a prostitute. And I had never seen a prostitute, and I remarked about it to my mom [Hattie Burton]. And she said you'd better be quiet. They will lynch you down here. And I had, I was like, well, they don't do that in Chicago. But, of course, Emmett Till was murdered [1955 in Money, Mississippi] because he had whistled at a white woman, and this prostitute was a white woman. And I just thought, I was saying, hi, to her 'cause I thought, hey, this is pretty cool. And my mom, and I remember that incident still today, that it happened. But that was Birmingham. That wasn't Chicago. I didn't have any--you know, my parents probably took the brunt of a lot of racial inequities, but they never shared it with their children. And we never saw that. Speaker 1: 'Cause that would have been--if you were twelve, that would have been about, around 1974 really, that you were twelve. Speaker 2: Yeah, because I graduated eighth grade [Arthur J. Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] early. I skipped a grade. I skipped second grade. So I was ahead of the game all the time. So I was thirteen when I went to high school. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was thirteen. Speaker 1: So you were always a good student? Speaker 2: I like to think so (laughter). Speaker 1: So, can you talk about that? Speaker 2: I like to think, I mean I was honor roll, you know. I had AP classes, honors classes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But before-- Speaker 2: --in high school [Lindblom High School]. Speaker 1: --but let's, even before high school. I'm trying to go chronologically. So at, you know, you were, you elementary school was Dan-- Speaker 2: Jane A. Neill [Elementary School] and Dixon. And I was, yes, I like to think that I was an excellent student there. I probably got straight A's, seventh and eighth grade, did very well on the [U.S.] Constitution. I don't know if you had to take the Constitution to graduate from eighth grade. Well, in the City of Chicago, back then, you had to recite the Preamble, verbatim, which today, I can still recite the Preamble from memory and you had to get 70 or better on the Constitution. And that was--or else you could not go to high school. So I was always, I liked to win. You know, I have trophies in my house. I read the most books one summer. I still have that trophy. I was the reading queen. I still have that trophy in my house. I honor it--it's plastic and cheap and little, but I still honor it because I read the most books for one whole summer. I was a spelling bee champion. Remember the white sheets of paper, and you wrote the spelling bees on there. I mean I liked getting hundreds. I liked getting A's. I liked getting--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So you were a spelling bee champion in what grade? Speaker 2: Probably six, seventh, fifth--fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth grade, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were in it in sequence? Speaker 2: Um-hum, in the school. Now, I wasn't the-- Speaker 1: No, no, I meant in the school. Speaker 2: --you know, the Scripps, the national Scripps Spelling Bee or anything like that. But in the school, I was the spelling champion. Speaker 1: So what are your sister and brothers saying about this? Speaker 2: They're all smarter than me. They're way smarter than me (laughter). My sister is like a Mensa, you know, genius IQ. I have two other sisters, and one, she's Mortar Board down in [University of] Illinois [Champaign-Urbana] where your name is on the wall, you know, chiseled in the wall because of your grades. That's my baby sister. And my brother is an IT [information technology] guru, you know. He could probably fix everything wrong with anything technologically wrong with any computer system. He's self taught. So that's pretty amazing. He's eighteen years in owning an IT company. He does things I don't even understand, but he's very creative and smart in that. But I don't know what my sisters say about me. I'm probably the most generous person they know. That's probably what would first come out of their mouth, and I'm funny. I'm really funny. They would, you know, they would say that. Speaker 1: And so were you--did you always have that role, like--what I was just wondering--oh, we've gotta change tape. Speaker 2: I was voted class clown in eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was a class notable. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Was class clown. Story_ID: 131062 Speaker 1: --in her class at Bowen [High School, Chicago, Illinois], very, very smart, so. The baby sister and, I mean, we always joke, you know, everybody's more intellectual than me 'cause they have so many more degrees than I do. Everybody's got post-graduate degrees, but I just have my B.S. [degree], and I'm doing all right. I'm doing all right (laughter). Speaker 2: I think you're doing okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, M.B.A [degree] from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. That was my sister, Sherri [Turk], and that was a family project, you know. We all paid for that to make sure she got it done. And that was big, you know. My cousin, I have a very cool story about my cousin. Her name is Kimberly McClure, and she graduated from high school, and she got a full ride to George Washington University [Washington, D.C.]. But she had gotten accepted to Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and didn't have the money, so my brother-in-law, who went to Stanford, and his brother went to Stanford, did a whole conference call. And everybody got on the phone and said, what can you chip in, what can you chip in? And everybody agreed to pay for it. And so my cousin, instead of going for a full ride, she went to Stanford University, and we paid for it. And then, [U.S. Secretary of State] Condoleezza Rice writes her a recommendation, and she gets scholarship money. And then she goes on to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to get a master's degree. Because of how this world is, Condoleezza Rice's mother [Angelena Ray Rice] was the teacher in the next room with my mom's [Hattie Burton's] sister, my aunt. And still today, I just saw Condoleezza Rice at an event that me and her did together. And when I showed her my aunt's picture, her face lit up because my aunt and her mom were schoolmates, teaching together in Birmingham, Alabama. And so she remembers my aunt and my mom very well. And, of course, Kim, she remembers her very well. And Kim graduated from Stanford with Chelsea Clinton and then she went on to go to Harvard and is doing very well. And now she works for [U.S. National Security Advisor] Susan Rice. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Yeah, my cousin works for Susan Rice now in New York [New York], yeah. And Susan Rice graduated Stanford with my brother-in-law, Jonathan [Turk], who is married to my sister, Sherri. Speaker 2: And Sherri is your youngest-- Speaker 1: Is the baby. She is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's the baby. Speaker 1: Yeah, the baby genius who's the Mortar Board student. Her two children go to Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Now, when you say the Mortar Boards-- Speaker 1: At Illinois, when you are an academic-- Speaker 2: At University of Illinois? Speaker 1: Yeah, the University of Illinois, in Champaign-Urbana-- Speaker 2: UIUC--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --the Mortar Board is an academic genius board where your name is engraved when you have academically excelled at the university. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: So, yeah, and my sister's name is on that board (laughter). I went there, but my name is not on the board (laughter). But I was in marching band (laughter). Story_ID: 131063 Speaker 1: So you, so here is a young person. You're doing flips and you're-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that was real young, you know, four and five 'cause ballet started, and we learned--that's how I learned acrobatics and tumbling because we'd put on the 'Nutcracker.' We would do 'Swan Lake.' Every year was a big ballet production and the 'Nutcracker' had lots of, you know, majesty and fun and playful things. So I did several parts in that. But I enjoyed it, you know. I look back, I remember my costumes, and I just remember begging for money all the time, needing costumes for something, you know, being in this group. And I'm sure my parents [Simpson Leo and Hattie Burton] were like, can't you just sit down and just go to school, you know. But I had jobs. I have always worked, and sometimes I had two and three jobs. Speaker 1: No, but how old were you when you start working? Speaker 2: I started working at fifteen for my sister in Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], for Elaine Powers Figure Salon. My sister was the general manager of the Midwest and the Eastern region. And so I thought my sister was just like the empress, and I was like, can I come live with you for the summer. And she lived in Philadelphia. She had a Corvette. She was all cute, you know. And she was my oldest sister, so she's eight years older than me. So at this point, I am in high school, and she's, you know-- Speaker 1: Early twenties. Speaker 2: --in her twenties, yeah, and she's driving a Corvette, you know, and she's big job. My sister's got two master's degrees at this point, and she's this general manager of this figure salon. And so I come and live with her, and she's the same sister--I would wear her clothes and put them back. And she would know that they were, very funky, like, Cheryl did you wear--you could have washed it. And she would go off on me. I mean crazy, like, you're wearing my clothes and you left them stinky (laughter). So, but I would, I'd wear 'em and put 'em back like, she's not gonna know. But I went to live with her, and so I worked for her as a figure consultant at the Elaine Powers Figure Salon. They called it a service consultant. And I had to learn scripts, and my sister was so hard on me. And today, she still feels bad about it when I bring it up. But I was very good because she was like, you're my sister. You've gotta represent, and you're not supposed to be working here, you know. I want you to make sure you're doing a good job. And so I had to learn all of the phrase, all of the, you know, how to answer the phone, how to do all the exercise equipment. I had to do tours, you know. It's time to--"Hi, my name is Cheryl. It's time to team up and trim down with Cheryl. So please turn off all of your electric equipment and meet me in the back of the room for our selection of dance and groove." That was like (laughter)-- Speaker 1: So really, this was really--I mean these salons were beginning--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, they were big. Speaker 1: They were big. It would be the beginning of the fitness craze, sort of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, you know, they would put the thing around you, and it [vibrating sound], you know, do that. And then they would have like exercise routines in the back, and you would work out in the back of these figure salons. It was a big deal back in the day. So I probably was, you know, I was fifteen so that had to be what, 1975, something like that. Speaker 1: So you did that over a summer? Speaker 2: Yeah, for a summer, went to stay with my sister, 'cause I told you I liked money. I liked to earn money. Story_ID: 131064 Speaker 1: I didn't like to ask, asking my parents [Simpson and Hattie Burton] for money all the time. I remember when I was twelve, I wanted a Kick-and-Go, the Schwinn Kick-and-Go was this very new thing. It was a scooter and a bicycle all in one. And you had brakes on it, and you would kick it, and it went. And it had two wheels in the front and one in the back, but you stand up on it, and you kick it. And I wanted on. And my mother [Hattie Burton] didn't get it for me. So I ran away. I ran away for twelve hours. Do you think she missed me? Not one bit (laughter). I ran across the street, to my girlfriend's house, Stephanie Freeman's [ph.] house and Crystal Freeman's [ph.] house. She didn't miss me at all. When I came back, she was like, girl, you know, you haven't done the dishes. You need to get those dishes done. I was like, I ran away. You didn't miss me? I've been gone for twelve hours. No, so, and she finally got me the Kick-and-Go, and I probably didn't even play with it very long, probably didn't even, you know, I just wanted it 'cause it was the hot, new thing. And it probably is still in my mom's house or in the garage, (laughter) somewhere at her house. Story_ID: 131065 Speaker 1: So what things are you thinking at age twelve that you wanna be? Speaker 2: I wanted to be a doctor at twelve. That was it. I wanted to be a prima ballerina but that was not an option. So my parents [Simpson and Hattie Burton] were like, try something else. Get another dream, okay, 'cause you're going to college. So I thought, ooh, I loved children, so at first I was gonna be like a pediatrician. Then I found out pediatricians take care of kids till they're sixteen. So I said, no, I think I'll go for anesthesiology. And so I went to U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] in the pre-med program. So I had a double major of biology and psychology. Speaker 1: And you had said that you went to Lindblom [Robert Lindblom Math & Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] over-- Speaker 2: Whitney Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: --Whitney Young because you wanted to be a doctor. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So how was the, how was the education at Lindblom, and-- Speaker 2: We were the number one academic school in the city at the time. I mean our--in fact, just last week, the principal won the Golden Apple Award, and we've always been a school that excelled at the top of the game because we had some very bright students. And when I attended Lindblom, it was probably 60 percent African American, and 40 percent Asian, and very competitive, lots of math and science. I took drafting. I drew houses in high school. I built Christmas trees that had lights that worked because I had to take electronics class. It was a technical high school. So I had to do architecture, I had to do drafting. I had to do requirements that were technical versus going to a school--but I really chose Lindblom because it had Latin over Whitney Young, and because they were the number one academic school in the city. And I wanted to be able to say I went to the school that I considered to be the smartest 'cause we always joke, when I meet people, and they'll say, oh, you went to Lindblom. You must be smart, you know, and people all over the country are doing very well today that went to Lindblom. And, in fact, when I went to college, we had five of us that made a pact, five of my girlfriends, that we were all gonna be doctors, and out of the five, three of us became doctors. And one is an event planner, and I'm a news anchor. So three of them became doctors in the group. Speaker 1: So can you describe the network of schools, you know, 'cause there's certain technical schools and there are industrial schools, so can you describe that and even how you applied at that point--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, Lindblom, you had to take a test, and you had to get 90 percentile or better to get accepted. So it was a little bit challenging because the neighborhood [Englewood] did not appreciate students coming in from out of their neighborhood. The neighborhood students could not attend unless they scored high on the exam. So all of us took buses to get to school. It was a trek for me, all the way from 83rd and Indiana to 63rd and Wolcott. So my mom would take me sometimes, and, you know, boyfriends would take, and then I had one boyfriend the whole four years. So he would, whole four years, one boyfriend the whole four years of high school. He would bring me--and I'd take the bus a lot, and, of course, there's cheerleader practice. There's after-school activities. So I didn't get home till seven or eight o'clock at night, taking the bus down 63rd Street to King Drive, and then King Drive over to 83rd and walk home. And I'd stop at McDonald's all the time, at 63rd and King Dr. 'cause I love McDonald's. I still love McDonald's still today. And I never felt, you know, unsafe. I did get robbed once when, you know, they were snatching the chains on the L [Chicago elevated train], snatch and grab is what they were doing. And I got robbed then. And sometimes robbed going to school because it was the--Lindblom was in a challenging neighborhood where, like I said, the residents kind of resented that the students there did not live in the neighborhood. And they couldn't attend. So, and you had to really do well. I mean I was a cheerleader. You had to maintain a B-plus average or you could not be a cheerleader. And, you know, one time I didn't maintain that, and they, you know, took me off for a semester. Story_ID: 131066 Speaker 1: So you had to really, I mean, it [Lindblom Math & Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] was not one of those schools where you could just go and--I mean I was in clubs there as well. Speaker 2: What clubs? Speaker 1: Gosh, I just listed them all, oh, man, I forgot. I should have wrote them down, but I had--I just did-- Speaker 2: Did you do debate or-- Speaker 1: No, oh, God, I can't even remember all of them now, and I just wrote them down 'cause I went and opened the yearbook, and looked at all the clubs that I was on. I was on, you know, AP [advanced placement] History Club, the history club, Swim Club, Latin Club. Then they had some girl groups, Student Girl Council. I was the secretary of my sophomore class, treasurer. I had, you know, classes all the time while I was there. Of course, I said, perfect attendance while in high school, so I never missed a single day. I was in biology club, of course, 'cause I wanted--chemistry club, lots of different clubs. And then they had girl clubs like Les Chics, and, you know, Elegance and those kind of clubs (laughter) that were kind of interesting. I was cheerleader captain as well. Speaker 2: Oh, you were cheerleader captain? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was the captain of the cheerleaders, so I was at leadership role my whole four years, probably, and, you know, I represented the school. I was class speaker for senior year as well. So. Speaker 2: What about Lindblom's teams? How were they? They weren't-- Speaker 1: We were very smart, so we weren't dominate in the teams. In basketball and football, and we didn't even really have a field to practice in football. We had to go all the way to the park about four blocks away to practice. And it was just two field goals sticking in the dirt, you know. But we had very intelligent players. I can't say any of them went on to become professional athletes, but they all went to four-year universities and graduated. So, our athletes had to also maintain B-plus average. And most of them were so smart, they had A's as well because they were competitive, and they were trying to get scholarships to attend college. But, but we didn't, you know, we didn't have that kind of opportunity. Story_ID: 131067 Speaker 1: (laughter). Speaker 2: So when you graduate, you graduate [Lindblom High School, Chicago, Illinois] in--is it 19-- Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980]. Speaker 2: I can't believe it. That's the year I moved here. Oh, my God. Speaker 1: Oh, really, oh, God, yeah, so that-- Speaker 2: I (unclear) (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Oh, God, oh, wow. Speaker 2: I cannot, that was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And you came from Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right or-- Speaker 2: Right, um-hum. Speaker 1: You were getting your master's degree-- Speaker 2: I got my law degree and moved here in 1980. Speaker 1: Oh, you've got a law degree from Harvard? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I told my mom [Hattie Burton], master's, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, wow, I'm in Chicago-- Speaker 1: So you graduated with [HM] Barack [Obama], right? Speaker 2: No, he's younger than I am. So he-- Speaker 1: Oh, he's younger. Okay, so you all were kind of crossed over-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we. He's, he and Michelle [Obama] are younger, but that, I mean you're a baby (laughter) Speaker 1: I'm not. I'm fifty-one (laughter). Speaker 2: I know, but you have this-- Speaker 1: I'm growing up (laughter), oh, God, yes-- Story_ID: 131068 Speaker 1: So, but what things are forming you? Oh, wait a minute. We cannot not talk about 'Romper Room.' Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my very first television opportunity. Speaker 1: Now, but how did that happen? Speaker 2: I don't-- Speaker 1: 'Cause 'Romper Room' was like my favorite-- Speaker 2: I know, it's like I see Cheryl, I see Julieanna, I see Scott-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And you're looking, and you hope that she--Ms. Carroll [ph.] would call your name. So, back in the day, you know, you had to write in and fill out applications, just like to get on 'Bozo's Circus.' You had to apply to get on and do that. And so my parents just kept applying every year. I was the only child that was on 'Romper Room.' I don't know why they picked me, but I have pictures of, you know, me and Ms. Carroll [ph.], on 'Romper Room,' my very first television opportunity and also I was on 'Kiddie-a-Go-Go,' you know. Do you--I don't know if you remember 'Kiddie-a-Go-Go.' Well, that was a dance show before "Soul Train". They had 'Kiddie-a-Go-Go,' yeah. And I know, I remember dancing to-- Speaker 1: Now, where did that show come out of? Speaker 2: It came on Channel 26, but it was out of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: So that's how 'Soul Train' began at Channel 26. Speaker 2: Right, exactly, but 'Kiddie-a-Go-Go' was before that, and that was young, young people like twelve and thirteen, and elementary school students could go in there and dance. Speaker 1: So, were there, was it a mixed, 'cause--a mixed audience or was it black? Speaker 2: It was mixed. And the first prize was a case of Yummy pop. And Yummy pop had the riddle on the bottom. So you would drink the pop so much just so you could get to the riddle at the bottom. That was the funnest part. That was the best thing. But, you know, your consolation prize was being on the show. So you got a case anyway of Yummy pop. And that was just a fun show. We danced to 'Love Train,' I think [singing] "Get on board, join in, on Love Train", yeah, that was, you know. I wore this blue jean outfit. I remember it, bell bottoms, you know, and I rehearsed with Ms. Eberhart [ph.]. She was our third-grade teacher, and she was really tough, made sure our routines were down, just really solid, you know. And I just, that was a cool--but 'Romper Room' was very fun. Speaker 1: So wait a minute. Were your, did your other brother--your brother or your sister participate in any programs like this? Speaker 2: Not 'Romper Room' or 'Kiddie-a-Go-Go.' No, they weren't. I think the teachers probably saw something in me. I'm not sure how that happened and-- Story_ID: 131069 Speaker 1: You know, another blessed opportunity, my uncle was an eighth-grade teacher over at Bryn Mawr [Elementary] School in South Shore community [Chicago, Illinois]. And for eighth grade, he was innovative to be an eighth, you know, an eighth-grade teacher. He would take his eighth-grade students as part of their graduation process, every spring break, the eighth graders, he would take them along the Civil Rights Movement, all the way from Chicago to Florida and would stop at all of the Civil Rights Movements, along the way, Memphis [Tennessee], Atlanta, Georgia. And because he would take his eighth grade class, which he took Craig Robinson and Michelle Robinson [Obama], they were his students at one point, and I traveled with them before, when we were young. But because he was the teacher, my uncle would allow his nieces and nephews to come along for free. So I have a picture of me standing by [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s gravesite in Atlanta. And then I have a picture of me standing in front of his monument in Washington, D.C. And my sister put together this picture frame called "Then and Now". And I was very socially conscientious way back when 'cause I'm standing by the Eternal Flame, and I'm not cracking a smile. I know the value of this moment, and I know I'm nine years old at this point. And I'm standing there, just proud. I knew where I was going. I knew what I was doing, and I knew the history. I was thankful that my uncle let us attend, but, you know, so I've had some great support along the way. Story_ID: 131070 Speaker 1: What are you--so you're interested in being a doctor when you graduate from Lindblom [High School, Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And how do you decide where you wanna go to school 'cause remember you made this story--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm the fourth at this point now, I'm the fourth kid going to college. So we have like, no money (laughter) at this point. Speaker 1: 'Cause it's every two years. Speaker 2: Yeah, so we had three kids in college for ten years at a time, three all together for ten years because of post-graduate and undergraduate degrees. So I went to Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] because that was the least expensive, because my two sisters, older sisters went to Illinois State [University, Normal, Illinois], and my brother went to Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois], and I went to Illinois, and it's like, I--'cause I told you I wanted to go to California and go be free. And, you know (laughter), and then I wanted to go to [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] because they had a great swim team, and I was gonna try out for the swim team. But that was out-of-state fees and money. You know, my mom [Hattie Burton] is like, you're going right down the road. So I'm gonna fill out the application and you just, that's where you're going. Speaker 1: So how, at that point in time, what was the tuition 'cause it's-- Speaker 2: It was, it's thirty-three thousand [dollars] now. It is the most expensive public institution in the United States. When I went, it was five to seven thousand. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, someone told me about that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the most expensive-- Speaker 1: --you know, that it's gone up like ridiculous. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's not easy to get in anymore. So it's tough into Illinois, yeah. Speaker 1: And it's a beautiful campus. My niece-- Speaker 2: It's beautiful. It's huge, forty-seven thousand students when I went, probably twenty-three hundred African Americans were the student population when I went from 1980 to '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: So how was the adjustment there because it's, you know, you're used to an urban area. This is-- Speaker 2: I didn't have a single adjustment at all. My roommate is still one of my best friends today, Sandra Warren [ph.]. I'm going out to dinner with her next week, watched her two children be born. One is now in college, one has graduated, and she was my roommate from day one, didn't know her. She grew up in the Morgan Park community [Chicago, Illinois], didn't like each other at all when we first started 'cause she had a boyfriend who was grown, and he came down every weekend. And she wanted me to leave the dorm room. I was like where am I supposed to go? I, what, what am I supposed to do (laughter)? I have no money. I'm, what am I supposed to do? So that was a challenge. So she left, she got homesick, and probably left after her freshman year. And then I got a new roommate, McKayla Label [ph.], and she was Lexington, Illinois, had never been around African Americans at all, and still today, one of my best friends as well. Yeah, love her dearly, and love her family. In fact, Joel [ph.] is her brother. Her parents are the sweetest people. I have a picture of me and her together in that jumpsuit, that blue jean jumpsuit with the bell bottoms from 'Kiddie-A-Go-Go.' I still could fit it (laughter). So, but she, you know, I used to go home with them to Lexington all the time break because they were like, come on home. And they worked for the Funk Seed Company. So I learned a lot about living in downstate Illinois from them-- Story_ID: 131071 Speaker 1: And I remember my senior year [1983-1984], I was a Chicago Honey Bear. I was a cheerleader for the [Chicago] Bears. And I had to be in Chicago [Illinois] two days a week-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute, so how did you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was crazy, right? I commuted my senior year in college. I commuted. I went to school on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, got on a Greyhound bus Thursday, got home for practice which was 7:00 Thursday night, would stay in Chicago Friday, Saturday, do the Bears game on Sunday. We had practice on Monday, again. I would take the 10:30 pm bus, Greyhound down to Champaign, get to Champaign at 1:00 in the morning, go to class Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. And so I was a cheerleader for the Chicago Bears in my senior year of college. And Joel and Kayla Label [ph.] were, they let me live with them because I wasn't--I didn't wanna live in a dorm. So they--and I saved a lot of money by staying in their house. And they just let me live in their house. I had a bunk bed in the room, and I would just be there Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and I would help cook or buy groceries, and I would study. And then I'd go right back home. Sometimes I would drive with friends who were going home on Thursdays, but for the most part, I took the Greyhound bus. Story_ID: 131072 Speaker 1: How were you developing there [University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign]? If you start out as, you know, wanting to be a doctor, when does it change for you? Speaker 2: Oh, wow, I took the MCATs [Medical College Admission Test] and did very well. So I graduated and, you know, what you do. But I started to interview my senior year for corporations they came to the university, and they started talking to students. And I think that I got discouraged because I was in debt from college loans when I graduated, had lots of debts like most kids are because, of course, you know, there're five kids in my family that are trying to go to college. My sister was a freshman then. I'm a senior, and so there's more money going out. And I didn't think I could swing it financially. And I didn't wanna be in debt $150,000 by the time I graduated, and because I was going to be, going to med school with very wealthy people with generational doctors that had what it took. They already knew the process. They had the money. It's very difficult to go to med school and worry about not having money. And I didn't need that distraction. I didn't think I could do it. I just didn't think I could do it, and I didn't want to have that kind of debt, that kind of stress being held over my head. I didn't think I would make it. Speaker 1: So Cheryl, you're saying the whole time you were planning to be a doctor, and you took the whole line of courses. Speaker 2: Yeah, I even took the Stanley Kaplan trial test, the Stanley Kaplan course to get ready, to prep for the MCATs, got accepted. And I just didn't have any money. And I would have had to take out more loans. Story_ID: 131073 Speaker 1: So where were you--what were you doing for summer jobs? Speaker 2: Summer jobs, I worked every summer. I would work at Marshall Field's at Water Tower [Place, Chicago, Illinois]. And I was also an Andy Frain [usher] too. That was my high-school job. That was the best job in the whole world. Speaker 1: Andy Frain is where you're ushering. Speaker 2: You're an usher, yeah, and that's where I found my love of art because I did, I worked at Orchestra Hall, the Lyric Opera. I did all the plays at Arie Crown. I met some of the most incredible, famous people working as an Andy Frain. This was back in high school, and then sometimes I would go back and work it when I was in college, but mostly I worked at Marshall Field's. But during, working as an Andy Frain, I made $2.95 an hour, but I got to pick where I wanted to work. So I would work Soldier Field. I would do all the plays, all the concerts. I got free concerts and free theater and free orchestra, music, and I would get paid. And you work as much as you want. You send your schedule in two weeks in advance, and then they send it back stamped where you're gonna work these shifts. And that was it. And my mom [Hattie Burton] would sometimes pick me up, and I'd change my uniform and got work at Macy's--I mean it was Marshall Field's back then. It was Marshall Field, and I would change into clothes, but then put my uniform on. And then my mom would do it reversal. She would drive me down to Comiskey [Park]. That was my favorite. I had the visitor's dugout. So I met Reggie Jackson, Willie Randolph and, in fact, it's so funny. Willie Randolph came here with the New York Yankees maybe five years ago as the manager, and he called the news station and he said, are you Cheryl Burton, that little girl who was the visitors' dugout as an Andy Frain. And I said, yeah, that's me. And he said, do you remember me? I'm Willie Randolph. I was like, of course, I remember you 'cause he was always so nice to me. But he remembered me, and I was teenager, and he was watching the news from the--he called me from the New York Yankees' clubhouse. And he left me a message to call him back if I was that Cheryl Burton. And I was her, and I talked to him then. I was there when Thurman Munson died. He was getting on, getting on the bus--he didn't get on the bus. He went and took a private jet. And he passed away. But I have so many wonderful memories, Reggie Jackson giving me a "Reggie Bar", you know, and talking to him and just, you know, really some really cool opportunities, meeting stars who did plays at Arie Crown that I kept in touch with because I admired their talent. And I just found it exciting to--this is what you do for a living? You do theater and you go from city to city, and so I thought was--it was the best job, the most exciting job. And I made the least amount of money. Story_ID: 131074 Speaker 1: But for the summers, I, I did work--one summer, I did do a medical kind of internship at the University of Illinois at Circle [University of Illinois Chicago Circle Campus (UICC), later University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC)]. So, but that didn't garner an income, and like I told you, I liked making money (laughter). So-- Speaker 2: Well, there are two questions I have. Is there any doctor that you know that you wanna be like or that's advising you at that point? Speaker 1: Not one. Speaker 2: So no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I've never been that girl. I've never been, "I wanna be like her" or "I wanna be like--I've never been that girl to say that. Speaker 2: There was no, but medical doctor--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, there's nobody I shadowed or spent time with or there's nobody that I did that-- Speaker 2: But how do you become a-- Speaker 1: I just liked being a doctor and helping people. I thought the idea of saving lives and fixing lives was something very admirable. Story_ID: 131075 Speaker 1: But how do you become a Honey Bear [Chicago Bears cheerleader], and how do you even hear that there's this opportunity to be--and how old were the Honey Bears at that point in time? Speaker 2: Oh, they had been around a long time. I auditioned because I had been in marching band at [University of] Illinois [Urbana-Champaign], so I had lived that fantasy, that joy. You know, I was like ready for the next chapter. Okay, I went to the Rose Bowl, went to the Liberty Bowl, and the marching band. It's gotta be something more fun and bigger and exciting than this. So I heard about the cheerleaders for the Chicago Bears, and I sent in my application, of course, as a college student. And I got an opportunity--they had probably six, seven hundred, eight hundred people audition. And they kept doing callbacks, you know, maybe three or four days' worth of callbacks. And then finally--and it was so funny, Julieanna. I was so plain. I had on Vaseline for lipstick. You know, the CoverGirl eyeliner, the red pencil, maybe some blush. I had my hair pulled back, you know. But I could dance, and I don't know what they saw, but that's what happened. I made it, and it opened so many doors for me. I mean I met so many incredible people and the opportunities that they--it wasn't just cheerleaders for the Bears. We got to go--and we were ambassadors for the Bears. So we did lots of charity events all the time. We would go to hospitals and dance for young people, for seniors. And there were fun things too. I remember meeting [HM] Smokey Robinson. I was twenty years old, and a very interesting line he gave me. I won't share it with you but (laughter), but I was like, wow, Smokey Robinson. I mean, you know, the Jacksons, and, you know, I remember when the Bears went to the Super Bowl in 1986, and the Jacksons were the entertainment. And one of them, I had a dress with no back, and you know, they kind of started finding their way. And I thought, oh, wow, you can't do this. So, but that was in New Orleans [Louisiana]. It was just the time of my life. And I was only, you know, twenty-one, twenty-two years old. And then after that, I went on 'Star Search,' and, you know, 'Star Search' was-- Speaker 1: Well, okay, but stop a second. So the Honey Bears, what is--what was the process? What, I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Lots of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --you did the audition, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, you did the audition. And that took place over a three or four-day period. And they kept doing callbacks. And they'd teach you routines, so they want you, to see how quickly you can learn it. And then the last day, I thought, oh, I got this, and I looked around at my competition, and I was like--and then they brought in the returning Honey Bears. They had their white boots on, fab bodies, hair done, boom, boom, boom, all of that, and I was like, Oh, I ain't gone get this because they had to, we had to re-audition every year, re-audition every year to be a Honey Bear. I was it for three years. I was on the team for three years. Speaker 1: How many Honey Bears were in the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There are, it's like forty-eight of us. Speaker 1: And then there're alternates, right? Speaker 2: Right, they had a couple of alternates, right. But that was, you know, you had to audition every year. It was a lot of us. Story_ID: 131076 Speaker 1: Can you go back and say that, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: So for marching band? Speaker 2: For marching band, we weighed in every--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: At UIU--okay. Speaker 2: At University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC)], the marching band, the Fighting Illini, that was a huge program. I mean we had to learn sheet music as well stage performance because they would have, the way you were directed on a football field, they had a performance direction. So we had little hash marks. We had to learn how to read stage, stage production because each one of us was in a particular setting because we made formations. You know, there's sheet formations, so you had to learn how to do that. And we didn't have that in high school. I was competing with a lot of girls from high schools around the state that they had fabulous marching bands. We didn't have a marching band. We had a musical band, a chorus at Illinois--Lindblom [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. But we had to audition, and you had to--I had to learn--I had never read formation music before. So I had to learn how to do that as well as learn the routines because we danced with the marching band, and we had to make formations, could be an eye, could be a bird, could be a cupcake. I mean you had to read all of the formation sheets before you could learn how to do the routines. So we had rehearsals everyday from four to seven and then rehearsal, of course, every home game. And we went to one away game every year. Speaker 1: So that's why you're saying that the Honey Bears were, you know, you were prepared for them. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was very prepared. And Honey Bears was, you know, to the next level. You're talking professional sports, the opportunities to travel all over the country and meet people and meet interesting people and do things that were really on the bucket list. And it opened my eyes. I had so much fun. And I was on it for three years, and, of course, it culminated in the 1986 Super Bowl [Super Bowl XX, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Which couldn't, I mean you couldn't ask for anything more. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Chicago hasn't even seen sports since the-- Speaker 2: No, they went to the Super Bowl and played Indianapolis, but they have won. But they have been once since the 1986 Monsters of the Midway. Speaker 1: But think about all the-- Speaker 2: To be in the history books. Speaker 1: --I mean all the players that were, I mean, talk about that. I mean who was on the team. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean, you know, the Super Bowl Shuffle, you know, they-- Speaker 1: Walter Payton. Speaker 2: --would perform that. Walter Payton, you know, which today Brittany [Payton], I went to her wedding, and I think about when she was born. I so remember both of their children 'cause they would always be at the games and in the locker rooms, and Walter was such a jokester, you know, and just being a part of history. You know, Richard Dent and Dennis McKinnon, L.A. Mike [Mike Richardson], that was how I knew him. And the McCaskeys [Ed, Virginia Halas, Michael, and George McKaskey] and just learning about professional football, professional sports, professional athletics was a whole new ballgame for me. And it was learning, and I always wanted to learn and evolve. You know, Jim McMahon, the quarterback, they had characters. You know, I bet you can't even name ten players right now. But they had characters and, you know, Steve McMichael, Keith Van Horne, it just, all of these wonderful players with personalities and-- Speaker 1: The Fridge [William Perry]. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Fridge, you know. We could not fraternize with the players. We signed contracts. You could not date them or anything like that. But you performed on the sidelines, but you were not allowed to fraternize with them at all. Speaker 1: So the McCaskeys were--they ran a tight ship--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Ran a tight ship, yeah, definitely, always have run a tight ship. Story_ID: 131077 Speaker 1: So, and it worked. They were very successful. Speaker 2: So who managed you [Chicago Honey Bears cheerleaders]? I mean did--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Kathy Core was, and she is now, she manages the [Chicago] Bulls cheerleaders. So she's been doing this a very, very long time, Kathy Core was our direction. And we each had our own, we taught ourselves routines. So we had cheerleader captains and I was one. So I was obligated to teach routines to the group. But Kathy Core did all--and we also were established with a modeling agency, and they would book us with modeling. I mean I made TV commercials all over the place, you know-- Speaker 2: Like where and what agency? Speaker 1: I have a very famous commercial with Harry Carey for Budweiser. And when he passed away, they ran it a lot, you know, but we would do--I have a book of modeling ads over there. Speaker 2: But what agency was this? Speaker 1: A-Plus Talent Agency--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: A-Plus, okay, so it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --was the name of it, yeah. And that was part of the deal too. You didn't make any money, seventeen dollars a game. That's what you made to use to clean your uniforms and polish your white boots. But you made lots of money if, you know, if you did modeling contracts. And they were--you had to, if you were a Honey Bear, you had to either have a full-time job, be a full-time college student. You couldn't just be. There were requirements. Speaker 2: See, and I was gonna ask that. I was gonna ask what--so tell me, how many black cheerleaders versus others, you know, what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Out of the forty-eight and probably four alternates, there might have been six, you know, four to six at one time. Speaker 2: And how many were college, you know, educated or had a, you know, in college versus other--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I probably was the only college educated one. The other ones were full-time, you know, employees at jobs that they had worked, but I, looking back at the ones that were--one was a singer. She pursued singing. I wouldn't, I have to look-I'm looking at the pictures over the years, but not, not--I wouldn't say that was, for the African American ones, that wasn't--and it, for a lot of the young ladies, they were not, they were mostly full-time, working women. They were--or college students, so, 'cause that was a requirement. You had to be full time, either-or. Speaker 2: And then how long would average--you did it three years, but what was the average amount of time that people did it? Speaker 1: That would, two. Speaker 2: Oh, two years? Speaker 1: Yeah, if you could make it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Because of the travel? Speaker 1: No, it's hard to make it back. It's hard to, you know, make it back every year. Speaker 2: Because you have to, you have to audition-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and you've got new young people coming in, and, you know, people that are dancers, yeah. It was very challenging to make it every year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you didn't know if you were gonna make it every year. Speaker 2: And then I had read that there were over five thousand that auditioned in 1985. Is that true? Speaker 1: Probably, yeah. Speaker 2: And that was because the [Chicago] Bears were so hot? Speaker 1: Right, so it's like, you know, everybody wanted to be on that squad. So it, you know, you had to audition again too. So it was very challenging, and you had to bring you "A" game. And I was working full time at Xerox when--'cause I graduated in 1984. After my first year, I was a college student, but I graduated in 1984, and then I was working at Xerox. I didn't go to med school. I ended up getting hired at Xerox and worked for them for two years to (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, so you're working at Xerox, but then you're--so how does the schedule work though, then, so, 'cause-- Speaker 1: So now, I'm graduated so I'm living in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So the schedule is still the same, Honey Bear practice is Monday and Thursday nights from seven to ten and then the games are Sunday. Speaker 2: Oh, so you could do that. Okay, I see. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I lived in Chicago then, so I could, you know, and I worked nine to five, that kind of thing-- Story_ID: 131078 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Can you talk about, though, the winning game, you know, 'cause the, you know, the Super Bowl, the famous Super Bowl game [Super Bowl XX, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: So can you talk about being there and what that involved and-- Speaker 1: Oh, it was so exciting. I mean because we didn't know if we were gonna get to go and perform on the sidelines. There was some talk of not using cheerleaders just for safety reasons, and then at the last minute, they decided that we would be able to go. And we all flew down together. And some couldn't get off from work. But it was an opportunity of a lifetime. And I just--there were so many fun things that we did. We did lots of events, speaking engagements, if you will, that we had to show up for. And we were performing, and, you know, a party that the Jacksons were giving, or, you know, a party that the Commodores might have been having a party. And we would go and perform at that. So we had an opportunity to go and be at so many different things that, you know, Tommy Dreesen [Tom Dreesen] he would have some kind of comedy show. And we might be performing, you know, at that. But we worked the whole time we were down in New Orleans, the whole time. Speaker 2: And so, but do you remember the night? Can you just take us back to that night when they won and what that was like? Speaker 1: First of all, I mean just--I was so grateful to get on a plane with all these women, and we had our--I mean the pride walking through the airport because we all had to wear the same thing the whole time we were there. We were there for about four days. And everything was uniform. You couldn't be different except for the last night, the Super Bowl party. We could wear whatever we wanted. But the pride of being a part of an organization, and I had looked back on my life because had I not stuck with it, you know, I was commuting as a senior in college, taking a full load of classes, performing and, you know, trying to keep my grades up. And it was just crazy, what I was doing, like people were like, how did you do that, Cheryl? But I've always been that kind of person, and I've over exceeded all the odds that, you know, were against me. And so to get to that place and I'm thinking, we're here, the [Chicago] Bears, all of this. You know, it's a super dome so it's enclosed. And in New Orleans is sexy and hot and great food and fun and music. So all of that I had taken in. And I'm young at this point. You know, I'm twenty-four years old, and I'm like, I can't believe this is my life. And I'm dancing on the sidelines, and the players are running past, and we're winning. We were beating New England Patriots badly. So we started having fun, you know. The worry was over about halftime because we winning by so much. And it was just, it was just magical to be there and to win, to be on the field, you know. Not a lot of people got to say that. And I was right there, and, you know, I could go hug the players 'cause I knew them. I had been a cheerleader for three years, so they were friends. Many of them were my friends. I'd been to their weddings and their child birth. So to be there was just a magical moment. It was historical, and, you know, I've lived my life. I love being part of history, and I've been calculating, and I've recorded history a lot, for a lot of different things, a lot of milestones that have happened. And that was one early on for me. Story_ID: 131079 Speaker 1: So, now, you--when do you start dating Jim Rose? Speaker 2: That's very cool because he asked me to marry him at the [1986] Super Bowl [Super Bowl XX, New Orleans, Louisiana]. On the Mississippi River, on a big boat, and there was a celebration, we're live on television. Speaker 1: But when did you start dating him? Speaker 2: I started dating him, I met him--he was a judge for the Honey Bears [cheerleaders]. So that's when I met him my senior year--well, actually, it was my junior year when I auditioned. So I was twenty years old when I met him. So what is that, 1982 is when I started dating him. Speaker 1: And he had been at ABC how long? Speaker 2: Maybe a year. Speaker 1: So he was even new to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --to town? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was new as well, yeah. So maybe, 1983 is when--I think he started here in 1982. And I met him maybe 1983, yeah, it was 1983. Speaker 1: But (unclear), you were still (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, and he was a judge, and I just thought he was very handsome. I didn't know who he was, of course, 'cause I was a student. I didn't know who was on TV in Chicago [Illinois]. So I saw him, and I was like, oh, my God, is he handsome, yummy. And so he had read my resume, 'cause, of course, you had to apply to be a Honey Bear. Like I said, you had to have a full-time job or be a full-time college student. And he said he was so impressed what I'd done by age twenty. He couldn't believe all the things I had done by the time I was twenty years old. He couldn't even believe it. So he found me to be very interesting. And he asked me out, and he ended up driving me back to school after that. So we talked the whole way, and he would drive down to visit me all the time at school. And, and, of course, the auditions were in May or something, and then the summer came. So I was at home. Speaker 1: Now, where was he from originally? Speaker 2: He's from Providence, Rhode Island, and he has an incredible story too. His ancestors came over here--his real name is Roberio [ph.]. His last name is James Roberio. And because they could not pronounce it when his family got to Ellis Island, they just told them, you're gonna be "Rose". And that's how his name became Rose. Speaker 1: And where is his family from originally? Speaker 2: From Providence, Rhode Island--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, but I mean-- Speaker 2: The Azores Islands, Portugal, the Azores Islands. Speaker 1: Oh, so is he Cape Verdean? Speaker 2: Cape Verdean, yep, for sure (laughter). Speaker 1: 'Cause Cape Verdeans don't even think they're black a lot of them? Speaker 2: Oh, (unclear), well, sometimes, you know, (laughter). He has a great story too. You might wanna do him one day. Speaker 1: No, we haven't done him. We--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Connie Lindsey 'cause the forms you guys sent me said who would I-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I'm thinking Connie Lindsey, Melody Spann [HM Melody Spann-Cooper], but you guys might have done her. Speaker 1: We did Melody Spann. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. Speaker 1: Have we done--I thought we had done Connie, but I have to check on that. So when you, so you're young when you get--so, wait, talk about the proposal. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm, yeah, he--we're dating at this point. I met him when I was twenty, so twenty-four is when he asked me. So we had been dating four years at this point. And he, everybody knew he was gonna ask but me, and we're live on TV. He's interviewing Richard Dent, and Richard Dent's like, "Man, you getting married?" And Jim had asked me before the interview, and then the whole interview became about--and that's how my family found out that I got asked to be married (laughter). They saw that on TV 'cause everything was happening, you know, and this is the Super Bowl, and you asked me to marry you, oh, my God. I don't know, I'm only twenty-four. What am I, you know? So, but that was very, very exciting. I went down there as a Honey Bear and I came back engaged, and this Super Bowl, they won. And Jim was also working. So we always say, you know, we're probably the only couple that was both on the sidelines of that game, covering the game that day because he was covering it for ABC television, and I was working as a Chicago Honey Bear. So that was pretty cool actually 'cause he could walk down and kind flirt with me, and, you know, say, "Hey, honey", you know. So that was pretty cool. Speaker 1: It's very cool. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I hadn't--he hadn't asked by then, you know. Speaker 1: 'Cause, you know, at that time, the only other person I know--'cause I'm thinking, did I, was I, was I aware of that. But the only other person was, you know, is Phylicia and Ahmad Rashad. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You know, he did--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He asked her, and I can't remember how he, he asked her on the set of the show, I think. Speaker 1: No, he asked her, I thought on the field or something--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, he did. But he was out on a football field-- Speaker 1: Right, yes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And she was in the studio or something, and he, you know, he said--he asked her, yeah. That is how that happened. Yep. Oh, and people were joking and saying, who do you think you are, Ahmad Rashad, and it's like, no, I didn't ask Cheryl on TV. Richard Dent brought it up becuae he didn't ask me on television. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He asked me in private before, but Richard Dent made such a big deal, live, 'cause they had won, and they were happy. And, you know, we're on this big steam--is it a steamboat? Those big boats with the-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --you know. Yeah, that's where the big party was where Jacksons were, and it's so funny. When they were flirting that night, and Jim was like, she's engaged, okay. She's not available (laughter). I was like, but these are the Jacksons. It's Jermaine Jackson (laughter). Speaker 1: I got options. Speaker 2: Right, I'm like, you know, wow. And so, and 'cause Jermaine was there, Tito, Jackie and Randy were all at that party. Story_ID: 131080 Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: So you've not, at this point that this happens, you're working-- Speaker 1: I'm still at Xerox. Speaker 2: --at Xerox. Speaker 1: Right, and doing like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And now, are you doing, now, the other thing at Xerox, see, Xerox was known as IBM for their sales (unclear). Speaker 1: Right, oh, I was in the sales department, yeah. I was a sales rep, and I was one of the top ones every year for the two years I was there. I went to President's Club every year because I was one of the top. Speaker 2: And they have, they're also known for a very good training program. Speaker 1: Excellent, Leesburg, Virginia. I always say, you know, that was the best training I ever got in my entire life when people talk about it. You go to Leesburg, Virginia, and you stay about three to four weeks. But I can tell you today, that's why I can sell me better than anybody. I'm the best--I can sell a pencil to, you know, people who don't use pencils. I can sell anything. It's the best training in the world, Leesburg, Virginia for Xerox. And it is. And the spin method, I remember it very distinctly, S-P-I-N. And that was the heart, the focus the core of the training of what Xerox was for sales, you know. And if you went there--and I thought, I'm twenty--I graduated from college, twenty-one, and they're sending me out of town, you know, and work in Leesburg, Virginia. I'm all that. I'm, you know, I was making fifty thousand dollars at the time. Speaker 2: Which was a lot of money back then. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a lot of money in 1984, so very cool. Speaker 2: So are you, you know, 'cause a lot is happening there. You know, you're--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: A lot (laughter). Speaker 2: I mean, well, the, I mean even before--you know, you have the [1983] election of [Chicago, Illinois] Mayor Harold Washington, that-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --but you're in school when that happens. Speaker 1: --but that was, I'm back in college when all of that-- Speaker 2: You're in school when that happens, so missed that. Speaker 1: Yeah, because I took the bus home. Oh, no, mama didn't miss. Mama took the bus home and stood in line in the cold to make sure I voted for him. I definitely did that because I wanted to make sure I was part of the process. But I got on a bus and voted and got right back on the bus and came on back because I wanted to be part of history. And he won, and I remember it just so clearly. My parents [Simpson Leo and Hattie Burton] were just overwhelmed because they never thought it would happen in their lifetime. They never thought, and my father, of course, being involved in Chicago politics, he was just elated. He couldn't even believe it. Speaker 2: Well, because think about the time when you're talking about him even studying, you know, for law. Now, when he was doing that, how old were you? Speaker 1: It was in the '70s [1970s]. I was in high school. Speaker 2: Okay, so he was doing that, and your mother is-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yep, elementary and high school 'cause it was in, mostly in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 131081 Speaker 1: Yeah, like most of the '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 2: So when you get proposed to, and you come back, now, the planning of your marriage, you know, your wedding and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: We didn't get married for three years after that, yeah, so there were--we didn't even. Yeah, so we dated seven years actually before we got married. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Why so long? Speaker 1: Because I wanted to be me. I wanted to do my life first and make sure I was okay with taking on a husband, you know. I wanted to make sure I was okay with the person looking back in the mirror. I didn't wanna just be married and just because you asked. I wanted to make sure I was contributing to the household and that I loved who I was. And I never wanted to look back and say, I wish I had done this or that. I wanted to live my life first, and I didn't get married till I was ready. I was twenty-seven years old when I got married. And then shortly after that, I took a job in Peoria [Illinois]. And so we commuted the first three years of our marriage. Speaker 2: So let me ask, so then what is it, 'cause you were, you had started to talk--see, I was wondering if I was getting things out of sequence because-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you did the 'Star Search'. So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, 'Star Search' came in 1986, two years out of college. And I was also a Honey Bear [cheerleader]. That was the best year of my life, 1986. It was 'Star Search' and the Super Bowl. Speaker 2: So did that come through the-- Speaker 1: That was November of '86 [1986], and Super Bowl was January of '86 [1986]. Speaker 2: (Unclear)--'86 [1986]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So does that, does that come through the agency? Speaker 1: That was an audition. When 'Star Search' came to town, and they wanted auditions, and I auditioned for the show. And they didn't call me back for three or four months. And I had cut my hair off, and, you know, I looked totally different, and they wanted me to look like the girl who auditioned. And in the meantime, I'm a real go-getter, you know. I had already gone out to New York [New York], in that meantime, to audition for 'It's A Different World' ['A Different World'] and the 'Cosby Show' because--and I used the fact that I was on 'Star Search' to get me in the door, and I got a lot of auditions off of that. And they were looking Jasmine Guy, her character, Whitley Gilbert, on 'It's a Different World,' was looking for a roommate. And I have some really cool stories too. Don't let me forget this one. But so I went to audition for that role. And I thought they were looking for--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now, is this in 1986 too or is this 19-- Speaker 1: This now after 'Star Search.' Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So probably 1986-1987 'cause we filmed 'Star Search', and it didn't air for two or three months. So about '86 [1986], '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: And talk about 'Star Search' at that time though, too, because it was a big-- Speaker 1: That was the 'American Idol,' the show, 'America's Got Talent.' It was the prolific talent show that was on television. Ed McMahon, it was the only talent show besides 'Soul Train' and 'Kiddy-A-Go-Go.' But there was a competition. 'Soul Train' was a performance, fun, dancing. But 'Star Search' was an actual competition. And to be on it, you won money, and you had to compete against other girls. I was in the spokes model category. They had acting. They had dancing, they had singing. They had solo singing. They had group singing, and they had a spokes model category, which was the category that I was in. And I won three times. I mean I did very well, and I have so many fond memories because my entire family came out there to see me on the show. And we didn't have money, but we stayed in my hotel room. That was paid for by 'Star Search', the production company paid for it. And so, you know, I had my father [Simpson Burton] sitting in the audience and all of my siblings. And we stayed in one hotel room. Who cares? They were there, you know. This opportunity would never have happened for my family, to be able to witness going to Hollywood, California, being a part of a show and talking to Ed McMahon. I mean, just, it was so incredible. And then I won too, and I'm like, what? I won, again? (Laughter) You know, and so then, of course, Xerox said if you don't come to work on Monday, you're gonna be fired. And I kept winning on 'Star Search'. So I couldn't come home. So I was let go. It came to a head. But I made so much money in one appearance on 'Star Search' than I made, you know (laughter)-- Speaker 2: So how much money did you make? Speaker 1: Each show, you got $2,500. And if you kept winning, you know, that's like--that was a lot of money to me, back in 1986, you know, versus, I was making a lot of money too at Xerox as well 'cause I was in President's Club, and I sold a lot of copiers and fax machines. And fax machines were just starting to get hot. So Dannon Yogurt was one of my big, big, that got me in the President's Club because they ended up buying everything for Dannon Yogurt for everybody in the country through me. So that was something that was big and huge. But- Story_ID: 131082 Speaker 1: So that was just something that happened really, really cool. And before, I think--so then Xerox, I didn't have a job. So I was starting to kind of do the modeling thing. And Aaron Spelling started coming across the country to look for new Charlie's Angels, and because the original Charlie's Angels did not have a person of color, he wanted to make sure there was gonna be a person of color when he cast it for the new 'Charlie's Angels.' And it came down to me and Halle Berry here in Chicago [Illinois] for the final two casting calls. And I remember giving her a pair of my shoes because she got to the audition late and didn't have shoes to audition for. And I never got those shoes back. And when I interviewed her once, I was like, hey, do you remember when you got my shoes. And she tries to act like she doesn't remember it (laughter). So, and so, but, yes, and we auditioned for the role. And it ended up going to Drew Barrymore and Lucy Liu, I think, and Cameron Diaz, were the three that got cast for--but Halle Berry and myself were the finalists here in Chicago. Speaker 2: See, and I could--now, what was she doing in Chicago? Speaker 1: She lived here. She was a model, full time. She came from Cleveland, Ohio, but this was the closest to making it big. So she moved here to be a model, yeah, and that's how she broke her teeth and did acting jobs. And she did lots of print ads. And then she got a role in Chicago from auditioning here, she got 'Baby Dolls' or it was 'Guy Dolls,' 'Baby Dolls' or something. It was about some really cute girls that lived in an apartment. And that was the first series she got. So she moved out there with a job. And, you know, the rest for her is history. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But we were finalist for the Aaron Spelling new show, you know. Speaker 2: And so were you still represented by A-Plus [talent agency] at this point? Speaker 1: Yes, um-hum. Speaker 2: So the whole time by A-Plus? Speaker 1: Yeah, still. Speaker 2: 'Cause I could see you as a Charlie's Angel. You've got that Charlie's Angel look. Speaker 1: I mean, I don't--they didn't see it. Well, they didn't see me or Halle Berry, but she did okay (laughter). Speaker 2: So, now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: She has an Oscar (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right, she did. That's true, that's true. Story_ID: 131083 Speaker 1: She [mother Hattie Burton] said it was boring. They had a car in Cheyenne [Wyoming]. So it was nothing. She said, life--they had no life. (Laughter) Yeah-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, so she taught English and office practices. That's what my mom taught. The only instruction airmen, be seated along with [reading email], all instruction was given by the [U.S.] Air Force. They left Cheyenne with two kids, yep. Story_ID: 131084 Speaker 1: So I wanna ask one other thing about 'Star Search.' So to be a spokes model winner, what was the requirements for a spokes model? Speaker 2: Just, it was, you know, modeling, and public speaking. That was what the auditions, because you had to act as the host of the whole show. So you did the commercial breaks. You would introduce the acts. You could introduce commercials breaks. You would introduce part of the show. So you kind of co-hosted the show with Ed McMahon. So you had to have really good speaking skills, and you had to fit the clothes. Now, we filmed everything, the actual insert to the show in New York [New York]. And that's when I auditioned for the Bill Cosby--for It's a Different World ['A Different World']. And they ended up going with Jada Pinkett [Smith] on that show. And I didn't get that one either. (Laughter) So, 'cause I went in the audition incorrect 'cause they wanted--I thought they wanted a classy girl. I had high heels on and a dress, but they wanted her to be opposite of what Whitley was, and that's why Jada Pinkett got the role. So, but then we filmed all of that. So while I was in New York filming everything for 'Star Search', I was knocking on doors, you know, I'm here with 'Star Search'. And that opened many doors. People, come on over, come on over. Whatever was auditioning, I asked, can I audition, because I dropped, "Hey, I'm in New York filming 'Star Search', and that was such a big, huge show. Of course, they would let me in for that. And then we actually filmed the show in Hollywood [California], and when I went there, I was knocking on doors as well. So. Speaker 1: Now, are you thinking at any point that you're gonna move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] or New York? Speaker 2: If I had gotten the roles, but I wasn't just gonna do it to pursue--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You hadn't gotten married yet. You were-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --still--okay. Speaker 2: I hadn't gotten married. And I have a very interesting New York story before I moved here from Chicago [Illinois]. But, yeah, so I didn't get any roles in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] 'cause I didn't live there, and I couldn't go on the calls and things like that. But I took advantage of being there for the time that I was there. So I came back to Chicago, and, you know, after--and, of course, I didn't have Xerox. And after that I got the Minority Business Report with Otis Buchanan, and that aired every Saturday on WGN. And it was a business magazine show. And I thought, I was making $250.00 a show. And I thought, "I've made it." I am going places (laughter), you know, because it was a really good show. But I cut my teeth on how to anchor the news and, you know, how to get my skills really elevated. And it was a great opportunity for me, and then after that, I put a tape together, using everything I had done at that point in television, and I went to Peoria [Illinois] to do commercial news. And I worked for the CBS affiliate, WMBD. And that was '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: Right, we're gonna change. Speaker 2: Or 1990, I'm sorry. Oh, okay. Story_ID: 131085 Speaker 1: But then, so when I got 'Minority Business Report' after six months, he let me go, and I just was devastated. Speaker 2: Now, why did that happen, on hindsight, and-- Speaker 1: Well, I have my theory, but I'll tell you when the camera's not rolling. But 'cause they were talking about it being syndicated. Well, it was syndicated already. Speaker 2: It was syndicated at that point. Speaker 1: Yeah, but we were talking about taking it to a bigger scale, and we were gonna move to New York [New York]. That was what--and I was getting all excited. I'm like, oh, my God, yay. And then they just let me go. They called me to the office for once, and I thought, oh, wow, okay, good, a meeting. And they're like, we're gonna relieve you of your services. And I remember the meeting taking place right on Randolph [Street, Chicago, Illinois] at a building they must have had between Dearborn and State Street. They had an office building, and I came out, and I was just bawling, walking down the street, crying. And people were like, "You okay, lady?" And I just didn't answer. I was just crying. And I went into a parking garage where the parking was twenty dollars, and I didn't even have, you know, any more money to pay for parking. So I had to pay with a credit card 'cause, you know, I'm still young and making my way. And I mean parking downtown was a luxury. So they let me go, and then I started to put together, I edited on my own--I used two VHS tapes. One was upstairs in the house, and one was downstairs in the kitchen. So I would run up and down the steps to hit pause, and I put my own tapes together with everything that I had done from the Home Shopping Network, from working on 'Star Search,' from commercials that I had done and the 'Minority Business Report,' and I sent out thirty tapes before I got a job that I wanted because I got a couple of offers, Steubenville, Ohio, which they were offering ten thousand dollars a year. I would have had to live in my car. And I was like, no. And then I got the Peoria [Illinois] job. Story_ID: 131086 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So a couple--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And the Home Shopping-- Speaker 2: Can you talk about the Home Shopping 'cause we--that was the cutest clip. Speaker 1: Which clip did you see (laughter) 'cause I don't know which--did you see me as the host? Wait--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, 'cause--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I mean I was the Home Shopping Club, but I also had my own talk show called 'Simply Elegant.' Speaker 2: No, but we, those were two separate things that we talked about. Speaker 1: Yes, two separate things. Okay. Speaker 2: So, but the Home Shopping, it was [HM] Merri Dee on there. And she's describing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, and I'm in jewelry, and I'm wearing it, right (laughter). Speaker 2: Near a wheel. Speaker 1: On the wheel, oh, the wheel, yes, 'cause people won jewelry and, oh, my God. It's so funny--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So, you know, I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's so funny. I went to this event with Oprah [Winfrey] last week, and the producer of that show, I had not seen since then, was at this party. And he looked at me, and said, Cheryl, do you remember me? And I said, oh, your face looks really familiar. Now, granted, this is like 1986, 1987, and he says, Cheryl, this is Rob, the producer of the Home Shopping Network, and I was like, oh, my God. And then I went crazy because Jane Lynch had just been on Jimmy Kimmel talking about the show because he brought it up. You know, he did his research and homework, and he said, Jane, weren't you on some Home Shopping--she was one of the hosts. And so I tweeted her, I said, Jane, you remember me? She's like, "Kid, we had a great time". So she, of course, remembered me, and talked about the other model, Candy Clifford [ph.] was the other model on the show (laughter). And, in fact, one time my sister filled in for me 'cause I wanted to go skiing in Colorado. And they were like, Cheryl, you have to work, and I said, well, my sister's cute. She can fill in. She can do it. And she filled in for me one time. So it was good. But, yeah, it-- Speaker 2: Because this was when home shopping was big. Speaker 1: Big, we were the first show. We were the very first home shopping network program on television that went across the country. And people could call in-- Speaker 2: But it was for BET? It said, BET. Speaker 1: Right, but it was the first one that was created. It was on BET, but other outlets seem to have picked it up or something. Speaker 2: Who was behind that? Do you know? Speaker 1: Midwest Tel--I have to go look. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I have to go, I have to go--I can email Rob. I can't remember the name of the production company. But he would know right away. I'd have to get that information 'cause I can't remember Midwest Television was when I worked in Peoria. So, (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And then TCI Cable. Then you start doing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, I start doing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --'Simply Elegant.' Speaker 1: 'Simply Elegant,' yes. And I was the talk show host where I like to say I got "the" best training ever because it was an hour-long talk show with no commercials. So I had to learn my very best interviewing skills because you are talking for an hour with no commercials. So that's when I really perfected how to conduct an interview, was during 'Simply Elegant.' And it was a lifestyle show. It was entertainment. It was sports. And then I would call some of my famous friends just to show off. So (laughter) I can make my show look like it was legitimate, you know. It was so cool. They would show up and I had, you know, NBA players 'cause of my girlfriends were married to them. And, you know, it was like, okay, and they were so impressive because it's like you got an NBA player and his wife to be on the show. And, of course, Jim Rose was a guest. You know, oh, my God, he's a news anchor, you know. So I would call in some of the [Chicago] Bears. And then I did stories from water parks, and I learned how to do interviews on location and just fun things. We had animals, we had fashion shows. We covered it all. Speaker 2: Now, is this before or after 'Minority Business Report' or does this lead into--or is this simultaneous? Speaker 1: This is probably simultaneous. Speaker 2: It's simultaneous, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum, yeah, it covered--'cause I did that for like three years. Speaker 2: Now, how did that come about though? Speaker 1: I auditioned. I saw an audition that was like in the trade magazines. They were looking for a host. And it was after Xerox, and so I was like, oh, this is perfect for me, and I really liked it. And it was in Skokie [Illinois]. We filmed everything in Skokie, and I went for the audition, and I can't believe that, I couldn't believe that I was the host--single host, and I loved it. Speaker 2: So you're-- Speaker 1: I didn't get paid a dime either, not a single--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, well, because it's local cable. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But I didn't care because--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But you learned. Speaker 1: The priceless opportunity, the learning how to interview, my interview skills perfected, and you can't put a price tag on that. Story_ID: 131087 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So you're also, at that time, working for your sister as a special education teacher or around that time? Speaker 1: Right, to earn an income, right, 'cause she went for her sabbatical. So I'm doing that too. I'm teaching school 'cause like I said, I wanted to have an income. And I wanted to make a contribution to the household. And I wasn't just gonna get married unless, you know, I had something to bring as well. And his [ex-husband Jim Rose's] son came to live with us at thirteen years old. And, yes, so I was a mom to a thirteen-year-old. So he came to live with us for high school. So I took care of his son, and I was married and had a new job and all of that. And it was all, it came together the same year. I was twenty-nine. I got the job in Chicago [Illinois], and what happened was, you know, Jim and I had made a pact, if you don't get back to Chicago within three years, then you need to work on something else. And I made it back to Chicago in two years two years and seven months. Speaker 2: Okay, so you're saying, you didn't get married until you came back-- Speaker 1: No, I got married in 1990. I was a reporter in Peoria, Illinois. Speaker 2: Right, so you got married while you were--so a couple things about that, is one, is he encouraging--do you get the idea that you wanna go into TV professionally when you start doing 'Simply Elegant' or 'Minority Business [Report]'? Speaker 1: Right, I enjoy. I knew that I enjoyed it because I didn't get paid for it. And when you do something and you don't get paid for it, and you like it, that's your calling. And that's your passion because I didn't care that I didn't make any money because I was teaching school to pay for my gas and to pay for bills and things like that. And I lived at home for a long time until I got married. So I still lived at home and I, you know, paid utilities for my mom [Hattie Burton]. So. Speaker 2: And so, is he saying to you, you have talent--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Very encouraging, has always been a huge supporter, you know, would help me put my tapes together. I used to call like back in the day, I used to call this, like this TV hotline, what jobs were available. And I would--that was like a thirty-dollar-a-month subscription. That was a lot of money for me to have to pay at, you know, out of my little funds. But it was worth it because it talked about opportunities and jobs that were available across the country. And so that was, you know, one of the ones that--and he was always supportive, you know, helping me--he taught me how to write a story, a news story for television, not for just writing a story to tell a story. He taught me how to write a story for television news. And he was very good at that 'cause Jim is one of the best in the business. I mean incredibly talented, very smart and he has made it against all odds too. And he's been here thirty-plus years. Story_ID: 131088 Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: He's been here, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: So this is who--'cause Peoria [Illinois] also was a training ground. See, when I saw this, I said, she's --you know, 'cause I was like, how did she get this? So Peoria, I know that [HM] Dorothy Tucker also trained, I think, in Peoria. Speaker 1: Well, you have to, to get in this business. You just can't come from out of college and work in Chicago [Illinois] because it's the number three market in the country, and you wanna make your mistakes so you don't get sued, or you don't do the wrong thing. This is live television. You don't get to make mistakes. You can't take it back 'cause it's what you say, and it's right there. So you wanna make your mistakes before you get to a market this size. And I wanted to figure out what I was doing, you know. I had to a degree in biology and psychology. I could figure out people's brains and bodies, but, you know, I could figure out why they were--people were doing crazy things on the news. But I couldn't report it based on, you know, my life experiences. So I had to go and get some training because I wanted to be able to say, yes, I can compete on the same level as you. I didn't want somebody say, oh, you got your job because of your husband or you got your job because of this and that. No, I got my job because I was good, and I worked hard. Speaker 2: So when you were out there, how did you find that? Was it, you know, at WM--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --MBD [WMBD-TV, Peoria, Illinois]. I was focused, so focused. And I was twenty-seven years old or twenty-twenty-seven years old, twenty-six, twenty-seven. So I was older than most of the people that worked in the building. They were straight out of college, most of them. And they resented me, you know. I was grown up. I had a husband who was, you know, a news anchor, sportscaster in Chicago. And, but I came in there, I was very focused. That's all I did was work, and I taught myself everything because they weren't very helpful. My colleagues were not very helpful at all, and I was determined to make it. And I didn't care, at all costs. So I would stay and work till twelve, one in the morning because I had nothing else to do. I just lived there. I just came there to work. I would commute. And my off days were Thursday and Friday. And on Wednesday night, I would come home, be with Jim, and then I would go right back Saturday morning and work Saturday through Wednesday. Speaker 2: So you were there a year? Speaker 1: Seven months. Speaker 2: Seven months, okay. Speaker 1: That's, I came in the door with the focus that I'm not gonna be here very long. So I taught myself at an accelerated rate so that I could be out of there as quickly as possible and because I taught myself how to edit, you can't use editing machines in Chicago because they were a union city. So I taught myself how to edit and put my own packages together so I could send tapes out for auditions. And so that's what I taught myself how to do and edit and write. And that's all I did, and then I sent my own tapes out. Story_ID: 131089 Speaker 1: Now, had you got involved with NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] at that point? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You had not, okay. Speaker 2: No, I had never been to a CABJ [Chicago Association of Black Journalists] meeting, an NABJ convention. I had not been to anything related at all. Speaker 1: So who--then do you then go directly from there to Wichita [Kansas]? Speaker 2: I went to Wichita from Peoria [Illinois] after seven months. Speaker 1: After you got your--so the tapes, they pick you up, they see you? Speaker 2: Right, I send my tape out. I didn't have an agent at that point. It was all me sending tapes out. And I saw the position. I thought, every job at that point, I said had to have a nonstop flight from Chicago [Illinois]. That was the importance of the location of where I was going. If it had nonstop, I could go because I wasn't gonna go somewhere I had to do a connecting plane, just, that was not an option because I had to get home because I had a son, you know. And I knew Jim's [ex-husband Jim Rose's] son was coming to live with us when he turned thirteen, when he went to high school. So I knew my focus was, I had to get to Chicago, and if I couldn't get there, I would be able to come home on one plane. And Wichita was an hour and a half. It's right smack, dab--if you threw a dart in the middle of the United States of America, Wichita, Kansas is the most middle part of the United States. Speaker 1: So how did you find that experience there [KWCH-DT, Wichita, Kansas] and you were anchoring alongside John Ridge and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, John Ridge did the weather, and then Roger Cornish was my co-anchor. I absolutely loved it. I was solo anchor on the weekends when I got there at first. And that last about seven months, and then I got moved to the six P.M. show, for the fifteen months left. And they knew that I had a Chicago out. If I got a job in Chicago, they would let me go because they knew my husband lived there, and I was from there. And so I worked very, very hard, through tornadoes and hurricanes. I mean my car got messed up, and me and Jim worked out--he traveled a lot with the Bulls because they were hot back then always. So he would route every trip through Wichita so he would visit me. And then I would come home every other weekend. So we probably didn't see other--two weeks, maybe was the longest we'd go without seeing other. But we made it through. Speaker 1: And at this point, now, did you--did an agent negotiate--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: To get to Chicago--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, to-- Speaker 2: I had an agent get me to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I didn't have an agent get me to Wichita, yeah. Speaker 1: But who negotiated the Chicago out for you? Was that you that negotiated that? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum, yep, I did say that. And, you know, because they could see that, you know. Wichita is not--well, for the most part, it's, you know. 59th market in the country. People aren't lifers there unless you have a family, like Roger Cornish. I think he's probably still on the air with Cindy Klose. Cindy Klose was one of the first anchors for CNN. And she went from CNN to Wichita. She replaced me when I left. And so, it's a lifer is you wanna be there. You know, there's some lifers in Peoria that's still there and stayed there. But I, my family was in Chicago, so you go where your family is. And the people who are lifers in Wichita, their families are there, their wives, their, you know, parents, their children. But my family lives in Chicago, and that was my focus. And I'm a very focused person. When I have my eye on a goal, I keep my eye on the prize. Story_ID: 131090 Speaker 1: Now, at that point in time, are you getting involved in the Wichita [Kansas] community like most--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, doing lots of speaking engagements and, you know, requested a lot. And the thing is, I was going home a lot because I would go to Chicago [Illinois]. So I would do the speaking engagements during the week and also when I was there on the weekends. And it was very fun in Wichita because it was family. You know, we had bowling leagues and the TV stations would bowl against each other. We had softball teams. We played softball games, very family-oriented, and they were my family. You know, I was there by myself. I didn't know anybody when I moved there. I lived in a remodeled Holiday Inn. So, you know, how they have the hotels, it was a motel, an old Holiday Inn. And I lived on the second level, and the people who lived under me were, didn't always follow the law. So I was worried on a regular basis of what was living under me and what was taking place and transpiring (laughter). So, but I spent time with my coworkers a lot, and I became the spokesperson for Bombardier private airplanes because all of the airplanes, the private jets are built in Wichita, and so is Air Force One. They're all built in Wichita, Kansas, so I got to board Air Force One before it was sent to President [George H.W.] Bush for his approval. And I did all of the industrial films for Bombardier. The private jets that you probably have been on are all Bombardier. And their big warehouse was in Wichita, and I would do their industrial films, to sell their planes. So I would actually get in the planes and do the film work to introduce them to companies. So if they--if your company was looking to buy a private jet, I would be the person on the film selling it as, this is what you get. And because of that, they gave me full access to their private jets at any time. And [ex-husband] Jim [Rose] was a pilot, and he loved flying. So Jim would come to visit me, and he just had a dream to go to six cities in one day. And we got up in the private jet, and we'd take off, touch down, take off, touch down. They let Jim sit in the front because he was a licensed pilot. And that was like a gift for my husband at the time. And, you know, of course, I got paid as the spokes model for the Bombardier, but for him to be able to go to six cities in one day in a private jet--and private jets fly 50,000 feet. They don't fly at the same air space as commercial airplanes. And I had never been on a private jet. I mean it's fascinating to do that, fascinating to go aboard Air Force One to see what that's, looked--you know, what that looks like, and it's built in Wichita. And Wichita also is the bible belt of the world. So they're lots of protests because you could still have an abortion in that state. And Operation Rescue was there. It's a big, big deal happening in the country and lots of conflict and lots of tornadoes happened in Wichita. So those are some of my vivid memories. And people would count the words that you would say for a candidate who was for abortion. And they would count the words that you would say for a candidate who was against abortion. And they would call the station and tell you that, you know, you're unfair in your reporting. So I learned a lot. It's the biggest banking business, as well, is in Wichita, Kansas. And, you know, pizza companies are there too. So Wichita was a really productive place, and-- Story_ID: 131091 Speaker 1: I was pretty much focused though. I worked a lot, and I worked on this project I was very proud of called 'Baby Your Baby.' And what I did was, I was helping reduce the infant mortality rate in the State of Kansas because African American teenagers were having an alarming amount of deaths in births of babies. So I worked on that project and was given several awards by the state, the governor of Kansas [Joan Finney], for helping out, reduce infant mortality in the state of Kansas, and for reducing teenage pregnancy and teaching even older women what can happen when you're pregnant, a lot of--so every week, I did a report on what was it like to be pregnant. And it could be from teenage pregnancy to what happens if you have diabetes when you're pregnant or what happens if you, you know, eat food that you're allergic to. So each week, it was something to raise awareness about pregnancy in the State of Kansas because they had such a high death rate of babies. Story_ID: 131092 Speaker 1: So Cheryl, what are you also learning about anchoring, and, you know, and what mistakes do you make at the--are--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm learning a lot, of course, you know, timing, pacing, friendship with your co-anchor family, with, you know, having a partner because when I got there, I was a solo anchor for seven months. So I had to get used to anchoring with a partner. And that was, you know, very interesting for me, but he was very warm and welcoming, just a good guy all the way around and just learning the skills of pacing and, you know, not just reading, having feeling. And because I reported and I anchored, every day I would go out and do a story. I wasn't just reading the news. I was serving up stories that I had worked on and stories that I cared about because I pitched stories. And, you know, we had a lot of emotional stories that were happening. I remember when the war [1990-1991 Gulf War] started. And I went in the bathroom, and I just cried, you know, because for my family, when we think of war, you know, I didn't want anybody to see me crying because I was a news person, and that was not allowed. You're not supposed to do that because we had lost my cousin in Vietnam [War], and he'd only been there like six months. And he was shot and killed at nineteen years old. And it was a big struggle for our family to recover from that. So when I thought of war, I just--it was just really a tough thing for me 'cause I didn't, I don't like, you know, conflict. And I knew people were gonna die, people's children were gonna and fathers were gonna die and mothers were gonna die, and for what? So it was, you know, it was really a tough time when that actually happened, when we went to war. I remember the Scud missiles going over, and I thought, wow, this is real. So. Story_ID: 131093 Speaker 1: You know what is--so you come back and you get on with WLS [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Right, well, what happened was, the 'Today Show' was starting a weekend show. Twenty-two years ago, they did not have a weekend show, and they auditioned, and the final two people were me and this other young lady from Miami [Florida]. And the pact that [ex-husband] Jim [Rose] and I had made was you come home. So at this point, we're at two years and seven months, and the, you know, another city--his son was coming to live with us. We were building this big house, and, you know, getting ready to, you know, be these parents of this teenager. And so I got down, it--I got down to me and her, and they eventually went with her and not me. And I don't know why, you know. They ended up going with her and not me, but it was all probably in God's eternal hands and his plan for me. And then I got an interview at all three stations here in Chicago [Illinois] at CBS, NBC and ABC. And it was all the weekend anchor position. And my first thought was to take the other two, NBC and CBS because I didn't want people to say I got the job here [ABC] because I was married to Jim Rose. And, but they were offering the most money (laughter) and a better position, more prestige, I thought, you know, longevity here. They covered news the best. They had, you know, the best name in the community, and I thought they had the best staff of reporters, and the best staff of anchors. And I really thought it was really the best station. So I said I didn't care what people thought. I'm going for the best, and I'm now twenty-two years later, still working here at ABC-7 and-- Story_ID: 131094 Speaker 1: And I remember how many years I've been here because my father [Simpson Burton] died while I was interviewing to work here [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. And it was, July 4, me and Jim [Rose] would always throw a big party 'cause Jim's birthday was the 5th. My grandmother's [Edna Burton's] was the 10th, my brother's was the 10th, and we always threw a July 4 party at our house 'cause we had a swimming pool. And the kids would come in, and my own family--I made my baby sister come home. She didn't feel like it that year. And my, even my nephew's who's three, jumped in the swimming pool and almost drowned. And my father jumped in the pool, clothes on full and saved him. And it was kind of funny 'cause then my dad had to take all his clothes off and put 'em in the dryer and put some clothes on, some of Jim's clothes on that were way too big for him. But, you know, my nephew was still alive, and, you know, and the value of swimming, again, came to life. And so, but three days later, my father had a heart attack on July 10 [1992], and that's my brother's birthday. So we know my father died on my brother's birthday, and he died while I was interviewing. I had interviewed once at Channel 7, and they wanted me back for a second interview. And I remember coming back for my second interview, and I was a mess because my dad had had a heart attack, and he died. He didn't get sick and linger. He had had a stroke at fifty-five and full recovery. And so I remember distinctly when I was hired here, I was hired in July, and I didn't start until November. So, and my sister is very grateful 'cause I made her come home 'cause we were all home for the July 4 holiday. And at that point, my siblings made a pact, we all--three of us lived out of town, and made a pact that we were all moving back and getting jobs in Chicago. So whatever we had to do to get a Chicago job is what happened for us. So we all moved back, and we've all been back since. Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, when you--so it was almost bittersweet in some respects, you know, because what's the beginning, you're getting ready to--your career is really in a major--and frankly, in-- Speaker 1: You know, it's so, it is bittersweet 'cause my father used to write me letters, and he used to cut out articles in the newspapers when people were moving around and shifting at stations and moving and leaving. And he would send the article and say, "Now, they're leaving. You should be able to get that job." I mean he just thought I was that kind of good because I was his daughter. So I had saved all of those articles. And he would send me cards, "I can't wait till you make it back to Chicago all the time." And then, you know, here it is, he didn't get to see me on TV in Chicago. But I always say God took him so I could come home. That's the only way, you know, peace surpasses understanding all the time, and that's the way I look at it. But, you know, I carry him with me every, every historical story, I have a picture of my parents in a locket from their wedding day. I have it with me today. And I carry it. So he's with me everywhere. When I went to, you know, cover the inauguration of the first African America president of the United States [HistoryMaker Barack Obama], I thought about my father, and we're in [Washington] D.C., and, you know, people have run into the man who used to be my dad's taxi driver and remembered him very well. And they said, yeah, I met this man who knew your dad in D.C., the taxi driver. So I felt like his presence was there, and it's always there because I wanted him to be proud of me. Speaker 2: So you were a daddy's girl in some respects-- Speaker 1: Um-- Speaker 2: Not? Speaker 1: I don't know about that because my sister was the firstborn, so she was the princess, but my father thought I was cool 'cause I was born on Christmas Day [December 25, 1962], and he was Christmas Eve [December 14, 1929]. And he would make fun of my mom [Hattie Burton] 'cause she was pregnant. He says, what are you waiting for? Would you please have this kid? Are you waiting for Christmas or what? And so, my sisters resent me, brother, because they had to spend their Christmas with their grandmother [Edna Burton]. And they still remember it. And like, you know, 'cause they were two, four and six. Who wants to be without their parents on Christmas? But they were, and they're, and then another kid? I mean gheez, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: They didn't put the baby behind the door (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. I was so mischievous. Speaker 2: Little, sweet Cheryl (laughter)! Story_ID: 131095 Speaker 1: So you come, so you--so what is the offer that you get then, to come here? So it's to be on the--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All three [ABC, CBS, and NBC] made an offer. Speaker 1: For the weekend. Speaker 2: For the weekend anchor. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, all three made an offer. And I chose ABC [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: So who is, who, who's in place when you come in? Who's the family you're coming--you already know the family here too? Speaker 2: Oh, right, 'cause I'm married to Jim [Rose]. So I had been to stuff, you know, I had known Jim since 1983. And at this point, it's 1992. So-- Speaker 1: Almost nine years. Speaker 2: --I've known everybody. You know, Linda [Yu] and Sylvia [Perez] were so welcoming. They were so funny. They put pictures of themselves up on the place that would have been my office area. And so they were so happy when I got here, so kind to me. I mean, you know, Tim Weigel worked, and Jim worked here. John Drury and [HistoryMaker] Diann Burns and Kathy [Brock] was here, Sylvia Perez, Linda Yu, Frank Matthey [ph.]. Let's see who else, Mike Adamle was here. Joel Daly was here, Floyd Kalber was here, and-- Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Harry Porterfield was here. Speaker 2: Paul Meincke-- Speaker 1: Was Harry Porterfield--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Harry Porterfield, Paul Meincke [ph.], Charles Thomas, you know, and a lot of them are still here. But, yeah, Harry Porterfield. I was honored because I used to watch him growing up. I watched CBS growing up. So, because I saw him, you know, I was inspired by him and his voice and his delivery. And he was, and I remember what happened to him over at Channel 2. And the bus, the boycott that [HistoryMaker] Reverend Jesse [L.] Jackson conducted after they felt he had been wronged in his position. So I was very familiar-- Speaker 1: So, and you talk about it being a real family here? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah, definitely. I mean I felt like I was at home. I felt very supported, and that was how I was able to thrive because the support was here. And people were very generous and encouraging. And it's so funny, when Barbara Walters retired last week, I went back, and I had gotten an exclusive interview with her in 2003. And she let me spend a couple of days on 'The View' set with her, and had given me this great advice. And I looked at my pieces and they were four minutes long. And I did two. Today, 1:15, that's, you know, that's all you get on the ten o'clock news, 1:15, 1:30 and if it's a special, you get 2:30, you know. Speaker 1: Well, so that--and the business has changed. That's what you're probably speaking of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's how things have changed (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It changed fast, you know, quantity. How many stories can you pack in? So, but I looked back on it. It's like, wow, I did eight minutes on a piece, you know. Story_ID: 131096 Speaker 1: So what are you, so in ter-- so is there another couple that are married, I mean in within the [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] station family? Speaker 2: I think Jay Levine and Mary Ann Childers might have been--and then there's other--in different departments. But on camera, I think they were the only ones that I can recall at the time. Jennie and Johnny Morris were married over at CBS [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. And I don't think there's many 'cause people don't do a lot in this business. They don't-- Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So when you--so you're back, and how old is your son at that point? How old is Jim's [ex-husband Jim Rose's] son? Speaker 2: When he moved in with us, he was high school, so he was fourteen. Speaker 1: So he moved in when you moved back? Speaker 2: Right, I came back to a new job, a new house me and Jim were building, a teenage son and virtually, a new marriage because the first two years and seven months, we commuted. So I had all of those big, challenging situations going on all at once. Speaker 1: Oh, that can be really hard. Speaker 2: Oh, it was really hard, building a house. That's really hard in itself, you know, very challenging 'cause you might wanna--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And where were you living at that point? Speaker 2: In, we lived out in Tinley Park [Chicago, Illinois] on a golf course, yeah, the Odyssey Club. That's where we were building our house. And so, you know, you might want red carpet. They might want white carpet or orange carpet or paint the walls blue, and you might want 'em yellow, you know. So that's a challenge, and Jim and I built a lot of the house ourselves because he's very, very good at woodworking. In fact, one of the rooms in the house was dedicated to woodworking, all the machines, the professional machines. He built my hope chest, you know, that I keep, you know, everything in and fur coats and mementos. And he built me jewelry boxes from scratch. And he built them all with his hand. And we did the whole entire basement. He built me a ballet studio in our basement with, you know, mirrors and ballet bar 'cause he knew that I liked to do that 'cause I took ballet classes way into my adulthood. And so, you know, we had a lot going on. We had a theater in the house that we could watch movies. And he built all of that. He built the theater with, you know, would built it up so you'd have levels. And he installed the chairs 'cause he knew he could save so much money 'cause he could do it. He knew how much they overcharge people when they're building houses. So we did everything, everything. We put the basement up ourselves, putting dry wall up. You know, I helped him lift through the basement to the--from the second floor to the basement. It was crazy, but, you know, so we did all that. Then I'm a new job and, you know, and the son, having to cook meals, do homework, you know, be a good mother because his mom allowed him to come and trusted me with her son, you know, her only child. I've, I took huge responsibility in that. And I took honor and pride in that, and I wanted to make sure he was happy, he was smart, he was adjusted and comfortable because his mom allowed me to raise his child. That's a, that was a big honor. So. Speaker 1: So you were--so how long--did he stay with you until he graduated? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he went to college. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah, he stayed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: How are you doing that? That's a, I mean you have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I know, football practice and proms and, you know, and it was, yeah (laughter), working here. And I worked weekends. Jim worked Monday through Friday when I first--my first ten years here, I worked weekends. So, you know, we would have our date nights on Friday. Speaker 1: And when you work weekends, is it, really, is it less work than someone who works, you know, like you're working--you work evenings or is it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, you do two shows when you work the weekends. You do five and ten [o'clock]. So you get there early, and you do--and then you prepare--you do the show, and then you prepare for the next show. So it's about the same, you know, I'd say it's the same. Reporting during the week was very challenging because I could be live in Wisconsin at midnight if there was a football game, Monday night football, and not get home, one, two in the morning and then have to be back at work at ten. The reporting is a lot more challenging because you're out in the elements in the extreme cold, extreme heat, rain, you know. And you're covering weather a lot of times too. So I was doing that, and, you know, Jim was busy doing sports. And I had to, you know, be responsible for a son and make sure he's well taken care of and eating and not, you know, and doing what teenagers do. (Laughter) So, you know, somebody had to be home, you know, to make sure everything was okay. Story_ID: 131097 Speaker 1: You know, Cheryl, see, a lot of times people don't really understand TV, you know, and, and, and, and news anchoring and reporting. They see it as glamorous-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, and they don't understand the--so, can you talk about some of the, you know, what are the expectations and what are the things and how, you know, are you, as a weekend anchor, are you doing things in the community or does that start more when you anchor? Speaker 2: No, you start that the day you walk in the door. I mean the day I walked in the door, I didn't get like a, you know, a two-week follow people and shadow people. I was on the air the day I walked in the door, and I did a three-part series on the [Chicago] Bears wives because that Monday I started was a Monday night football game. The Bears, it was playing the [Green Bay] Packers or some big, huge rivalry. And so I came to town three days early, and I used my friend contacts and said, can I interview you? And I ended up getting, you know, Diana Ditka, Ron Rivera's wife and Richard Dent's wife. And every day, I had a piece, and that was, you know, early. I came in here doing my thing. And it's live television, so you have to have your facts straight. I don't like to have to go back and say, "Ooh, we made a mistake." I like to have my facts straight. So that's very intense to make sure your information is right and good and fast and factual because you could get sued. In fact, we had a seminar yesterday, a two-hour legal seminary about what you can put on the air and what you can't. But it's very important in live television that your facts are straight, you know what you're talking about, and you have to have the confidence to deliver a story so that viewers feel welcomed to watch you because I have to rely on viewers to have my job, unlike, you know, somebody who might work at one job where you go every day, and you do that job. And then you go home. But my job relies on viewers. If we don't have viewers, and nobody is watching us, then we don't have a TV station. So we have to make it inviting, informative, compassionate, and interesting all at the same time. And it's live television. You don't get homework here. Speaker 1: Now, when you come, where is ABC [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] in the ratings? Speaker 2: We're number one. Speaker 1: You were number one? Speaker 2: Yeah, when I came here, we were a dominant number one. I mean there wasn't even in competition when I came here twenty-two years ago. I mean, because there wasn't a lot of cable, you know, there wasn't competition from cable and mobile devices where you can watch TVs on your iPad or watch TV on the bus while you're riding home from your mobile device. So dominant number one. And that was another reason why I chose to come here versus the other two stations that had offered me a job. Speaker 1: That's right. And then, now, how do things changes when Emily Barr comes on then 'cause that's after-- Speaker 2: Joe Ahern hired me. Speaker 1: Oh--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he hired me--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He was the king-- Speaker 2: Right, he, and he took people from other stations, and he had this grand vision. You know, he brought over Joan Esposito [ph.] and Linda Yu and Russ Ewing [ph.], all from NBC. And then, he brought [HistoryMaker] Harry Porterfield from CBS. So he had this grand vision of reconstructing how everything worked, and it was amazing. He hired Sylvia Perez. He hired me. He hired Jim Rose. He hired a whole lot of other people, Susan Ricco, Kent Ninomiya and lots of other people, Jim Rosenfield, who was my co-anchor on the weekends, who I loved so dearly, still to this day. He was like a brother to me. And he was very good to me. Joe Ahern, I always thank him. Whatever event--he's now the president of the "100 Club", and when I see him out, I don't care. I let everybody know, this man gave me the opportunity because had he not hired me, I don't know what would have happened. I don't know where I could have gone. You just don't know. And I'm a very grateful person. I never forget people who give me an opportunity. I never take it for granted, and he gave me that opportunity. He didn't have to. Speaker 1: But he was really known as the king--I mean if Joe--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Ahern was in the room, he was gonna put the right people--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and he was viewed as, I--what was his like--I don't know. I knew (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, he's just very charming. He dressed very nice. And, you know, he came from New Jersey, I think. He was a New Jersey guy. So he was, you know, middle-class guy, came from New Jersey, and he was like a doer. I'm gonna do--I've got this, and I'm gonna make it happen. But he had great vision. And he wasn't scared to implement his vision, and it worked out for him tremendously. Speaker 1: Tremendously. Speaker 2: He did very well, yeah. Speaker 1: And then he was, so he was here for your first like five years--well, no, yeah, five--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Probably--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --five years-- Speaker 2: --seven or something. Speaker 1: Seven, okay, 'cause I have Emily Barr coming-- Speaker 2: Wait, okay. Speaker 1: --in 1997. Speaker 2: Oh, she came in '97 [1997]? Okay, yeah-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --'cause I came in 1992. Speaker 1: Two [1992], right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so what is that? It's only five years. Speaker 1: It's five years. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then Emily was here from-- Speaker 1: A long-- Speaker 2: --'97 [1997] to 0-12 [2012]? Speaker 1: No, to '12 [2012]. Speaker 2: So, five and five each. Yeah. Speaker 1: No, no, she was 1997-- Speaker 2: Wait. Speaker 1: --to 2012? Speaker 2: So, that's '03 [2003], plus--oh, that's eight. Speaker 1: That's- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: no--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Wait, no--she, that's right, she was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --eighteen--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, she was here fifteen years. Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, what am I thinking? Speaker 1: --'cause she was here a long time. Speaker 2: Okay. (laughter) Speaker 1: I'm like, I'm thinking, I'm trying to add the numbers- Story_ID: 131098 Speaker 1: But, no, she [Emily Barr] was here [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] a long, long time. Speaker 2: Yes, she was. And I love her, you know. She's so practical. And I remember writing her a letter, thanking her for believing in me. That meant so much to me, that she believed in me. And I said, that's all I want, that's all people want. They wanna be validated. And when you gave me the opportunity and you believed in me, then I gave her everything I had. I put it all out on the table, and I said, I'm doing this for you to be a star, to be a winner because you gave me a chance, so. And I was very grateful. And I'm still grateful, and I always talk to her, and I check in on her children. And she's doing wonderful, you know. She, of course, got promoted. She's in charge of several TV stations now, a lot busier, of course. But she had great vision too. But hers is just different. And she was here. So she's been a large part of my success. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause she--that's where you really got promoted under her. Speaker 2: Right, and she promoted me to Monday through Friday, and like I said, she believed in it. When, you know, she didn't have to do it. She could have chosen a whole nother direction, but she gave me the chance, the opportunity. Speaker 1: Now, you replaced--did you replace [HistoryMaker] Diann [Burns]-- Speaker 2: Well, Diann left to go to Channel 2--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Two, where she then, she had a--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She worked Joe Ahern-- Speaker 1: Joe Ahern there. Speaker 2: Right, but Kathy [Brock] got the ten [o'clock news], and then I got the five 'cause Diann was doing the five and the ten. And I got the five and Kathy got the ten. So we kind of split her duties. Speaker 1: And then, really, I wonder if Diann wished she had--well, she wanted to follow Joe, but I mean at--Channel--CBS didn't turn out to be--that's where things sort of exploded. Speaker 2: But you never know, though, how things are gonna--you've gotta try it 'cause you don't want to live a life of regrets and say, "Gosh, if I had tried to go over there, how would it have been?" You just never know. You know, when you come here, how it was gonna be, you know. I didn't, my first week here, my first month, I was like, why? This is so hard. You know, I loved Wichita [Kansas]. It was very difficult, the transition was very challenging. Speaker 1: Now, what was challenging about it? Speaker 2: Just because, like I said, I had a teenage son that I was rearing, and I had a new job. Any new job is a lot, and, you know, basically, a new marriage because we had commuted so we were the first time living in the same house. And we were constructing a home together. I had that, and just the challenges of a new city and a new TV station. And this is the real deal. I mean we're talking the number three market, and we had newscast four, five, six, ten, and we added an eleven. So we had five, six, seven broadcasts a day. And you could be on all of them or one of them. And, so you were working. Speaker 1: So do you know that at the time? I mean how are assignments given out and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You come, well, if you're reporting that day, you come in and there's a big meeting, and you discuss what, what do you think people are talking about? What's the story? Some things are very obvious, like, you know, two men drowned in Lake Michigan today at the beach at 31st Street [Chicago, Illinois]. So that'll be our lead because that's something that is tangible, and we know that happened. But then there could be the story of the little girl that you were in the grocery store, and her mother said, "Hey, Cheryl, Ms. Burton, she's fourteen and graduating from high school and going to college at fourteen." Well, that's huge. I wanna do that story. So you come and you share that information. And they go, wow, that's pretty cool. Or you have a story you've been working on for a long time, you know. There's been some controversy over at the photography studio or something like that, that you've worked on. And now it's time to put it in film form because you've got all the players in place, and you've got all the information, the evidence. So it kind of depends. You've got breaking news too that happens right--you might have a plane crash or a train derailment, and it--you just drop everything and that becomes the story, a fire, you know, or children are trapped or a school bus accident or shooting at a school. So breaking news, so, but you come ready for some ideas. You know, a good reporter always comes to work with ideas, and then you go from there, and you share. And you find out what you think people would be interested in seeing or viewing later that day. Story_ID: 131099 Speaker 1: So you're--you know, it looks like a very steady growth, but are you--and you make everything seem so easy, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --in some respects. But can you--I know besides that, but what have been some of your low points? And what have been some of your--and I have some things here that I know are high points, but can we talk about low points? Speaker 2: Some of the, you know, when I was a reporter, I worked the night shifts, from two [o'clock AM] to ten [o'clock AM]. So things happen a lot between that time. And I was a reporter Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, two to ten. And I would go out regularly on stories about child molestations and drive-by shootings and child abuse stories, regularly. And it began to chip away at my spirit. It was very hard to keep going to these homes and ask families for photographs of their loved ones who had been killed in a drive-by shooting or who had been molested by their teacher or who had been hit by a car. That, I have a very compassionate spirit, so I take that with me at home. And it was very hard, and it began chip away at who I was. And, you know, I know Oprah [Winfrey] talks very often about when she worked in Baltimore and that's why she auditioned for the job in Chicago [Illinois] to be this talk show host for 'AM Chicago' because she couldn't do it anymore. And I totally understand what she was saying. And people would say, Cheryl, I don't know how you do it. You know, I would go, and I would go into some of the projects in some of the most dangerous neighborhoods. And I'd be climbing up stairs in dark and hoping I wouldn't get shot or attacked with a cameraman, going to get pictures and talk to people, and hoping I wasn't gonna get beat up, coming to a crime scene very soon after, and it does happen to reporters and cameramen, things do happen like that. So I was concerned, and one time I went to a rally, and I have a picture in my office. And I'm holding hands praying with some kids, and he has a t-shirt on that says "Stop the Violence", and somebody took that picture of me and sent it. And, you know, reporters aren't supposed to get involved, but that was who I was. I needed to pray with these people and hold their hands. I'm covering the story, but they started, they asked for prayer, and I held hands and did that. And it got to me so bad that I went to Emily Barr, and I said, "Emily, we have to do something. All of these young people are being killed. And some of them are the brightest." They had futures that were just so shiny, and I said, we must do something. So she agreed with me, and we started a campaign called "Stop the Violence", and our first project that we did was, we had a town hall meeting with the mayor of Chicago [Richard M. Daley], the superintendent of Chicago, the superintendent of Chicago Public Schools. And we had some psychiatrists, some psychologists, and we had a gentleman by the name of [HistoryMaker] Roland Martin. And he will tell you that he gives me credit for starting his television career in the city of Chicago because I had hand-picked him to come and be a part of this discussion. Emily liked him so much--she was a little nervous though 'cause he could be controversial. But his verbiage was so on point, and so profound, and it was inspiring. It was motivational, and it got you to think. And so that was our very first project. After that, we did half hour specials where we began to talk to people who worked in the community. But those have been some of my--you know, I've arrived on plane crash scenes, and the deceased are still in the plane. And I've seen dead bodies, and I had to go home, and I couldn't get that out of my head. I've seen them in, dead bodies in sewers, where I've come upon a crime scene, and the police haven't arrived yet. And it was just very challenging. Story_ID: 131100 Speaker 1: I remember--I'm gonna try to get through this one, but I had--when [emotional]--let me take a little sip here. When I got divorced [from Jim Rose], my little sister [Sherri Turk] who lives four doors down, she would come by every day and [emotional] put a note in my door and tell me, you're good, you're smart, hang in there. And so one day she gave me a mustard seed, and on the back of it, it says, my favorite passage in the Bible, Matthew 17:21 [sic, Matthew 17:20], "If you have the faith as small as a mustard seed, anything is possible." So I wore that every day. And so I remember going to a house where this young girl had just been murdered. And the family was distraught. And I didn't know what to do. I'm up here trying to interview 'em. I felt so bad. And I took my necklace off, and I put it around the mother's neck. And I said, you're gonna be okay, you know, you're gonna be okay, 'cause you're gonna have your faith. And that probably was tough. I still remember it, going to the house, and I said, you gotta have your faith. That's the only thing that's gonna get you through this 'cause I can't imagine losing a child. And she just fell in my arms and broke down. And we had to stop filming. I didn't wanna put that on, but, you know, that happened. And so my sister got me another mustard seed. I ended up giving that one away (laughter). She got me another mustard seed, and I gave that one away. So, that became kind of like my signature gift. And when I went to interview Oprah [Winfrey], I gave her one and a jar of mustard seeds, and she keeps them on her bathtub. So, and she wore the mustard seed on TV a couple of times, and I was just like, oh, my God. Yeah. So, you know, those were some of my really tough times. I think going over to people's homes when they lost a loved one, and, you know, because this is a time conscious business, I have to turn these stories around very quickly. You can't stay there all night. But it was like, what can I do to make this person feel better? And, you know, I took it right off my neck, and I mean it had so much value to me 'cause my sister was like, "Hang in there, keep your faith", you know. She would just put little things in the door like--that was hard too 'cause I got a divorce with somebody I was working with, you know. That was-- Speaker 2: That's hard. Speaker 1: That was very hard. I have to sit on the set with the person, you know, and do the news. But, you know, my sister would put, I'm telling you, a note in the door every day. And she, she would put like a magnifying glass in my door. And she said, I want you to use it to magnify your blessings. Speaker 2: Is this--now, which sister is this? Speaker 1: The baby. Speaker 2: It's the baby. Speaker 1: Yeah. She's so sweet. She's going to Heaven, oh, my God. I'm going too, but-- Speaker 2: But you are. Speaker 1: --I'm going a little rickety (laughter). I didn't think I was gonna like cry or whatever, but-- Speaker 2: So what year did you get divorced? Speaker 1: It was 1996. Speaker 2: Oh, it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's been eighteen years, yeah. Speaker 2: It was 1996? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah. Ooh, do I need some tissue? What is it, is it ten o'clock or nine o'clock? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996]? Speaker 1: Yeah, I got divorced in 1996, yeah, four years after I got here. Speaker 2: Too much going on? Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Story_ID: 131101 Speaker 1: [Okay] so that, was it two careers or is it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was a lot, probably. I don't, I mean I can't even tell you today, you know, 'cause it was--he asked. So I don't--you'd have to ask him [Burton's ex-husband, Jim Rose] (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But, yeah, it was challenging, you know. And his son graduated from college [sic, high school]. So he didn't, at least he didn't have to see-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, everything happened that year. His son graduated from high school, and we went our separate ways too. But he's always been a friend. And it was tough, you know, going through the process and a couple of years after. But he is my biggest supporter here, my greatest friend in this building. And, you know, I trust him more than anybody in this building. He's got my back more than anybody, and I have his. Yep, and he'll tell you that, yep. Thick and thin, you know, he married several people after me. And, you know, I'm very proud of him, and always supportive and encouraging and always has his back. And any time there's something going down, he will go and stick up for me and fight for me. Yeah. Speaker 1: That is, I mean not many--there are all kinds of situations--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but people, I mean to be in the same--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, I know it-- Speaker 1: --company. Speaker 2: People are blown away, but he is very kind, and I'm, you know, kind to him, his children. And never--that's why you've never seen anything in the papers or, about anything. In fact, we were probably divorced two or three years before it even got in the paper. And they had to commend us on how it was so, you know--nobody said anything, you know. Yeah, but he is my greatest friend here and would do anything for me today and vice versa. Speaker 1: Wow, that's amazing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, loves my family and, you know. Story_ID: 131102 Speaker 1: It was, it was tough, it was very tough going through it, going through it, you know. We didn't have children, and, you know, he [Jim Rose] had a job, and I had a job. So it wasn't like we had the tumultuous, in that kind of situation. But it was just sad because it was thirteen years we had been together, married six and together seven before we got married. So thirteen years. I was with him longer than any woman he had been with. His mother died when he was eighteen. So, you know, no other people he had been with--and we had built a life together, you know. We had dreams, I mean it was happening. We had raised a son together. And I had, you know, I was with him when his son was five. I met him--so every summer, his son lived with us for summer break. And then afterwards--but we're very professional. And we kept it professional the whole time, you know. Speaker 2: That says a lot. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 131103 Speaker 1: So I--that, how we got to that is I was asking about the low points. Speaker 2: Right, the low points 'cause I was talking about the mustard seeds that I would give out. And I've oftentimes, you know, one time I interviewed--there was a ninety-year-old woman who they had cut her heat off because, you know, that's what happens when you don't pay your bills. And I, and I thought about my parents [Simpson Leo and Hattie Burton]. And I said, if my mother was ninety, and she couldn't afford to pay her heating bill, I would be devastated. And if you're ninety, you've seen the invention of a car, the telephone [sic], the television, the phonograph [sic], the computer, all of these things. You've lived through the Civil Rights Movement. There's no reason you should be living without heat, food or anything because you have given your life. So, you know, I went, and I paid her bill the next day, and I gave her all the money in my purse. And I had done that on many occasions because people don't have money to pay for funerals. When they, you know, have a loss of a child, they don't have money to bury these children. And people don't even know I've done it. I've called the funeral home the next day and I just told them how much, and I just paid for it. And so many people have no clue the kids I've put through college. They don't know it's me at all, and it just got done. And, you know, those were low points 'cause I said, it--how can you like, it's not fair. You know, this just isn't fair. These kids were going to school or trying to have a better life and then look what happens. So, but there have been many occasions like that, that one story that started my annual party that I did, you know. I had gone out and done a story on a women's shelter because these women had been abused by their spouses or whatever or partners. And they ran away to live in a women's shelter with only the clothes on their backs and their children. And I had gone to do a story one time, and it was very--I was super sad because it was coming up on Christmas, and these mothers were gonna be in this shelter with their children. And I was like, I gotta do something 'cause I know what Christmas is like to wake up with a toy everywhere, and a house full of gifts wrapped. So that's what started my annual toy drive birthday party, after doing a story. And that was a low point, and I think for me, whenever I have a low point, I try to make something good out of it because every year I had a toy drive, and people would come to my birthday party and bring a toy. And then I would deliver them to the shelters and then I would personally purchase gifts for the mothers so that the children in the foster-- in the domestic violence shelters could go and wrap a present. So their mothers would also have a gift when they woke up, so it wasn't always about the kids. Story_ID: 131104 Speaker 1: And I've always done that. When I went to South Africa to cover the opening of Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey's] school, her Leadership Academy for Girls in South Africa, I took an entire suitcase of toys that year, and an entire suitcase of gym shoes. And I took the toys to an orphanage in Pretoria [South Africa]. And this was an AIDS orphanage where these kids were orphaned because their parents had AIDS. And I took a whole--I shipped boxes and boxes of toys to South Africa. And my driver took me to the orphanage, and I delivered toys for these kids. And it was very tough. I mean that was really a low point. You know, interviewing these girls that were trying to get into Oprah's school, I mean, you know, going to their homes and their bed was made out of newspaper. And, you know, I remember one girl, Lasefo [ph.], and she lived with her father because her mother had died of AIDS. And I went to her home in the shanty town, and she had lived on a floor with, you know, her bed was made out of newspaper. And she said, you know, and they're so proper. She was only twelve years old, brilliant. And she said, "Ms. Burton, if I don't get into this school, I will be judged by my circumstances and not by my possibilities. And getting in this school, will open up my possibilities." And that has never left me. This is a twelve-year-old, you know, and twelve-year-olds in this country want X-Boxes and, you know, electronic games and computers. This girl only wanted an education. And that was all she wanted. And, you know, her father had to let her go, and he was gonna live in this house by himself that had one table and a couple of chairs, and some pots on the stove, no locks on the doors. And how do you get brilliant at twelve. And then she wrote this poem to me that she read looking through a mirror. And it was about what she saw when she looked in the mirror. And I thought, wow, you know, I was so inspired when I left there. And I, you know, I learned words in Zulu like "hope" is "themba", and, you know, I learned words like "faith" is "kholo" in Zulu because that is what kept these people's dreams alive, was having kholo and themba, in Zulu. You know, I interviewed Archbishop Desmond Tutu, and such an honor for me. And he gave me some words of wisdom that I've never, ever forgotten. And I've been a fighter my whole life. Like I told you, my mom [Hattie Burton] told me I came out with my head up. And he said, "Cheryl, one thing I wanna leave you with is that I would rather you be jailed and speak your mind than silent and free. Don't ever be silent 'cause silence is violence." And, you know, so whenever I see a wrong, I'm all over it. I have to speak up because silence is the same thing as violence. You can't just sit back and watch. And I think I've learned that from going into these homes, the families who felt like they had no fight, no voice, no hope because of what kept happening, you know. And I've had low points like that. But through them, I went home and, you know, I became an activist to do something about it, to make sure your child got educated. I know there's one young man, that he's in the Boston School of Music, Boston College, the prestigious Boston College of Music? Speaker 2: Berklee [College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Berklee. Speaker 2: Berklee. Speaker 1: In Boston. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: He has no idea how much I paid for him to go to college because I read an article that said he had no money, but he had the talent that was beyond his, you know, seventeen years. There's no way that a young man with all that talent should not have the right. I mean in this country, I always say every kid should be able to have a doctor and go to the doctor and have an education. It's the richest country in the world. So if I can do my part, you know, God put me in this place for a reason, and I don't take that for granted. And that's why when you asked me my favorite phrase, "God is good all the time and all the time, God is good." So I'm very grateful and "To much whom is given, much is, you know, expected." And Arthur Ashe once said that "You make a living by what you do, but you make a life by what you give." And that has stuck with me. So I'm--like I said, my sisters will tell you, I'm more generous than anything, but I'm funny too. I'm super funny (laughter). I'm like, hilarious. So, very dramatic. They call me a drama queen. They will say that too, that I'm a drama queen (laughter). Story_ID: 131105 Speaker 1: Well, you know what is interesting, 'cause not many people do that. You know, people can be sort of more self, self-centered, but not many people always, you know, be--are silent givers or helping things behind the scenes 'cause it, well, for whatever reason. But I think it takes a person who wants to, you know, have impact, but doesn't need the glory. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I wanna ask you another question 'cause you've mentioned her several times. So when did your relationship, when did a relationship start with, between you and Oprah Winfrey? Speaker 2: Oh, fifteen years ago, maybe, when she asked me to come interview her. Speaker 1: So how did that come about? Speaker 2: That's how it came about. Speaker 1: Because that's very--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She said, send Cheryl over. Speaker 1: See, but that's very, you know, 'cause she's--she doesn't let everyone. Speaker 2: She was supportive of me. She said, send Cheryl over to interview me, and I've got--she was talking about something at that time. It could have been--I'm trying to remember the very first interview I--it might have been her talent show or something that she was introducing. But it was something that she was promoting, and she said, I want Cheryl to come over and interview me. And from day one--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Do you remember what year that was? Speaker 2: Probably fifteen years ago. I'm just trying to think because--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So like 1999? Speaker 2: I was still the weekend anchor [at WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] too 'cause I got 2003 is when--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Three [2003] is when you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --is when, yes. So I'd probably say 1999, something like that, yeah. It was before the millennium that I was doing the interviews. But I'm thinking fifteen years ago because I, you know, look back at some of the stories that I've done with her 'cause I've captured all of them, and I recorded them, so I have it in the library at my own home. And the first time I went over there, I took her a gift, and it was a spiritual gift because what do you get somebody who has everything. And I brought her something because I was grateful she allowed me to interview her. And I wanted her to know that. And I didn't take it for granted 'cause I know what she did. I know her value, and I know why she did it, and I know what she was trying to accomplish. I felt it, I understood it, and I wanted her to know that. So I gave her a thank you, a gratitude gift, in appreciation. And, you know, whenever I would go over there, like if I had some great shoes she liked, I would get 'em, you know, and give 'em to her. But mostly, my gifts to her were very spiritual in nature. And I would make them, I would create them like, you know, I have all my spiritual bracelets on today. It would be something like this, you know, or had a cross. I have "love", I have a "cross", I have the word "faith" written out. But it would always be something spiritual because she, you know, had amassed wealth. What do you get somebody like that? You get somebody, you know, value, when you do something like that. And I continued to tell her I appreciated the opportunity. I, recently, I got an exclusive interview with her in the White House at, when she was receiving a presidential medal. And she allowed me to interview her. I got the phone call only hours before the interview took place. It wasn't even happening, and I saw her at this event recently, and I thanked her again, and that was November because I want her to know that I get it. I understand the value. And I had pitched the story to go to the White House to cover this because [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks and she was getting the award. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And those were two beloved Chicagoans. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I had started pitching this to her in July and August, just like I had pitched starting in May to cover the fiftieth anniversary of the [1963] 'I Have a Dream' speech [by the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And I did that for a week and covered some of the most incredible stories of our history. I interviewed the man who caught Dr. King when he got shot. And he fell into his arms. And the way he explained that moment, I just started crying. I, I couldn't even help it, the way he described that moment in history. Story_ID: 131106 Speaker 1: So, you know-- Speaker 2: So that first interview when you go over, so are you, are you nervous? Speaker 1: Oh, very, my God, (unclear) you think--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --because she [Oprah Winfrey] is at--she's really hot. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, she's an international star-- Speaker 2: She's hot--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and, you know, I've gotta ask the right questions because I've gotta make it interesting. I've gotta ask the right question. I can't just go over there and say, "Ooh, you look so nice, oh, you sing so good, oh I love your glasses, oh I love your fingernail polish." No, I've gotta really ask the right questions that will be things that the public wants to know because I've gotta have a story that nobody else is gonna have. And I want it to be interesting so you will want to watch it. So that was, I was very nervous. I was excited beyond--I mean I couldn't believe it. I'm gonna go interview Oprah. What do I wear? I mean what, I mean, oh, my God. What do I--you know. What do I say? Do I hug her? Do I not hug her? I mean, do I ask her about her family? I mean, you know, just what do you do? This was huge for me. But then I hugged her, and she was so warm and welcoming to me, it was just--the ice was broken, and it was like sisters, and we giggled at silly stuff. And, you know, we laughed and cried, you know. I had several interviews where that has happened where Oprah has shed some tears. And it was genuine, you know, it was the subject matter. So. Speaker 2: So, really, she felt your spirit in some respects? Speaker 1: I think that's it. I think, because people say that all the time, like Cheryl, she can tell you're genuine, and you're real, and you're deep, you know, and you get it. So, I think that was it, and I got the final interview, television, the only interview she gave. Speaker 2: When she retired. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Which is a big--that was another big deal. Speaker 1: I mean I was just blown away because I ended up interviewing all over the world. People were calling me from Holland, from Africa, from Greece to do interviews. What was that like? What did she say? What, you know, and I'm just like, oh, my God. I'm on the radio in London, you know, on TV in Italy and, so it was really an incredible opportunity, and again, I thank her all the time. I don't take it for granted, and I always give her a "thank you" gift. And it's always been something so special. And I remember giving her, when she retired, I gave her like in this bejeweled box, this bejeweled magnifying glass. And I took it back all the way to what my sister had gave me. And I added to it, and I said, "You know, may you use this as a visual aid 'cause, of course, she was older, and I said, and so that you can magnify your blessings in your, and she just, was just so emotional because it was from the heart. And it was real, and it was beautiful magnifying glass that stands on your desk. And she got it. She was a heartfelt gift. It wasn't, I didn't buy some designer handbag or anything like that. It was a gift from the heart, and it was meaningful and well thought out. And that was just part of the gift, and then I gave her a charm bracelet that had all of the things she loved about Chicago [Illinois] on it, including a light bulb 'cause that was her phrase, "The light bulb moment". And I had all of these charms made, a custom charm made of her dog 'cause she loved to talk about her dogs, a microphone, you know, the city of Chicago skyline, and, you know, friend. I even stuck a mustard seed on there. And that was, yeah, because I knew she was leaving and going to California, so I gave all of the things that reminded her of the good that happened here in this city. So, yeah. Speaker 2: I mean that's pretty special. So what were just some of the--what were the questions in that first interview that-- Speaker 1: Oh, God, Julieanna, I don't--kind of probably had to relate to whatever-- Speaker 2: The (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, like if it--whatever it was--I remember what I was wearing (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) What were you wearing? Speaker 1: It was like a blue, like sweater and tank. I remember it. Oh, my God, I don't remember what it was. I remember she teared up too. I cannot remember what it was, what the subject was. I don't wanna even make up something 'cause I don't remember it. Speaker 2: It's just so few people that have the chance to-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --to, you know, she hasn't allowed that very much. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Even there are--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But they were mostly for something, like if I went--like when she gave away the cars-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I went over there to interview her about that. I went over there to interview her--I remember doing the story on the "Down Low". I was the first probably person in the country to do a report on what that meant. And she ended up--I did it in February, and she ended up doing it on her show in April. And she had the same people that I used in my story, and I was in her audience on that show, very profound. People had never heard the word, "Living on the down low", never even knew what it was. So every time I've gone over there, it was for a purpose. I went over there one time, of course, when she was opening the school and what were her thoughts about, about that and why she was doing it. And then one time she was having like a talent show. So I went over there--then I went over there for her favorite things. So, and, of course, she would play, you know guessing games because she didn't wanna tell me anything. So some of the interviews were very fun, and then some of them were very serious. So when she was doing a very big project, she would always have me come over and do an interview. You know, it could have been the beginning of the season, the new year or the end of the season show, what she was doing. Like if she was doing something big, like taking her whole audience to Australia, something like that. So it always was for some purpose. Story_ID: 131107 Speaker 1: And so what about the Legends Ball? You also were at that, right? Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, can you believe that? I could not believe when I got the invitation. I screamed so loud, my sister thought I was being harmed, and she was like, do I need to call 911? I was like, "No [hollering], I got an invitation!" And I'm screaming 'cause she [Oprah Winfrey] only invited 200 people, 250 people in the whole world. And I was one of them. Speaker 1: I don't know--I didn't know it was that small. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was that small, and each person could bring a person. So 250 got invited, but 500 total were there or less. But 250 people. Speaker 1: 'Cause by that time, the president [HM Barack Obama] had just-- Speaker 2: He was a senator. Speaker 1: He was a senator--he was a new senator. Speaker 2: And I'll tell you at the Legends Ball, all of the people who were there--it was women. They were celebrating women, that the only person who spoke at the ball was Senator Barack Obama, the only who spoke at the ball that night was Senator Barack Obama. And she said that night, he was gonna be the president. That's kind of how she jokingly introduced him. So, everything is divine order. Speaker 1: Everything is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Really divine order. But that was the most fascinating, fun event. I was super nervous. You know, I got a ball gown, made custom, 'cause you had to wear a ball gown, she said. You know, I'm in the bathroom and Janet Jackson, Katie Holmes is starting--this is her first day with Tom Cruise. We're in the bathroom with Patty LaBelle telling Janet Jackson how to fix her undergarments, and I'm sitting there, what? I'm here. This is (unclear) and Janet Jackson, you know. And they're all, everybody is just sisters. And we're laughing, you know, Gladys Knight, and you're cracking jokes, and, you know, and they're interested in me, you know. Why was I there? And, and I said, because--I'm here 'cause--just like you. I'm her friend or something like that or, but it was just so much fun and freedom and just, everybody was kind. And I met some really great people. I mean I have a picture of me and Sidney Poitier in my office taken at her house. And when would I have ever gotten a chance to meet him and talk with him and ask him about his life. And we had conversation. You know, I have a wall in my office. It's all, you know, people I've interviewed, Madeline Albright over the years, [HM] Harry Belafonte, President [Bill] Clinton, T.D. Jakes [HM Reverend T.D. Jakes], President Obama, First Lady Michelle Obama, Desmond Tutu, and, you know Kanye West. I spent three days with him before people could pronounce his name, telling the station, this guy is going to be famous. You guys must listen to me. So I've got people, I've got Hill Harper who was a graduate with Barack Obama at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] from election night. And, in fact, one year, he had written a book to women and to sisters and teenagers, and he signed a copy for everybody at my party that night. And then I took twenty-five of them and gave them to the women of the shelter too. Story_ID: 131108 Speaker 1: So, but I have, you know, my office is my life story. People--and I have affirmations everywhere that, you know, stenciled on the wall and some just on Post-It notes because I carry affirmations, I live affirmations, I read affirmations every day from several sources. And I just kind of, you know, I think in a positive way. And, you know, when you said some low points, I've had them, you know. I've had them along the way. My life might look like I haven't, but I've had them, you know. I've carjacked at gunpoint. I've been, you know, beat up and attacked in downtown Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: You know, that was--what was that man? That was weird--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He was bipolar [schizophrenic]. Speaker 2: Right, that's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And he hadn't taken his medicine, and he just was on a rage. Speaker 2: Gregory Perdue-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --was his name. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know it better than me 'cause he doesn't really, I don't, you know, give him energy like that because, you know, it was a very traumatic time. I had to testify in a court, and I had never had to do that before, you know. And I had to look at the person who thought it was funny and, you know, he wasn't remorseful or anything like that 'cause he was mentally ill. You know, and it was hard for, you know, for the defense to talk to me about it, and, you know, try to defend his actions and things like that. So that was a tough time. My mom [Hattie Burton] was with me in court for that. Story_ID: 131109 Speaker 1: Now, what was your most difficult interview, and what has been the easiest--do you think, like when you-- Speaker 2: I don't know. It's difficult. I'm trying to think. I have to think about that, and, oh, I don't know. I can't even--I remember asking Oprah [Winfrey] that, and she answered that very easily. But I can't think of anybody who was difficult or--you know, the difficult ones are the interviewing families that have lost loved ones, and they were children or babies. Those have been extremely difficult because I'm very sad, and I feel their pain when I'm interviewing them. Story_ID: 131110 Speaker 1: Like I said, I have affirmations everywhere. You have to constantly stay positive. Speaker 2: You do, and sometimes it can be hard. And then that's why I'm saying, when you're talking about seeing sometimes the worst of society,-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know. And the news, it seems like it has to report it too? Speaker 1: Well, you do have to report it, but we see the best in society too, you know. Every time there's a mass shooting, people come through. Or, you know, people have no idea that I've paid somebody's bill, and they're ninety years old. And because I get to cover the news story, I'm doing that. I'm helping somebody. And helping somebody go to school and go to college. And I might do a story on a volleyball team that's number one in the city, but they can't afford uniforms. And if I do a story and it goes across the airwaves, people wanna help out. People wanna help people who are trying to do and better their lives. So that's the flip side of the bad things that happen because I really think there's more good in this world than bad, even though you see it a lot on the news. You see the bad, but I remember think there are more good people. And I think there're more good things that happen in life than bad things. I've been the recipient of a lot of good things, a lot of good people loving me, believing in me, pushing me, not letting--my family doesn't let me complain very much, you know. I always joke with my friends. I'm like, I need to go out with you so I can complain and like you'll let me because my family checks me very quickly. And I remember when I was carjacked at gunpoint, I got very angry at God and I was angry at why, you know, I'm generous. I would have gave that man money for what he, the trauma he caused me. And, you know, my mom [Hattie Burton] said, girl, you'd better shape up really quick 'cause he coulda shot you in your head and you would have been dead. And I said, I was, right then, grace and mercy. She had to check me. And I was okay after that. I was just like, she just put it all in perspective for me. And my mom has never, ever complained. I've never seen my mom complain about anything. Maybe her knee's hurting now, but never, she's never been that mom to say anything about--if you didn't win a contest or if you didn't win anything, my mom was always positive, always. I've never seen her complain or, you know, raise her voice 'cause she didn't believe in that 'cause she said you should always talk to your children on their same level. So I've never heard her to do that. So I'm not the complainer type. So if I do go off on somebody, it's generally justified, and it has gotten to a point where it needed to be addressed. But I'm usually not that person. And then when I do go there, people are like, Cheryl is really upset about something because it's--wrong has been done. So. Story_ID: 131111 Speaker 1: So, that's why I was talking about the, the Chicago [Illinois] you grew up with in and the family structure you grew up in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There has been a profound change in those years. I mean from, you know, in your years of living, since you were born here. And what are your thoughts about, you know, the--or should I say the hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: It's, it is changed. I mean even in my mom's [Hattie Burton's] neighborhood. We used to, we were what we called latch-key kids. We wore our key around our neck, which means people could clearly see that you had a house key. And now kids can't even walk home from--we walked home from school and walked to school. We didn't get a ride. You can't do that now. You have to be escorted, and you have to maybe be driven to school. And that was the luxury of going four blocks and picking up, you know, Claudette on the way, David on the way, Robert over here and Bill over here. And you collect everybody walking down the street, and you spend time over people's houses. And their parents were able to reprimand you without any type of repercussions. And so, you know, now, it's very different. The neighborhoods have changed, and I'm scared for--my mom's neighborhood, of course, everybody is older. They're either selling their homes or giving them to their children because it's not safe to live in some of these neighborhoods. And I am, I am scared. And I remember doing a show on "Windy City Live", and it was about violence, and they asked me to speak on that same perspective of growing up here. And I always, you know, and I said something that people who commit crimes, they came out of the womb with dreams too. But something happened along the way, and their dream got deferred and they turned to violence because they had dreams at four. They had dreams at seven and something happened. And that's where we have to find the root of, where did their process go wrong, where they stopped dreaming and hoping and believing that it's possible to go to school and get an education and be free and be safe. But now it's very different, you know. I, I'd like to think I had a very happy childhood. I skipped, I had a pogo stick. I mean we had a Big Wheel. We could ride it outside. We rode our bikes. You didn't have to come home till the lights came on, and in the summer, that's like 9:00, 8:50. But now, you can't even ride your bike or walk to, you know, the ice cream truck that comes out. You have to be escorted to that. We had a Bus-o-Fun. I don't know if you ever had that where a bus decorated with fun things inside would be the birthday party. And it would show up in front of your house, and you'd play games in a bus that was called "Bus-O-Fun". It was a redecorated yellow school bus, but everything inside was games. And you had birthday cake and ice cream and games. And it was safe. I'm not sure that would be the case today. But I always have to stay hopeful. And like I said, I learned that word in South Africa because they inspired me, people who had worse living conditions than I could even imagine. They still had hope, every day. They believed something better was on the horizon, and if they can live like that, I have no choice but to believe that better days are still ahead and that change is coming and hope lives on forever. I still believe that. I'm never gonna stop believing in hope and dreaming and believing. I think school should have classes in dreaming. And I think people should dream with their eyes open, and I think they should dream out loud, and I think students should have classes where they can talk about their dreams and their goals and their hopes. And it'd be a class, and you'd get a grade in it or you'd get some type of evaluation. Are you dreaming big enough? You know, is that dream possible or what else do you wanna add to that dream because that's what gets you up every day, is the possibility, the enthusiasm of a new day, what it could bring. And if you don't have hope, and if you don't have a dream, why do you get up? And that's where some of the young people are at. And I do worry about that, and I do worry, especially for African American children because they've been affected the most by the violence. And it's younger and younger, the victims are getting younger all the time, and that saddens me. Story_ID: 131112 Speaker 1: (Unclear) time for quitting. So your--the carjacking, describe that and where you were and-- Speaker 2: It was a very hot July day. I had just gotten off from work. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: It was maybe 1997 or '98 [1998], and I was driving around in my convertible, and I had gone to get some gas. I had just picked up about five suits that I had purchased. And I had my computer and my purse in the car. It was a Wednesday so I was very happy 'cause at that time, that was my Friday. And I pulled up to this gas station, one block away from the police station on the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois], right there at Chicago Avenue and Clark Street. And it was a Citgo. And I was in the outer lane of the gas station, and I'm feeling it up, happy, sunny, and this man walks up with a gun in his face--I mean a gun in his hand, and he sticks it right in my face. And I'm just pumping the gas, and he walks up, and he pulls the gun out and he doesn't say a word. And he just goes, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And so my thought was, because I'm in the news business, I've seen enough crime. If I don't look at his face, he won't think that I saw him, and if I back up and back away and let him have it, he won't think that I'm fighting him. So I'm backing up. I fall backwards over the pump, and he gets in it, adjust the seat comfortably, and then he pulls off. And I'm screaming and crying. And I just kept saying, please, don't shoot me, please don't shoot me. I kept saying that. I mean I'm looking at it right now, just going, oh, my God. I can't even believe I'm talking about it. But I see the gun in my face so clearly, and I'm just like, "Please, don't shoot me," and I keep begging him to not do that. And I run into the gas station, and I'm hysterical, I'm hysterical. And there are people in the gas station. In fact, a cab driver drives all the way to Channel 7 to tell them that I've been carjacked at gunpoint. And they watched the whole thing. And that was it. And I went home. I had some police friends that work at the station, and they stayed at my house all night and watched it. And then I had some friends, you know, Malik came in and flew in. And he stayed with me for several days to just make me feel comfortable, got the locks changed. And three days later, I had to go to a lineup at a police station. And I recognized him from the feet and the legs and the thighs because I told you, I didn't look in his face because I didn't want him to think that. And I looked at his face last, and because they pulled up the curtain from his feet first, I recognized his knees, his thighs, his clothing, his belt because that's what I looked at. And he had the same clothes on that he had carjacked me in. And when they pulled it up, I picked the person, no problem. Done. And he was part of a carjacking ring. They were stealing high-end luxury automobiles. Speaker 1: You know, and this--if I'm correct on this time, isn't this right around when you start hearing about carjacking or had carjacking been going on? Speaker 2: It had been going on, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It had been--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --it had been going on a lot that summer. There was a high increase rate that summer. It was very bad that summer. There were a lot of carjackings that summer. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause you start to hear about people would bump your car, and then the next thing you know, you know-- Speaker 2: You'd get out-- Speaker 1: You get out, and then something--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a very high rate of carjackings that summer and car robberies that summer. I do remember that, so, but, you know-- Story_ID: 131113 Speaker 1: So, Cheryl, the other thing is, during your-- Speaker 2: There's somebody coming in? No, okay. Speaker 1: --your twenty-two-year career (unclear) it's amazing-- Speaker 2: Ah (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 1: I mean during that time, there's been a lot of change in the news business, you know, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Definitely. Speaker 1: I'm talking about from a management standpoint, you know, or a running of the station and even resources. And so who--what, how would you characterize the twenty-two years, like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, everything is condensed, you know. They've got one person doing the jobs of five people. Speaker 1: When did that start happening, would you say? Speaker 2: That switchover, gradually, probably gradually in the last eight years. Speaker 1: So in the early 2000s--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah-- Speaker 1: Like 2000 because--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, probably like--what is this? Like 2007-ish, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, well, around then, that was around the time of the bubble, you know, the economic-- Speaker 2: Right, everything changed. We were--everybody was affected because advertisers start pulling their money and not advertising. That was their last priority, to spend money on advertising. And that's how we make a lot of profit in television is advertising for commercials. And people just weren't advertising because they just didn't have it. And then technology too. Technology always, you know, the introduction of new technology always replaces human beings. I mean you can go all the way back car washes. Human beings used to wash cars. Then they made the automatic car wash or postal delivery services. You know, people were delivered by horse and buggies, and then they went to airplanes, you know. So every new invention is a necessity. And that's the same for television. You know, everything's digital, and the cameras are high tech, and now, you can do everything remotely. So that is elimination of jobs as well because you can do--one person can do the remote of the cameras in that way. So it changed that way. It changed to, like we talked about earlier, more news stories and high quantity, high content. More, pack in more information you can get because you have to bring something unique because we are competing against a whole lot of entities now. You know, and people just are working a lot. Some people go to sleep. They just don't have the energy left. They just, you know, they do the best they can. So we're fighting a lot of different factors. But for us, at the end of the day, you always have to have your facts straight. That will keep you, and good writing skills and good contacts and bringing in exclusive stories, very, very important exclusive stories because you--that can stand you out from the rest of everybody else. Speaker 1: So really, see, this is what really is somewhat amazing 'cause you, you know, you wanted to be a doctor-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --you were Honey Bear. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: --you know, and then you end up being a tried and true journalist. Speaker 2: I've had a lot of jobs. I mean- Story_ID: 131114 Speaker 1: You know, I've--I won my first writing award--I still have it, at twelve years old in sixth grade [at Arthur J. Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And it was, I won a silver dollar attached to a blue ribbon. And I won first place, and the topic was, you have to write about someone you most admire, and it couldn't be your parents. And I chose [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] because I remember my mom [Hattie Burton] talking about when he was killed [April 3, 1968]--I know his birth--when he was killed because he was killed the day before my mom's birthday, April 4. And so she talks about, she didn't cry a lot in her life, but she did that day because she thought too, the dreams had died when he was murdered. So when I wrote that at, you know, sixth grade, I was very passionate about it. I had remembered my parents talking about who he was and what he meant to the family, to the movement and to the African American people as a whole. And so I think the title is "Who's the Greatest American Negro and Why?" That's the title of my essay, and so I was writing back in the day. I kept a diary too as well. But that was probably my most profound writing piece since. And then eighth grade [at Dixon Elementary School], I was class speaker. And I ran for president. So I wrote lots of speeches, some corny. You know, I remember, I made a heart, and then I wrote the words "my heart", and then I plastered my speech on the back of the heart and so I stuck it up, and I said, "I come to you, and I speak to you from the heart, my heart" (laughter). So corny and stale I lost to Kenneth Givens. (Laughter) But I still was chosen to be class speaker. I wasn't class president, but I was class speaker in eighth grade. So, I don't know. I like to think I'm a decent writer. I don't know. I've done this a long time. I've won seven Emmys from lots of different-- Speaker 2: You've won Emmys, you've been honored by, you know, lots of organizations, NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], CABJ [Chicago Association of Black Journalists], CBAJ [Cross Border African Journalists], right. Speaker 1: I have many awards in my office, you know. So-- Speaker 2: And lots of people want to have you at their events too and it's because it's our spirit and your humor. And, you know, you were talking about this. So where does your humor come from? Speaker 1: I don't know, I don't know when I became really funny. I think I might have been funny in high school [Lindblom High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I, you know, I don't know. And it probably is too, to make people happy. It gives me great joy to make other people laugh and smile and giggle, you know. I think your greatest accessory is your smile and a lot of people go throughout their day and don't even wear one. So if I can bring a little joy to your life, that makes me feel good. So I'm getting more out of it than the people that are listening to me 'cause I feel like, "Oh, wow, that was funny, and they laughed", and it made them feel good. But I don't know. I don't have--my mother is hilarious too. She is funny as, I mean she says stuff, and you just crack up. She's eighty-four years old. You know, in that--when they get eighty-four, they say whatever they want. They don't filter anything. And she's hilarious. My father [Simpson Leo Burton] is a very serious man. And I was very serious too, growing up as a teenager, always been serious and focused. But my mom is hilarious. You know, you have five kids with no money, you become hilarious, you know, and things are funny 'cause when you don't have, you make do, and that becomes funny (laughter). So, that probably is genetically where I got my comedy bone from. She's very funny today. She cracks me up and says stuff. And I don't, I, you know, I think I was funny in high school too, yeah, 'cause I read my yearbook maybe about a month ago 'cause I wrote in children's, in a teenage book, some advice for teenage girls, and I looked at what people wrote. You know, when we graduated from high school, people would write in your yearbook. And so many people said, you are crazy, you are funny, you are hilarious. And I had no idea. I'm like, oh, my God. What (laughter), you know, and I've told you, I got class clown in eighth grade, that notable. So, so maybe it's been a quite a long time. I don't know. Story_ID: 131115 Speaker 1: So let me ask you, what haven't you done that you would like to do with your life? Speaker 2: Oh, I have written three children's books, and I have them illustrated, and I want them to be published. And I told my sisters, if anything ever happens to me, please make sure my books get published. And it's a trilogy of one young man, and it's the story of his life in three different periods of time. But they're all inspirational books about this young man. And he has special needs. And when I wrote the first book, I took it to an editor, and she said, this is incredible. You need to write some more about him. So I wrote two more, to the story. And then I got someone to illustrate it. I don't know anything about, you know, children's books and things like that. But what happened was, they said I had written--children's books have certain word count. And tween books have certain word counts. So I have to make it do, whichever way it's gonna go. If it's gonna be for actually, books that are illustrated for young people or do I do it for the tween. But I really like it for, I really like it because it's illustrated. And every character in the story has a special need. So. Speaker 1: Oh, it's for special need kids? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I've read it before. I've read the transcripts to kids, not in book form, but in what I have typed up. And it went over very well. I just haven't gotten the time. But that's my goal. I'd like to get them published. And they're incredible. The stories are amazing, and it's about a boy I actually met when he was five. And he's graduating from high school next month. So it's kind of what I thought his life was like after I met him. Story_ID: 131116 Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, go ahead with your question. Speaker 2: No, so my question--oh, gosh, that's another thing. So, the question was, if you--what would you do differently if you want--if you were to live, if you were to live your life over again? What would you do differently? Speaker 1: Oh, nothing. I don't know, probably take better care of my skin and, you know, my teeth (laughter), put more lotion on my legs (laughter). You know, yeah, I have no regrets, you know. Everything has been a lesson. My entire life has been a gift, and, you know, I have things I wanna do, but I wouldn't do anything differently. You know, we joke around and you talk about people having more money. But I think the way I was raised because my mom [Hattie Burton] and dad [Simpson Burton] instilled qualities in me about being a good person and being smart and making it on your own, loving your siblings and respecting your elders. You know, my dad always says the greatest information you can get is at the knee of an elder. And that has value to me. I'm so grateful that God chose Hattie and Simpson to be my mother and father because we don't get to pick our parents. We get to pick our friends, but not our family. And I could not have asked for a better set of parents to raise me and to give me life under the guidance of God. And the bible talks about, you know, raise your child up in the ways of the Lord and he or she shall not depart when they become adults. And so everything they've instilled in me has been a gift, and I think I'm walking in God's grace, and I'm really his servant. Every day I work--I wake up, and I say, "Thank you, God", even if my bones are hurting and I'm tired and it's raining and I'm exhausted, I say, "Thank, God, for another day" because my purpose here is to serve. And I know that. I'm grateful. I know my purpose. So many people reach death, you know, the Alpha, the Omega, and they never even know their purpose for being here. And life is just a minute that you're here. And if you can make someone else's life better, the time you're on earth, you've given back and really, that's what your purpose is. God gave you life, and your gift to Him is to do something good with it. So, and I take that to heart every day. So I wouldn't change a thing, even the good, the bad, the hard, the cries, because all of them are lessons. And, you know, I still say people can throw bricks at me 'cause I catch them one at a time, and I lay them, and I make a foundation to rise me above everybody else. And that's what happens. So I appreciate the hard and the lessons. It makes me a better, strong, smarter, more endearing person, loving, caring, you know. Speaker 2: That--so you take the bricks and build them one step at a time? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, and make a foundation that raises me above anything negative that you have to throw at me. So I say, throw the bricks 'cause I'm gonna catch 'em, 'cause that's the only way you can build something is when you have a strong foundation. And people don't realize that. They have no idea, and I always say the greatest gift you can give me is, underestimate me, underestimate my value 'cause I'm going to show you, you know, what I can do. Story_ID: 131117 Speaker 1: Now, who's mentored you in the industry, but, you know, Jim [ex-husband Jim Rose] has been a, he was--but what about any female, anyone--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say. Like I said, Jim has been the biggest, my confidant here. I have friends, you know, I have colleagues, but nobody's taken me, you know, I have very good friends. My friend, Camilla Edwards, is the Vice President of News in New York [New York]. And she is a power player, so she gets to hire people in the business. But she is a friend. I love her dearly, and we've worked together before. But I don't, you know, I haven't been that "girl". I haven't had a mentor or that kind of person. I mentor people because I said, if I had the chance to do something that didn't happen for me, I would. But I didn't have that, I didn't have mentors and, you know, I didn't hang out and shadow and learn from people. I just learned by doing because I didn't--I wanted everything to be me. I didn't wanna be me growing up being somebody else or trying to sit like somebody or stand like somebody. You know, God gave me a brain to think with, and I'm gonna use it for me to think with, and not somebody else. You know, he made me an original. Why would I wanna be somebody's copy? So, you know, I don't wanna be anybody else but me. The only unique me I've got. I have the only DNA of anybody else. It's just mine. So all my, whatever imperfections, and, you know, this is it. I do the best I can with what God gave me. And I'm very grateful for it. Story_ID: 131118 Speaker 1: Your legacy, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, God, when I ask people that, good grief. Oh, you know, I--that's, I'm not gonna ask people that anymore 'cause now (laughter) I see what they have to go through. Really, at the end of the day, I hope that people say, you know, she came in my life and she made a difference, she made her life matter, and she made the most out of every little thing she had. And she gave till she died. She was generous, she taught, she found a lesson, she laughed. I dance all the time. I dance every day before I come to work. And I armor up. I always say I spray PAM on me because I put the armor so I'm ready to go. And nothing negative can stick to me. It just bounces off like, you know, when you put PAM all over you. And so I think my legacy is that I brought joy or I hope my legacy is that I brought joy and that people learned something from me and something that changed their life for the better. I hope that I inspired every young person to dream bigger than anything that I've ever accomplished. And I hope that people, you know, wake up and say, "Gosh, I found joy in dancing; I found joy in loving. I was respectful to my parents", and that, you know, "Cheryl taught me to dream out loud and to always believe in myself." If I taught, you know, one person that they are great, then I'm good. I really am good, and I--I'm okay today 'cause I feel like I've helped a lot of people. And I think my legacy is still yet to be made, to accomplish because there's still--the best is yet to come for me. I really believe that. There's more to do, and who knows? If my books get published, you know, I see myself having action figures, work books that go along with that. And if I've changed somebody's thinking for the better, that makes me feel good, the lesson that you teach a person about life because some people have their way of thinking. But if I can change your way of thinking to better your life and to better somebody else's life, that would be a great legacy. Story_ID: 131119 Speaker 1: Can you talk about your role with The HistoryMakers? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. I'm glad you asked that. This is a full-circle moment for me. You know, we've been trying to do this for years now. But I remember, and I don't know why you asked me to do this. I have no idea. So you'll have to answer that. But I remember hosting--I wore a gray, long evening gown, one shoulder. I had my hair pinned up, and I had told my friends--it was a Thursday night, and everybody said, you know, I had Thursday and Fridays off at that time. And they said, you know, what are you gonna do? I said, well, I'm gonna spend my evening with [HMs] Danny Glover and Harry Belafonte ['An Evening with Harry Belafonte'] And they're like, no you're not. And I said, oh, watch me. I sure am. And so that moment was, that was another memorial, historical, magical moment for me. I had no idea what that meant in the history of life, of the world, the archival significance of what that began, that journey. And for me to be a part of that journey, every time I see you [Julieanna Richardson], and, you know, your show comes on Channel 11 every year. And I see it, and I go, I remember from the beginning, you know, what her dream--you're such an inspiration to so many people because who goes and gets a law degree from Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and says, I'm just gonna interview people, talk about their life. I mean how do you get--you talk to, ask me these questions, how do you go from being a Harvard Law--I'm sure you're thinking you're gonna take over the world, the legal world and own the world. And then you create the most historical archives in the world that's ever been recorded. And to be a part of that from the beginning, I feel so honored. I mean I'm just like filled with pride that you chose me because you could have picked anybody. I don't know why. And I was very stressed out to make sure that I represented you properly because what you were doing was something that I knew was going to be amazing and phenomenal. And it was gonna record history like never before. And I really enjoy being a part of history. I feel like, you know, that might be part of my legacy too because when you look back--you know, my sisters always text me when I do a news story that's historical. And they say, Cheryl, you did that. Nobody else can say they did that, and you went and interviewed Barbara Walters, and you have pictures with her. And you can tweet it, and you have a picture with the Stanley Cup, you know. I mean all of these moments in your life that have been recorded. And I was there from the beginning with HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: You were there from the beginning, and I wanna say I was a wreck, and your spirit calmed me. You--'cause it was like a mess in the dressing room. I can't remember-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: And you said, "It'll"--I can't remember. Speaker 2: I was like, "I'm gonna have fun. We are gonna do this." You know, I've got my dress on, and I got Harry Belafonte and Danny Glover, two of the finest men, ooh, yum, yum, okay. So, and I get to be in the middle of them. You know, that nice delicious sandwich, HistoryMaker sandwich (laughter), oh, God. And I get to be there, so thank you, Julieanna, for that opportunity, for that part of history that you allowed me, you chose me. You believed in me, and, you know, like I said, can you imagine, but you believed in me, and then the dream came true. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So dream, believe, imagine. Anything is possible when you have the faith of the mustard seed. Definitely. So I was, I mean I--nobody can say they were the first but me. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I like to be somebody's first at fifty-one years old, you know. I could just say that forever. I was your first, Julieanna, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: You were my first. Speaker 2: Say my name, say my name. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: No, seriously, you were the first, and I'm serious. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: When I was bold enough to announce the vision, seriously. Speaker 2: I know. And you have to have courage. I admire people who have courage. It takes a lot to have courage. I look at people, and I go, "Gosh, that was courageous." You know, I thank Barbara Walters 'cause she had courage. That was not an easy journey for her, by no means. And I know that. And we don't know all of what went down. We know some of it, and, you know, to look at that, and I just--I admire you. You own your own thing, you know. This is something you dreamed up. Can you believe it? And now, imagine this, look where we are today, so many years later. Speaker 1: We're gonna--celebrating in November. Speaker 2: I know. I can't wait, oh, my gosh--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Celebrating (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: What do you--how do you feel about that? Speaker 1: Oh, my God, you're not interview (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I am (laughter). Speaker 1: You can't change (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) How do you feel about that? Speaker 1: I feel (unclear)--no, that's pretty amazing. Story_ID: 131120 Speaker 1: That is me interviewing Oprah Winfrey in her final and only television interview before she retired from doing her talk show in Chicago [Illinois] after twenty-five years on ABC [WLS-TV] here in Chicago. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: So I have to do my dad [Simpson Burton] again. I think I am several months old, still a newborn baby, and I'm in my dad's lap. He's exhausted, and I'm exhausted. We're just worn out, and that's my bud, you know. He was born on Christmas Eve [December 24, 1929], I'm born on Christmas Day [December 25, 1962]. And at this point, he's got four children. So no wonder he's exhausted. Speaker 2: It's '62 [1962]? Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I was born in '62 [1962], December, so that's '63 [1963]. I think that was August '63 [1963], but. Speaker 2: That is me and Sherri [Sherri Turk]. And Sherri is the one I've been talking about who gave me a gift every day going through my divorce. That's my baby sister, Sherri. She's a genius. And my mom [Hattie Burton] made those dresses. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my grandmother, Dasie Woods, talking on the phone at Auntie Carlene's house in Fairfield, Alabama. That's my mom's mother. And that--and my grandmother was college educated. She was a teacher. Speaker 2: That's me interviewing Pattie LaBelle at Father [Michael] Pfleger's church at St. Sabina [Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois] during an inspirational night of music. And like Julieanna, he chose me to interview her, one-on-one. So that was all about him choosing me, so very grateful for that. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: That probably was five years ago, yeah. Speaker 1: I know this, the year of this picture because my brother turned fifty. This is my brother's fiftieth birthday party. And this is my family, my siblings, my brother's wife, my two nephews, and my two nephews who are following in my footsteps. And they are--one is a sports anchor and one is a news reporter. But that's my brother's fiftieth birthday party, so-- Speaker 2: And his name? Speaker 1: My brother is William Burton. He's the only brother in the middle of two girls and two boys. Speaker 2: And that was graduation from nursery school. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: So, I'm in the front there, all the way in the front. And that had to be 19--1966 in that picture. So you graduate from, 1966. Speaker 1: That is one of the coolest pictures--they used to do, I don't know if, Julieanna, you went to Christmas Glory at Apostolic Church [of God, Chicago, Illinois] every--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: --year. Well, this year it was held at the House of Hope, and Michelle Obama was taking a picture with my mom because my mom is a sweetheart. And at the time, she was a Senator's [HM Barack Obama's] wife, Senator-- Speaker 2: They've had it at House of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Not very much, no, just that one year. That was maybe the last year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That--and that picture is sideways. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: You have a method to your madness, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That is a picture of some Aborigines that I met in Australia when we were granted access onto their property, and we got to meet them, some Aborigines, some original natives of Australia. Speaker 1: And that's Jennifer Hudson when she was in Chicago, and she was having a listening party for her first album. And she had won the Oscar at that point. So this is after her Oscar win. Yes, and that picture is significant because all four of us are Deltas. We are sorority members of the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Incorporated. And my baby sister [Sherri Turk] is an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha], So-- Speaker 2: Oh, she is? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 2: She broke rank. Speaker 1: Yes, she broke rank (laughter). And my mom and two sisters, the four of us are-- Speaker 2: Those are fighting words, I don't know. Speaker 1: Now, that's upside down. I don't know if you meant it to be upside down-- Speaker 2: Sorry. Speaker 1: Yeah, it goes the other way, yeah, laying down. There's me getting like, I'm probably one years old at that point in that picture and having a little milk break. So-- Speaker 2: And that was again that night interviewing Patti LaBelle. I had the blessed honor, and we talked about shoes. She was gonna give me her shoes that night because, of course, she takes them off all the time. Speaker 1: She does. Speaker 2: And she's like, you can have 'em (laughter). Speaker 1: I do have pictures of me in 'Romper Room,' but it's in my photo album. But that is also in Australia, me and my sister and brother-in-law. But we belong to a travel club, and on that trip, we got to visit, of course, the Sydney Opera House, and I got to check off one of my bucket list. I scuba dived in the Great Barrier Reef. I am a licensed Patty Diver which is a licensed scuba diver. And I scuba dived in the Great Barrier Reef in Australia. So that's what that picture is of. Speaker 2: And, yeah, this was at the opening of the Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls. And those are two of the students, one of the ones that I talked about who shared her story. I went to their homes, and on the left is me and Oprah after an interview and during the ceremonies of the opening, the grand opening of her Leadership Academy in Henley-on-Klip, South Africa. Speaker 1: So you went over with her? Speaker 2: Not with her, but I joined. Speaker 1: Okay, you joined her. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I got to meet Nelson Mandela at that time. Speaker 1: That is a picture of my mom and sisters in Florida. It's a very significant picture because, for my mom's seventy-fifth birthday, I bought her a condo in Florida-- Speaker 2: You did? Speaker 1: --and I think that it has extended her life greatly 'cause she goes down there every winter and just has the time of her life. And her grandsons had come to visit for New Year's Eve. And that was a very interesting trip. We hung out on South Beach [Florida], and I was like, I'm never taking you guys out again. You worried me to death (laughter) 'cause they stayed out all night. Speaker 2: And that's my mom, my only surviving parent, the joy of my life, the one who carried me and gave me life. So I love her to death, and she's eighty-four years old. Her name is Hattie Eloise Burton. She's the baby of three girls, born in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: And those glasses. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's snazzy. Speaker 1: That was a photo for the cover of the Sun-Times Magazine in 2003. My mom and I were on the cover of the Chicago Sun-Times, and it was a Mother's Day article. And me and my mom were playing a duet on the piano at the time. My mom can play by ear, and she loves playing the piano. And we all took piano growing up. So John White took that photo, the famed Pulitzer Prize-winning-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: This is very cool because from the left is my grandfather--these are my mother's parents. His name is Calvin Woods, and next to Calvin Woods is my mom's mom, my grandmother, Dasie Woods. She spells her name D-A-S-I-E, not like the flower. And then her sister, Isa Lee Hamilton. Well, when she married, her son went to Vietnam, and he was killed, but when my mom was pregnant with her first child, her oldest sister, Isa Lee, had gone on a date with her husband, and they fell asleep and crashed into a rock quarry. So my mom fought for custody of her children. At the time, they were ten months old and eighteen months old, but they ended up going to their paternal grandparents. And it made a difference in their lives today. And next to her is her sister, Carlene. They've never had a cross word between the two of them. She's eighty-seven years old, and she lives in Fairfield, Alabama, and her and my mom talk probably every day. So, and my mom is on the end, and she was the baby. So-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Yeah, they had three girls (laughter). Yeah, so all of these pictures are up in my house. Speaker 2: And that's my parents' wedding day, the photo that went into the newspaper when they got married. So I have the actual wedding kiss. But it's on my iPad, so I don't know if you put the iPad picture up and then you guys shoot that or how that works. But those are my parents on their wedding day. Speaker 1: And this is my young people with big dreams--no, I had-- Speaker 2: That's a picture of my--the wedding day of my aunt. And they're at my aunt's house. And that's in Birmingham, Alabama. So I gotta find my locket. No, I already took it out of my purse. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, we do. That's a picture, that's a very cool frame. My sister gave it to me. And on the left is a picture of me at [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s gravesite, at the memorial gravesite in Atlanta, Georgia at the King Center. And on the right is a photo of me at the dedication of the Dr. King Memorial in Washington, D.C. He is a king among presidents on the Memorial Mall, in the Washington Mall. Speaker 1: And that's a cool picture. My mom had just given birth to her fifth child. She used to do exercises with the man on TV with the chair, and that was Monument [Baptist] Church [Chicago, Illinois]. We used to go there every Sunday, five kids in tow, and that was two months after my mom gave birth to her fifth child, God bless her soul. I'll tell ya, five kids. They probably only had--yeah, see, this is my locket that my little sister made me too-- Speaker 2: Oh (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And I tell you, I carry it everywhere with me. Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Speaker 1: Yeah. And that's, there I am, right there, in the white shirt. And that's like classroom, Mrs. Goodle [ph.]. I remember her well. She gave me a spanking because I spoke to the janitor when we were supposed to be napping. I was three years old, and, you know-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I thought, you speak to people, and he was the janitor, and, you know, I've always had a kind spirit. But I got a really bad spanking for talking when I should have been napping. So, Ms. Goodle, you take that. Speaker 2: Let's see. I got my Girl Scout pictures. Did you take those from over there? Speaker 1: Oh, that's--you see, I have my [Chicago] Honey Bear necklace on, but that's my senior graduation picture from college. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: Yeah Speaker 2: You looked younger than that. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yep, that's senior graduation from college, yeah. Oh, Lord, help her. So, oh, God, Julieanna, why are you torturing-- Speaker 2: The Lionettes picture is over to the left, and the picture on the right is when I auditioned for the Honey Bears actually. That was the day I auditioned for the Honey Bears. So, ooh, Lord. Now, why do you want that picture with the red top. I look crazy. Story_ID: 131121 Speaker 1: Let's try some of these. Speaker 2: Oh, just my modeling shots or--let's see. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: Gotta get my Girl Scout picture in there. Here's 'Romper Room.' Speaker 1: Oh, you have 'Romper Room' in there. Speaker 2: Yeah, here's 'Romper Room.' Here's 'Romper Room.' Here's a Wichita [Kansas] picture, headshot. The top one, the one at the top. Okay, yeah. The one at the top there is 'Romper Room' Speaker 1: Then do this one-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: That's a headshot from Wichita. Oh, so maybe turn it, pull it in, oh okay. There you go. It's probably twenty-five years old. Ooh Lord, help her, what she look like. Speaker 2: Alright, so that's like Girl Scout camp or something. Speaker 1: And that's my speech that I wrote in sixth grade [Dixon Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and there's my piano teacher. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the first award that I won from-- Speaker 1: You had talked about that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, that one's probably the coolest one in the corner there, the round one. Speaker 1: This one, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause you can see me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: There's another. There's a piano recital, I don't know, sitting up there, but I have a picture with the teacher, too, the nun. Speaker 1: That's the swimming pool where we grew up. Yeah that's the swimming pool. That's the swimming pool where we grew up. That's how we learned. That's in Homewood, Alabama, more ballet--my mom [Hattie Burton] made all our clothes and our swimming suits. And then-- Speaker 2: She made your swimming suits? Speaker 1: Yeah, she made our swimming suits too, yeah. She made exactly-- Speaker 2: I have never heard of someone making a swimming-- Speaker 1: Yeah, my mom made our swimming (laughter) suits. Speaker 2: Well, she had--(unclear) (laughter), sewing machine. Speaker 1: Yeah, she had--right. Girl, when you got five kids, you kinda do-- Speaker 2: That is true, except my mother, oh, my God, she was horrible on--we were so embarrassed. She couldn't sew. Speaker 1: There is Ms. Carroll [ph.] on the 'Romper Room.' I don't know if you want that. I gotta ask my mom why did I, yeah, all these clothes, my mom made 'em with Simplicity patterns and butter--what's the--butter something. Speaker 2: Oh, that's some old stuff from being married. Oh this was the letter I wrote to the-- Speaker 1: Oops [something falling]. Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry. Speaker 2: That's okay, yeah, it's a lot of stuff. This is the letter I wrote to the principal that we talked about, that I typed to the principal of Whitney Young to get in Whitney Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], yeah, 1975. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: Okay, I'll find my Girl Scout picture. See, where's the Girl Scout picture? Here it is, yeah, there's the Girl Scout picture. These are like, these are all my Christmas cards where I'm like at the Taj Mahal. I don't know if that's-- Speaker 1: I wasn't gonna do those. Speaker 2: No, okay. Speaker 1: But I wanted to get the (unclear) one-- Speaker 2: The which one? Speaker 1: These--is there anything in here? Speaker 2: These are just pictures of the famous people, but, you know, I interviewed Aretha Franklin and, you know, Jamie Fox. There's a picture-- Speaker 1: Okay, well, we can get some of those. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: Okay, this is me in front of my home in my Girl Scout Cadet uniform in the '70s [1970s]. I don't know exactly what year it is. But I was very proud of my Girl Scout heritage, selling lots of cookies. Speaker 2: Anything here? Speaker 1: Oh, that's that picture of me at Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s gravesite], and then there's Romper Room. You took that already, Girl Scout camp. Here's me flipping. I talked about that, doing an aerial cartwheel in the front of the house. Speaker 2: This is graduation from eighth grade. Speaker 1: And there's the door where I hid my sister [Sherri Turk] 'cause I used to hang out behind the door, yeah, but that's the door. Speaker 2: My Illinette uniform, my high school graduation [Lindblom High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: Oh, wait, that's, I don't think that's, grade--1962, yeah, that's my sister's. That's one of my sisters is on there. Speaker 1: Okay, that's Neal School. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Neal School, yeah, but I'm not in that 'cause that's 1962. I'm not born yet (laughter). Speaker 1: That is true. Speaker 2: That's me behind the door. I'm like one years old, but that was my favorite hangout. And that's where I hid my sister when she was born and my mom couldn't find her. So I hid her behind--I don't know why I liked hanging behind the door. It was a kitchen door, right off the door to go outside to--and it led to the door that goes downstairs in the basement. But that was kind of my hangout. Speaker 1: This is me and my girlfriends. Speaker 2: About what year? Speaker 1: The one on the right, Anne, her father was the president of Motown under [HM] Berry Gordy, Shamette [ph.] Abner, down at the right bottom. Yep, she--her dad was Mr. Abner [Ewart G. Abner, Jr.], and he was president of Motown for many years. Speaker 2: That was me as a Lionette, you know, marching band. So, my mom would come down to the games. Speaker 1: This is just me interviewing all, you know, I--this is her good-bye party. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey's], but I interviewed like, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, just tell me what it is. Speaker 1: Okay. I interviewed Aretha Franklin, but there's a shot of me interviewing her if you'd rather have that one. There's me interviewing Madonna 'cause I was the only local reporter who was backstage on her final tapings of her show. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Yeah, and there's me interviewing-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Yeah, the only local reporter. And there's me interviewing Aretha Franklin and Jamie Fox and also Rosie O'Donnell. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Do you want me to shoot all of those? Speaker 1: Yes, one, two, three. Speaker 2: It was a fun night. I got my family. She gave my whole family a suite so my mom could come and had, you know, bathroom connected to it so they could go to the bathroom, and had food. And, it was just really a spectacular-- Speaker 1: I mean that's, I'm telling you, that says a lot. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just totally cool. Speaker 1: This is just me working some more backstage, doing interviews, interviewing Josh Groban. So, yeah, musical legends. Again, Patti LaBelle, so. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. That's cool. I think that's just more like just friends and stuff like that. So, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Oh, shoot [dropping something]. Story_ID: 131122 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So you were doing a lot of print work then? Speaker 1: Um-hum, print and TV, yeah, and then there's a couple more that are really cool in there. These are like, never-before-seen. Speaker 2: Wow, look at that one in Ebony. Speaker 1: Um-hum, that's a cool ad, yeah. Speaker 2: Wow, look at you. Speaker 1: I know, looking crazy with blue tights and a leather-- Speaker 2: But really, you have a totally different life. Speaker 1: I know, yeah, I was twenty-one. That's thirty years ago (laughter). I think you can't do that one. You can't do that one. You can't have that one. No one's seeing those (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's just like my headshot or whatever. You wanna shoot this one, the headshot, 'cause I would shop around and get rejected. Speaker 2: Oh, and there you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my pageant days. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, so this is when you were at, in the-- Speaker 1: I was in college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] trying to make money to pay for tuition. So I was in the Ms. Illinois Pageant. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the Ms. Illinois Pageant. Speaker 2: Now, was Betty Brown [HM Mary "Betty" Brown] helping-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she was working with that, yeah, yeah, that was-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Unclear) 'Cause she--(laughter). It's just that I interviewed her, you know, early in the project. Speaker 1: This was my like headshot thing or whatever. Speaker 2: I interviewed her heavy, and-- Speaker 1: Oh, early, yeah, she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And she talked about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: She, I just saw her recently. Speaker 2: No, she's still--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw her at the Condoleezza Rice event that I did, yeah. Speaker 2: What about this, the Ebony. Speaker 1: That thing, the "Who Has the Upper Hand?" or whatever. You can't take that out 'cause it'll--we're getting to the end allegedly. Speaker 2: I think that's it then. Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't even narrate that one, but that was for an ad-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was, that was a feature article they were doing on who has the upper hand in relationships, men or women. So that was a photo of me-- Speaker 2: That's you too? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah--that's, you mean in the suit or in the bathing suit? Speaker 2: In the bathing suit. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a contest in Las Vegas [Nevada]. I'm telling you, I was going for stuff 'cause I was, yeah, that was--well, he-- Speaker 2: Just got, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, he got that. So that's, yeah, that was an article that was featured in Ebony Magazine, yeah, so. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's it then. Okay, wow. Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was my little "Look-See" book...