 Story_ID: 117482 Speaker 1: Oh, that's Chicago [Illinois] 2016, Chicago Olympic 2016. We were a City, of course we had a bid in to get the Games to come to the City of Chicago and this was the Gala that was at Millennium Park in 2008 in which we [Burke and her husband, HM Rodrick Dixon] performed on. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And this is "Too Hot To Handel" at the Detroit Opera House or Michigan Opera Theater [Detroit, Michigan]. The Conductor was Suzanne Acton and Rod and I were solos for that. Speaker 2: And that is the "Messiah on Steroids," a hybrid of musical and diverse styles. Speaker 1: And that's my son Dean [Perrin, Jr.] (laughter), he's now twenty-four and he is one of the highlights of my life. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (Laughter) yeah, yeah they sure are; and that is my step son Jared [Dixon] who lives in New York and is a Thespian. Dean is going into sports management but he can sing in aria, the first picture that you showed, and Jarrett ended up going into musical theater and certainly other genres and styles as well. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh that's my dad [John Henry Burke, Jr.] on the left and Rod's [Samuel Dixon] father on the right and they are both Pastors. My father passed away in October 2009, he had been a Pastor for thirty-seven years soon to be eight, thirty-eight. Speaker 2: And those are our moms. Rod's mom [Dorothy Jean Dixon] is on the left and mine [Mamie Lewis Burke] is on the right in the red. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: First ladies. Speaker 1: Give their names. Speaker 2: Oh right that is Dorothy Dixon and Mamie Burke, and my dad was Reverend John H. Burke, Mamie R. Burke for my mom and Rod's father is Reverend Samuel Dixon. Speaker 1: And this is the family at our wedding that took place on a very cold, sleety night in January of 1998 [January 12, 1998] and then we were on the plane the next morning (laughter) to New York. So we were between "Show Boat" [by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein, II] and "Ragtime" [by Terrence McNally, Lynn Ahrens, and Stephen Flaherty] at that time in our lives. Speaker 2: You wanna do it from left to right? Speaker 1: Right okay and that's my brother-in-law. On the back row from the left is my brother-in-law Bill Davis and my sister is next to him Renee Davis, Renee Burke Davis, and that's my father who officiated and married us, Reverend John H. Burke, Jr., and my mother standing beside Mamie Ruth Burke and there I am, Alfreda Burke and Rodrick Dixon, the bride and the groom. In the front row standing in front of my sister from left to right is my niece Danielle at that time, and then on the other side in front of me is Dean. I believe he was ten at that time, yeah he was ten. Speaker 2: Oh Rod and I are at a tea in London [England] coming from the Prague [Czech Republic] PBS Special "Hallelujah Broadway" and we were definitely on holiday for a week there in London, so we visited so many different places, Parliament, Westminster Abbey, the lakefront, the theater, etc. etc., St. Paul's Cathedral, I believe. Speaker 1: And this a gathering at Bill Fraher's home. From the left to the right is Bill Fraher, and he was the, actually the choral director and music director at Old St. Patrick's Church [Chicago, Illinois] for many, many years and he is now retired his duties from that, but he is the reason why we do the Siamsa Celtic Celebration ["Siamsa na nGael"] every year and he had instituted things like "Deck the Halls" for the Christmas season. Wonderful, wonderful musician and incredible ear, just a great heart and person and my son is next to him going to the right, Dean. Dean Michael, and there I am and then you have Jared Dixon, my step son, I might as well call him "son" (laughter) and then, and then Catherine O'Connell, our favorite Irish diva (laughter). Speaker 2: And I don't know about names for this one (laughter), some of them I certainly remember, but this is Prague. This is the creative team of "Hallelujah Broadway" and we were in the studio laying the tracks for the CD first and then we would go and tape and film the PBS Special a couple of days later. Speaker 1: Can you tell what year? Speaker 2: That was 2010, February, 2010. Speaker 1: And there I am in the City of Prague, "Oh, the wonder" I'm thinking, this, this place I'm just taking it all in and it's very exciting going into the, this I want to say the Church or the Basilica of St. Jude and St. Simon [sic, Church of St. Simon and St. Jude], and see all of the gold leaf and you can still see there that is the stage of the place where we filmed "Hallelujah Broadway," Basilica of St. Simon and St. Jude, and again, and you see in the previous photo you saw Linda Eder, who was a Broadway baby and Anthony Kearns, Irish tenor with Rodrick and myself. Speaker 2: And here again, there's no Linda Eder there, and that's the year 2007 and I believe September. We spent three weeks in Italy the Umbria Region and we did a concert each week that we were there and on the places like--in the Umbria Region places like Massa Martana and Todi and we visited Perugia [Italy], Florence [Italy] and Rome [Italy], Roma. Speaker 1: And this is "Siamsa na nGael", I was just telling you about Bill Fraher, the music director of Old St. Patrick's Church. Siamsa is the Celtic Celebration that takes place right, right before St. Patrick's Day and it is at Symphony Center [Chicago Symphony Center in Chicago, Illinois] every year. Speaker 2: "Show Boat," wow 1995 rehearsals and auditions, 1996 and '97 [1997], actually in '98 [1998] I went to the Kennedy Center [John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C.] and did part of the National Tour there. Speaker 1: And that's "Too Hot To Handel" also at the Auditorium Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], you see me on the front of that Playbill with Suzanne Atkins, Maestra and also "Hallelujah Broadway." After we did the Prague taping and the CD of the session, recording session, we also did some tour dates and that was at the Auditorium Theatre, the live show which of course involved quite a bit by that time. Speaker 2: And this is Grant Park Music Festival [Chicago, Illinois] going back to 1994, 1995, did shows there, theme shows like "[Leonard] Bernstein Night" and then the following year did a Jerome Kern night. Speaker 1: "Too Hot To Handel" at the Auditorium Theatre, that wonderful piece that's diverse in styles, a hybrid of, of--maintaining classical elements but also going into jazz, gospel, blues, rock and there it is again, some of the early years-- and at the Auditorium Theatre we did it 2006 until present and, and we started in 2002 at the Detroit Opera House, or Michigan Opera Theater. Speaker 2: And that's my niece Danielle who's a thespian, a creature of the theater and she's doing shows now earning her equity points. Speaker 1: And there I am as a teenager, teenager singing and playing. I, I did that--we had annual functions like spring banquets and fashion shows like the Chicago Hilton and the Palmer House and I always sang in aria and accompanied myself for some things like, oh the National Anthem, I had to play that for everyone and I also played at my Church. Speaker 2: And there I am on the runway in the fashion show as well. Speaker 1: Rod and I, another picture from our wedding. We're toasting each other with non-alcoholic beverage punch. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, '98 [1998] and we're jumping the broom, so I added some African culture to our wedding. Speaker 2: And there I am singing in aria at one of those annual spring banquets. Speaker 1: Look like I needed to eat (laughter) in that picture and there's good old dad and mom at a fall celebration that captures their spirits, their hearts, their exuberance. Speaker 2: And there I am in Head Start playing one of the mice that ran up the clock in "Hickory Dickory Dock" nursery rhyme (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And this is with Father Jack Wall of Rodrick and myself, and you can see the writing on the--behind wakening the mission so for the Catholic--one of the Catholic associations the big one. I will have to email that information to you. Speaker 1: And we were backstage at the, I think the Kennedy, it was at the awards, the Kennedy Awards for Whoopi Goldberg that year and there's dad, aw he was just, he loved life and loved to laugh, loved people and had a big, big heart. He and my mom were both so generous. Speaker 2: His name again? Speaker 1: Reverend John H. Burke, Jr., Pastor of First Mennonite Church of Chicago. Speaker 2: And there we are again another wedding shot. Speaker 1: Another one, it's the back of the gown. Speaker 2: Getting ready to throw the bouquet, the bouquet and family, dad, Reverend John H. Burke, Jr., Mamie Ruth Burke, my mom, and then Rod and I, Rod and me. Speaker 1: And you saw that, you saw that picture. That's probably a different smile for everybody but it's the same, yeah it's the same left to right for sure. Speaker 2: And I'm singing, I've--probably musical theater piece at a function. Speaker 1: Same here, banquet. Speaker 2: And then anything from a spiritual to-- and there I am the same--that, that could have been the same year I accompanied one thing and then I sang probably something else with an accompanist or acapella. Speaker 1: Is this the same event? Speaker 2: It looks like it could have been that same year and from left to right my son Dean Michael and Alfreda, Mamie Ruth Burke, my mom, dad, Reverend John H. Burke, Jr., sister Renee Davis and Renee Burke Davis and my niece, too, have her there, Danielle Davis, the thespian.. Speaker 1: And here's another family shot from the back left to right, my sister Renee Davis, my son Dean Michael, Parren is his last name actually from a previous marriage and you see Rod and I, and my mom and dad on the front (laughter) okay. Speaker 2: And This also is fam-- another family shot, we have Bill at the left in the top, on the top row my son next to him Dean Michael Parren and then my dad, and my mom, and there I am. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh this was probably Christmas holiday at my sister's home and she loves to entertain and she loves decor and, and art, she's a collector of art and also an educator. I should have of said that, that she's an educator in Evanston Public School system [Evanston/Skokie School District in Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And these are my friends from when I was in high school, from left to right Jennifer Holt [ph.] and Bernard Nixon [ph.] who was going to be the Pavarotti and then there I am--okay (laughter). I know. Speaker 2: (Unclear) place together. Speaker 1: Yeah he was a tenor, yes, Bernard Dixon--Nixon and then I married Roger Dixon, a tenor so (laughter). Speaker 2: Nixon or Mixon? Speaker 1: He was Nixon. Speaker 2: Okay, I (simultaneous) Nixon. Speaker 1: And, you knew (unclear), really, wow and so close and this is a fall tea and fashion show, oh when I was a teenager. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Teenager. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, so close? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Thank you so much, aw thank you, and this is, another function, another event at church and there I am on the left, and then my dad Reverend John H. Burke, Jr. and mom Mamie Ruth Burke and my sister Renee Burke Davis. Speaker 2: And that is the Cincinnati Pops Concert [Cincinnati Pops Orchestra in Cincinnati, Ohio]. There were some--some more concerts that I wish I had--with symphonies I wish that I had photos for, but that was the Cincinnati Pops Concert. You can see Maestro John Morris Russell behind me, leading everyone, leading the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra and the [Cincinatti] May Festival Chorus and they are at Riverbend [Riverbend Music Center in Cincinnati, Ohio], their summer venue and we're doing "Hallelujah Broadway" live there. Speaker 1: (unclear). Speaker 2: Its sweltering heat that day, it was--the air you could cut it with a knife, the humidity too. Speaker 1: Now what year? Speaker 2: Oh, that was 2011. Speaker 1: Oh, God as you can see that's 1973, I could have been in the sixth grade, I think, yes, that was probably sixth grade and there I am second row, third from the right. Yeah, second row, go downs, second from the bottom sorry from the bottom, so yeah I have two things, yeah two. My mom rolled my ponytails into two, looks like, what's the "Star Wars" character (laughter)? Speaker 2: Princess Leia. Speaker 1: Princess Leia (laughter) yeah, that's--my mom made my hair into that that day, that, those are fun times no worries right? Speaker 2: And (laughter) there's a baby picture, infant Alfreda Burke, look just like my dad (laughter). Speaker 1: And there I am in head shots that are dated maybe a decade ago. Speaker 2: I still like to use them, and there I am again. Speaker 1: And you--did you see a version of this earlier? Renee Davis, back, left to right, Dean Michael, my son Dean Michael Parren, Roger Dixon, Alfreda Burke, first row Mamie Ruth Burke, my mom and Reverend John H. Burke, Jr. my dad. Oh, wow this is one of the Siamsas, performances where you see Martin Sheen. I'm glad you have this one because on the end, on the left front you see Bill Hughes who was our producer for "Hallelujah Broadway" and he is Executive of Mind the Gap Films which is out of Dublin, Ireland and he wanted to--his brain child was to, to-- let's see, have a special of all of the songs that were inspiring from Broadway musicals and that were uplifting so that was his, I-idea to come up with "Hallelujah Broadway" and there he is, that's a good picture of him and his good friend is Martin Sheen and there I am next to Martin, what a great guy. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, that's all right. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): We're gonna get the stories when we do the interview. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true and then you have, have Renee Katten and her husband Mel Katten behind her. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, he is the chairman of the Auditorium Theatre Board of Directors and then you have Kathy Bliss who's the right hand of Brett Batterson, CEO of Auditorium Theater, and then [HM] Rodrick Dixon and then in that back row you see Glenn Solomon who is--you have his credentials from the Wright State University [Dayton, Ohio] Music--Music and Medicine Symposium and his wife [Cynthia Solomon] who is a wonderful pharmacist and they live between Chicago and Dayton, Ohio, and I already said Mel Katten. On the other side of him you see Judy, Judy Green who was marketing and development for the Au--mostly development now at the Auditorium Theatre of Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 117483 Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. The videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Anthony Poole. Ma'am can you please state your full name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Alfreda Burke, A-L-F-R-E-D-A, B-U-R-K-E. Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Pretty short and simple. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth was 1961 and the place was--June 17th [June 17, 1961], and the place was Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am a singer, performer, opera singer, let's say performer/entertainer. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August 20, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at HistoryMakers, 1900 North, South Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117484 Speaker 1: All right. Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer. The first one is: do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Wow, gosh, I love all foods so, it's hard to narrow it down but, I guess I could say something like collard greens, I love greens. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I was think melon, I like melon a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, like, like a watermelon or muskmelon or (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, like a cantaloupe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, honeydew, no not honeydew that's a totally different color, but yeah I like a musk color. Speaker 1: Okay, all right do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I do love two times of year, the fall when the leaves begin to change and you feel that brisk bite in the air, the wind blows and you just--see everything just takes on-- in nature takes on a different color, different feel and I love the spring, the newness of life, everything coming back from the dead of winter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you can smell the, the budding of the frag-- the fragrant flowers. Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, wow I have enjoyed places like Italy and London and, and the U.K., England but I would really love to see France, that's next on the list. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, what I've seen thus far, I--each place has had a special significance I would say. Speaker 1: All right, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's pretty close to the golden rule; you know "what goes around comes around" is my take on that. "If you put out good, good will come back to you", "you reap what you sow"; "so do unto others as you would have them do unto to you". Basically it's that. Story_ID: 117485 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. I'm gonna start with your mother's. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Sure, Mamie Ruth Burke and this is--is this her married name correct, that you would like? Speaker 1: Well her maiden name, this is her family history and all that so. Speaker 2: Okay, Lewis, Mamie Ruth Lewis, M-A-M-I-E, R-U-T-H, L-E-W-I-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born June 26, 1929 and right in Winona, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, that's W-I-N-O-N-A? Speaker 2: N-A, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family, how, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well I did meet her father [Peter Lewis] and he was an oil mill worker, and very respected in the town of Winona, hard worker, owned land, just upstanding citizen, awesome person, a strong, strong man, constitution, and I did not meet my grandmother, my mother's mom who was Ella Jane [Edwards] Lewis and she was a nurse-midwife and it's very interesting that when I gave birth to my son [Dean Perrin, Jr.] many years later that I would use a nurse-midwife to do so (laughter), but on--I just heard many wonderful stories about whenever there was a birth going on people sent for her because she was very experienced and knew exactly how to facilitate things and expedite them quickly and painlessly as much as possible because we know child birth is very painful, but see she had, I think, my mother, six siblings and two brothers and the rest were sisters. Speaker 1: What, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Peter Lewis. Speaker 1: Okay, okay and you were talking your aunts and uncles okay? Speaker 2: And he died in 19, yeah in '72 [1972], I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were talking about your aunts and uncles and your mother's brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yeah, she had two, brothers, one did end up in Chicago [Illinois] living on the South Side and he passed away fairly early in my life and then there was the Peter, Jr. who lived in Manhattan in New York [New York City, New York] and she had three sisters, that was two sisters that resided in Chicago and one of them were twins actually, the other twin stayed in Winona and she had a sister that lived on the West Side, two sisters that live--actually wow now we have to add a sister because she had a half-sister as well, so two, two--that half-sister lived on the West Side of Chicago and one of her sisters lived on the West Side of Chicago so that was two, then the last sister lived in St. Louis, Missouri after she left Winona, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay now on your mother's side of the family, are there any stories that go back to emancipation or slavery or, or reconstruction or? Speaker 2: No, there are but I have not, I have not heard those stories. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm sure there--I have a cousin that has done research and I can talk to him and get one of those stories. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Story_ID: 117486 Speaker 1: Are there any, any stories about growing up in Mississippi that your mother [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke]--now did your mother grow up in Mississippi, in Winona? Speaker 2: Yes she did and she also went to Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] which is an Historical Black College [HBCU] and they're known for that, for that, for Rust College its a'cappella touring choir [Rust College A'Cappella Choir], award winning choir. Speaker 1: Does she have any stories about Winona before she got to college and growing up? Speaker 2: She--it was a family town and she loved um--it's funny because one Sunday you have the Methodist Church and the Baptist Church. One Sunday they would all go to the Methodist Church and the other Sunday they would alternate to the Baptist Church and so, and that, and she also played basketball in high school, she was very sports-oriented, and the sisters always had each other's back so, if anyone ever were going to pick a fight with them, or be unfair, or say something out of term then they always came to each other's rescue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's that "it takes a village to raise a child" (laughter), all of the neighbors were in on discipline (laughter) so, before they could get home if they had done anything wrong at school or on the way home from school, their parents [Peter Lewis and Ella Jane Edwards Lewis] would know about it when they finally got home and it's like the neighbors would--were able to give spankings and then would get home and get a spanking from their parents as well, so it just seemed to be like everyone was closely knitted together and in small towns everybody knows everything about each other so. Story_ID: 115158 Speaker 1: Do you know what kind of school your mother [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke] attended in Winona [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Yeah, the name of the grade school, no, or the high school, but there were people that--she loved music even that early and she would always talk about the choir director and the organist about how they sang a variety of music, the anthems, the spirituals, the hymns. Speaker 1: This was actually in school, in Winona? Speaker 2: Yeah, in schools and church as well. Speaker 1: Okay both venues, so. Speaker 2: Spoke of Dr. Winbush all the time, and he was that magical music person in her life. Speaker 1: Now is he in Winona? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right okay so she was a talented musician, did she play the piano too? Speaker 2: She sang. Speaker 1: She sang, did, did she play anything? Speaker 2: No she didn't, she started taking lessons when I was probably eleven and she took a few piano lessons and would go along with me to my lessons. Speaker 1: Okay, now Rust College, this is in Holly Springs right? Speaker 2: Right, Holly Springs, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Did she talk about any mentors at Holly-- at Rust College? Speaker 2: You know there was something it happened before her coming to the college campus. There was a fire in her home and she, she said--she spoke about how she was all set for college and she had all of her clothes and, and everything laid out, the supplies and she was so excited to go and then there was a fire that destroyed everything and one thing she said that was so great is that the community and the church all gave donations and money--monetary as well as clothing and just replaced everything she lost and gave her linen, and she came to the campus with beautiful things that she had in her chest that, the truck and she said that college life soon taught her (laughter) that you might not wanna bring everything to the college campus too because she did have some beautiful things stolen as well on campus. Story_ID: 115159 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm sorry what were you saying, you were, you were telling me? Speaker 2: That she [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke]--that wasn't the only fire in her life, she was an infant and she was being rocked on a rocking chair by an older sibling and I think her sister jumped on the back of that rocker and she was propelled into the fireplace as an infant and her brother quickly grabbed her out but, she was burned on the right side of her face. Speaker 1: Now did she carry the marks on that through life? Speaker 2: Yeah she does and she, she use to talk about people's cruelty you know how she even had an instructor, a teacher that said "burnt face" called her "burnt face" yeah, just in one of those angry moments like cause, you know, a child is talking in class, and you know she said you "be quiet" and called her that name and as, as my mother told a story that, that many, many years later when that teacher had a child, that they were affected by fire, something happened to them, a loss of sort with fire, so it was just. I couldn't believe that somebody could be that cruel, especially an educator. You--I mean they're mentors, they're examples, especially of compassion and nurturing and concern and you have to be able to, to educate students that have different learning styles, all kinds of--that have disabilities or whatever they may have, learning disabilities, behavior disabilities (laughter) you know, trainable mentally handicapped which we don't call it, we say that they are "challenged" now but, but as an educator you would think that that person would have more concern and compassion and patience than anybody else. Story_ID: 115160 Speaker 1: So, now so you're mother [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke], so at Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] she--did she major in music (unclear)? Speaker 2: I don't think so, I think she, she was into home economics, later on she would be very interested in business administration and early childhood as well. Speaker 1: Okay so did your mother become a teacher, did she--? Speaker 2: She was studying to do that and when she came to the City of Chicago [Illinois] she, she did take classes at Kennedy-King [College, part of the City Colleges of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] as well as Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] and she was studying early childhood development. She wanted to do, to do Head Starts and. Speaker 1: Okay, so okay, so how, how old was your mother when she moved to Chicago? Speaker 2: Um-hum she was in her upper 20s, so probably around 26, 27. Speaker 1: Okay, so, she would've been--it's been in the early '60s [1960] or early '50s [1950] or, I mean the late '50s [1950]? Speaker 2: Late '50s [1950], yeah. Speaker 1: Late '50s [1950], yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah '56 [1956], '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now is there a story--did she come by herself to Chicago or did her family move? Speaker 2: She did, I think she--as I said earlier she had sisters that did leave Winona [Mississippi] and settle in Chicago, different sides of town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She had a brother. So it was three sisters and a brother that ended up settling in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay and they--so they were older than her and she joined them when she moved up? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, was she married already when she moved to Chicago? Speaker 2: All of them weren't older than her, you know a couple of them were, the brother was. Let's say when she got married, that's when she met my dad [John H. Burke, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Oh, in Chicago? Speaker 2: When she came to Chicago, right. Speaker 1: That's what I was asking 'cause she was married already before she--okay. Speaker 2: No, she was single. Story_ID: 115161 Speaker 1: Well let's go to your dad's side and then we'll put 'em together. Speaker 2: 'Kay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: John Henry Burke, Jr., J-O-H-N, H-E-N-R-Y, B-U-R-K-E. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 6, 1922, Des Moines, Iowa. Speaker 1: Okay so what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Gosh, what I have on the sheet what my grandfather [John Henry Burke, Sr.] did. Was he, I don't wanna get him mixed up with, with my mother's dad [Peter Lewis], but see I think he worked in construction and in found--yeah foundations, buildings, masonry of that sort and my grandmother, now that was of course, he's the "Sr," John H. Burke, Sr. (laughter), and Pearl Sumler was my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: P-E-A-R-L, S-U-M-L-E-R, and I think she was a homemaker. Speaker 1: Okay, now once again are there any? Speaker 2: She, she did work because my dad use to go wait at the trains, at the train station to pick her up at nights so she would, would come home late at night. Speaker 1: Do you know what kind of work she (unclear). Speaker 2: I have that listed, I can look at that (laughter) and let you know. Speaker 1: But, okay, are there any stories from your father's side about emancipation or end of slavery or Reconstruction or how they got to Iowa from? Speaker 2: Yeah because on both side there's a family member that's worked on the family tree and so they go into the 1800s, they go back as far as 1800s, maybe even further but, no there's not a story that I could share going back as far as the emancipation. Speaker 1: Okay 'cause Iowa is pretty far west and it's not, I mean there's, so there's no story about the--were there a lot of relatives in Iowa when, when your father grew up? Speaker 2: My dad had siblings, let's see, how many brothers did he have? Let's see he had Ernest, Lawrence, and then his sister--they, let's see Lawrence ended up and I think my dad's the oldest one and he passed away in 2009 but Ernest stayed in Des Moines, Iowa, his brother and then Lawrence ended up in Rock, Rockville, Maryland. Now the two sisters both ended up, Betty Lou Burke and Mattie Burke [ph.], they both ended up in New York [New York City, New York], in Manhattan and had careers there. Speaker 1: Okay, did, did all of 'em have a chance to go to school and finish school? Speaker 2: Yeah, dad went to Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa] and he was really big in music, he played the trombone in the Drake University Band and he also joined the [U.S.] Army and played in the Army Air Force Band [U.S. Army Air Force Band]. After that he was on the road with Thad, one of Thad Jones' [Thaddeus Joseph "Thad" Jones] ensembles, band and he met jazz greats like Billie Holiday, they played for her. People like that in the traveling, and then he ended up coming to Chicago [Illinois] and accepting his call to the ministry. Story_ID: 115162 Speaker 1: Now did he [John Henry Burke, Jr.] have stories, any stories about his days, you know, on the road other than the people he met, I mean? Speaker 2: Yeah, the smoky speakeasies and then just the joints that, that he played in. He thought that the people he met in the jazz field were very intriguing but that life I don't think filled the void for him. He loved music and I have his trombone right now (laughter) so and he of-- he often would play for me and I, and I did--when I was studying music education I had to do an instrument in each family and so for the brass family, of course, I did trombone and trumpet and I used his trombone. Speaker 1: Okay, so now did he end up in Chicago [Illinois] as a result of traveling with, with a band? Speaker 2: Traveling around I guess he just decided that--a lot of people seemed to migrate to Chicago, that was, that was the place, the hot bed for some reason. Speaker 1: I guess I'm asking this, was he working as a musician before he was called to the ministry? Speaker 2: Yes he was, not--but that was on the road, the touring, and that was during his service in the [U.S.] Army but yeah, he was working as a, as a musician before coming to accept his calling in the ministry. Speaker 1: Okay, did your father leave the United States during the War [World War II]? Speaker 2: Because he was playing in the Army Air Force Band [U.S. Army Air Force Band], I'm not sure if he had to. Speaker 1: Okay so--now old was he, so the war was over I take it when he arrived in Chicago, that? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: 'Cause he served is complete term in the Army. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Story_ID: 115163 Speaker 1: So does, does he [John Henry Burke, Jr.] tell a story about how he was called to the ministry? Speaker 2: Just that he could not really find rest and he said he was even, even when into a bar one night and he was just sitting there listing to the music and there was a woman that said "Son, you don't belong in here and you know it" and he knew it (laughter). He knew that the, the life that he was leading just that wasn't his calling, ultimately it wasn't his calling. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now, so did he-- now he became a Mennonite Reverend? Speaker 2: He was a Baptist minister for many years (unclear), yeah so he's a Baptist minister pasturing a Mennonite congregation and being part of the Central District Conference and so. Speaker 1: Okay, so he, he got involved with the Baptist church in the beginning then? Speaker 2: He did because the--where he and my mom [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke] met was at Mt. Pisgah [Baptist Church in Chicago, Illinois], and this is the historical Bronzeville district, an area of Chicago, and they met at Mount Pisgah which used to be a Jewish Synagogue. Speaker 1: Now is there a, who ordained him do you know? Speaker 2: Sure, Reverend Joseph Wells who was the Pastor, ordained him and also married--did he marry he and my mom or did they go to the justice? I think they could've gone to the Justice of the Peace. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was Reverend Wells who made, married them. Speaker 1: He's the Pastor of Mount Pisgah Baptist Church? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 115164 Speaker 1: Now is there a story that your parents [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke and John Henry Burke, Jr.] tell about how they met or who introduced them? Speaker 2: Yeah they would see each other in church [Mount Pisgah Baptist Church in Chicago, Illinois] and, and she had sling backs on and when she had let the sling back of the-- of her shoe come down under the heel of her foot and she was walking with 'em you know loosely and he said "Young lady you're gonna lose your shoe", and she said "If I do it's not none of your business" (laughter), so he said, "I'm gonna marry that young lady" (laughter). Speaker 1: So he likes that kind of? Speaker 2: Feisty, she was feisty (laughter), yeah she was quick and she was feisty, had a sense of humor and he did like her style. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was pretty handsome and she was, she was a beauty and you know she was-- she's taller than I am. She's like 5'7" and so he was probably 5'9" and so he did, he liked her style, everything about her. Speaker 1: Okay now when did they get married, what year did they (unclear)? Speaker 2: Fifty-seven, 1957. Story_ID: 115165 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you think about your parents' [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke and John Henry Burke, Jr.] personalities, their dispositions, their talents, their gifts, how they looked, how they walk and talk and act and interact with other people, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, because they both were musical, I have to split it down the center but I look more like my father, and his--he was very friendly, outgoing, exuberant, and you know, that way, he, he never met a stranger and I tend to have that, those tendencies, I'm friendly I will speak to people in the street that I don't know, I will nod my head, I will say hello and if someone wants directions I'm more prone to give them to them. Course now days you have to be a little more cautious but he was that type of person and just very generous of spirit, and my mother is a very generous person as well but she was more guarded. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Awesome cook she was, we've got to talk about her cooking (laughter), so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 115166 Speaker 1: Now, so can you list your siblings for us and tell us where you fit in the order? Speaker 2: Well my sister's first and there's only two of us and so that's Renee Burke Davis and she's four years older than I am. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's it, just two? Speaker 2: Just two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And both daughters, yeah, dad [John Henry Burke, Jr.] always wanted a boy (laughter) something, someone to carry on his name but, and because I am an entertainer I do keep my maiden name "Burke," so he gets his name carried on anyway. Speaker 1: Now is, is your sister a musician too? Speaker 2: Yeah, she is and she's also an educator, so, that, you know when you are a pastor's kid, a "PK" we call it, then you wear so many different hats and you fill in the plugs, wherever there is a need, you jump in and you do that. So we've taught Sunday School, vacation Bible school, children's choir for men and the young adult choir, the inspirational choir it's called, and the senior choir and we were in church every night of the week because there's--the ushers meetings and then you have the choir, the various choir rehearsals and then I even taught--I was teaching students organ and voice as I was growing up in church and so we--and if you're singing and you're teaching parts and if you get to Sunday morning and you're light on the alto section or the tenors, or the bass what have you (laughter), sopranos, then you fill in so you become an octopus because I'm playing the musical instruments, she's playing a musical instrument and we're conducting too, and leading the service so there's always something that we were doing and it was ever night of the week and we were doing homework and also getting to school in the morning, the next mornings. Story_ID: 115167 Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you live, where, where did the family live and did you live at one place for a long time or, or did you move around? Speaker 2: Well when I was very young, let's see up until probably the beginning of third grade we were on 55th and Indiana, that's also another historical area it's probably still considered Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], but that, what a great area that was, and now I, I believe they've turned those apartment buildings into condos and homes and they've knocked out the walls so that people just have more space but I've, I'll never forget that. There was this huge mirror and no one would know that, that would come down and be it's like a king size bed because this mirror was huge and we had all of these old 78s and 33 1/3 [rpm] those, the old records and Mahalia Jackson, Al Hirt, we would hear the music from him and a lot of jazz greats and I love Mahalia Jackson's contralto voice and Leontyne Price's melodic soprano and a lot of instrumental artists and they, my parents [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke and John Henry Burke, Jr.] always took us to, to see you know diverse, just, performances. They exposed us to so many different styles of music and different kinds of performers and just grew up seeing greats. I loved even watching on black and white television, loved seeing people like Sidney Poitier and [HM] Harry Belafonte, Lena Horne, Ella Fitzgerald, I grew up hearing her as well on the records recordings and Sammy Davis, Jr., Ben Vereen, Leslie Uggams, [HM] Diahann Carroll, just always wanted to be an entertainer because I was seeing it and hearing it and exposed to it and we went to plays and musicals and then dad was still playing the trombone in the home and he had a beautiful, big, round baritonal voice, voluptuous sound and my mother was a soprano and she had a beautiful, and her speaking voice sounded exactly like a singer, she sounded like a singer, and I always wondered well why is my speaking so much lower and I'm soprano, but (laughter) my speaking voice was always very low and I think maybe I just, maybe I was mimicking my father's voice that baritonal speaking voice. Speaker 1: Now you have a very mellow voice though, I mean it's not, it's not an atonal, I mean it's a mellow sort of voice, but it's, it's hard to imagine you pushing your voice the way it's heard--you know I heard you sing on YouTube you know before doing this interview and you can really push your voice. I mean it doesn't sound like you're pushing though. Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: It comes out the mellow kind of a way. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: So you have a soft speaking voice which is interesting, you know. Speaker 2: But a more resonant, supported on the breath singing voice (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. But I was just--so, so you lived at 55th and Indiana until the third grade? Speaker 2: Right, it was 5450 yeah, South Indiana. Speaker 1: Was this an old townhouse, I mean one of those townhouses (unclear)? Speaker 2: They were large, large apartments and you could go down the hall to your neighbor, and you could just go down there and visit and say "Hello" and I would go next door and wash dishes for one of our neighbors Mrs. Russell and she loved Lou Rawls. She loved Lou Rawls and so she always had him playing and singing and so I'd go get my Lou Rawls fix and then run back across the way (laughter) back to our apartment. Speaker 1: You know I think Lou Rawls made his first, I mean--I know they debut--"Lou Rawls Live" was a very popular album that--I think it came out around '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Aw yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know if you remember that album. Speaker 2: Maybe that's the one that she played, but you know when we moved, we moved further south to 95th, 94th and Green, and I--those records got broken in the move, broke my heart because they are just, they are, they're just very precious gems, they're invaluable. You can't really get that now, you would have to go to a resale shop. Speaker 1: Yeah the 78s? Speaker 2: Yeah, many of those broke on our move. Story_ID: 115168 Speaker 1: You've been partially answering this anyway, but one of the questions we always ask is--what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well yeah the, well I remember this certainly the smells of my mother's [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke] cooking, oh she's an awesome cook, everything you could think of she cooked it. The collard greens, the, the cabbage greens, the--every of fish and fowl right; and course pork and beef, her--the ham hocks and the hams and the turkeys and the Cornish hens and the rutabaga turnips, the sweet potatoes, macaroni and cheese and, of course, yea, I gotta get the fried chicken in there, bread pudding, she baked as well so, so you had all of the cobblers, the peach and the apple cobblers and the blueberry pies and apple fritters and, and her famous coconut pineapple cakes, sweet potato pies and mincemeat pies. My favorite was the German chocolate cakes and the lemon meringue pies, but I know I left out quite a bit but just the smells, her beef stew, she would cook a huge pot of that and you could just feed so many people, and well, I mean there were always relatives coming over, coming in and out so, so they, she always had the tables spread for them as well so that, as well as the family and the performances that we went to and the, and Church, being in Church all day, just the exuberance from the, the--that sound from the choir and the choir directors. I use to mimic them, I was told that at three years old they sat me up on the pew and I would mimic the choir director and-- Speaker 1: Is this at Mount Pisgah [Baptist Church in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah and I loved hearing the soloists, Catherine, Catherine Austin is it? She just had such a melodious voice and Malcolm would sing, the sing that I sing now at for "Hallelujah Broadway," excerpts of that performance 'You'll Never Walk Alone,' [from "Carousel" by Richard Rogers and Oscar Hammerstein, II] he would sing things like that and 'The Impossible Dream' ['The Impossible Dream (The Quest)' from "Man of La Mancha" by Mitch Leigh and Joe Darion], so not necessarily--you, you have the gospel music, you have the anthems, you have the spirituals, you have the traditional gospel and the contemporary gospel as time goes on but you, you still have these classics that are being sung as well, so seeing that. And then I loved the, the smell of perfume, the fragrances that my teachers in school wore, I can still smell the citrus fragrances so, just so and then you know being outside riding a bike or playing and falling and I've, I've gone to the hospital so many times it's ridiculous growing up you know (laughter) yep just really interesting things happening falling, you know, cuts and bruises. I was a tomboy, so I loved to climb trees and fences and get my clothes torn and everybody knows about "If you come in this house one more time, you have to stay in" so we would stay out and, and the signal to come in was the light would go on. When the porch light went on or the streets lights, street lights came on, we'd have to go in. We would always ask for more time, so who minded the mosquitoes, we just continued. Story_ID: 117487 Speaker 1: Okay, any other sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was just thinking about the, the watermelon man would come down Indiana Boulevard [Chicago, Illinois], well and you know as you said we were right there at Garfield and he would come and they would sing, you know if the milkman came and that milk was in the glass bottles and if--whatever these, these peddlers and their wares and they would come down and there were even horse carriages sometimes, they would come down slowly or they would be driving and they would say what they were selling, see yell it out just like you see in the folk opera, folk American opera on "Porgy and Bess" [by George Gershwin], you have the strawberry woman and all and the honey man and the you know (laughter) and the one that's selling fish and different things but they would come--the watermelon man and if you wanted something you would yell out the window, say, "I'll be right down" and there they were. So just very interesting and we would go across the way, the ice cream man would do the same but we, we would go there was an ice cream shop on the other side of Garfield and we would go over there and get--you could get two dips on one cone and I remember you know maybe licking that a little bit too hard and it falling down (laughter) on the ground and then of course I would get another one, my dad [John Henry Burke, Jr.] would buy me another cone (laughter), and we'd walk over as a family. Speaker 1: I'm trying to think in that neighborhood isn't there a bread, a bakery close by, well it's further west of you on Garfield. Speaker 2: Yeah, was that Holsum? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: Holsum Bread, yeah, bakery and I went to that school Kipling, no that Kipling was when we got further south. That was Mary Church Terrell [Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois], I think it probably went to the sixth grade but I didn't stay past second grade there. Story_ID: 117488 Speaker 1: Well tell us about the school, Mary Church Terrell School [Mary Church Terrell Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Mary Church Terrell, my mom [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke] was the President of the PTA [parent/teacher association] the years my sister [Renee Burke Davis] and I went there, and she would walk us to school and we'd walk home or maybe sometimes we'd--dad [John Henry Burke, Jr.] would come get us in the car and drive us back, but it was a nice walk, good exercise and I loved school, loved going. Speaker 1: Did, did they talk about who Mary Church Terrell was when you were in school? Speaker 2: I'm sure they did (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, she's a hero, a great hero you know, so, in the black community, but, but you know a lot of people don't--they don't talk necessary about 'em after they put the school up so. Speaker 2: Right, all of them have a history. For every school that's in Chicago Public Schools and I'm sure outside they always have such a rich history and a story. Speaker 1: Okay, but your mother was PTA, president? Speaker 2: Right, the years we were there. She was always involved in our lives, I mean she could've been work--she did work downtown in a department store for a while but she quit her job to come home and raise my sister and I, be with us. She never wanted us to come home alone with a key around our necks, let ourselves in and try to find something to eat ourselves. She always wanted to be there with us and pick us up, make sure she was supportive and instrumental in our lives and finding out everything that going on, making sure homework got done. We had bedtime stories read every night to us. My dad loved all kinds of literature so that, so they always read to us and we had encyclopedias and, what is there--there were some things that where, I wish I knew the name of it, where you can, a child could sit and you--it's, it's like what they have for computers in this day and age, only you manually would push and slide this card it and would ask you a question and you would have to answer and then you could slide it further and see if your answer was correct and we did that with math and all of our subjects, and so we did, so we were reading and so much went in the, in the formative years you know, zero to five, so much happened at home before we got to school, so when we got to school we were so ready and I did to go Head Start, so, so. Speaker 1: Could you read before you started (unclear)? Speaker 2: I could read before I started school. Speaker 1: And you would have started I guess first grade in '67 [1967] is that right? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. Speaker 1: So you were born in '61 [1961] you would have been six in 1967, I guess, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, probably started at five. Speaker 1: A formal school, in, in kindergarten? Speaker 2: In kindergarten yeah, probably did-- Speaker 1: So this would be '66 [1966], then Speaker 2: --and maybe at four I did the Head Start. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born, okay. Speaker 2: So I was ready, yeah, I did--when I--I use to cry when my sister went to school I wanted to go, go as well. So we had the nursery rhymes and records for that as well, so all of that and then being able to read a primer was just. Speaker 1: Now did you have-- Speaker 2: And know my numbers and my alphabet and my name, I could write and she got the paper with the lines so we, yeah, she. Speaker 1: Did-- Speaker 2: Had really prepared us ahead of time. Speaker 1: Okay, were there any favorite teachers in at Terrell School? Speaker 2: Oh, you know I--my memory back there is limited to--I remember gymnastics. Why do I remember gymnastics so much? I must have enjoyed that tremendously. That was the one teacher that put the fear of God in us you know. He was the one person that kept order in the building (laughter). Yeah, and you could threaten students with corporal punishment back then but he never did lay a hand on anybody, he just had everybody in line. Speaker 1: Now, Terrell, Terrell would have been like prepping, ninety-nine percent African American right? Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: When you were going there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that was. Speaker 1: And so. Speaker 2: And that was on West 51st [Street] and State [Street]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fifty, actually 54th, it's not too far from 55th. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I did, I know that I loved school and I loved my teachers there-- Story_ID: 117489 Speaker 1: But I have more of a recollection from Kipling, Rudyard Kipling Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] where I went from third through eighth grade. Speaker 2: Okay, that's third through eighth. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now this is out. Speaker 1: I thought I'd have more of a recollection. Speaker 2: So this is out near 94th Street? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Near 95th? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Rudyard Kipling was 93rd and, was it Lowe? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we were on 94th and Green so I would walk there. Speaker 2: So this is fourth grade through the eighth. Speaker 1: Third through. Speaker 2: Oh third, okay, third through eighth. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So did they have a good music you know instruction? Speaker 1: They did, they did, they had--the seventh grade teacher was all, she doubled as the music teacher, yeah that was Sedonia Brooks [ph]. Sedonia, she was quite talented, a pianist, an organist and she, she put on the school plays every year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I remember loving my third grade teacher Mrs. Evans and there were key teachers all along so (laughter). Ms. Lenore [ph.] for fourth grade, let's see fifth grade probably was, was Ms. Levona Whitley [ph.], and Ms. Reed [ph.] was sixth or seventh. I had Mrs. Bensdorf [ph.], and she had leukemia. She would have to get transfusions but she was a disciplinarian and sort of your strong personality, and oh gosh, and eighth grade is quite a blur, that's interesting (laughter), but I did take something away from each of those years. Speaker 2: Okay, now when did your father [John Henry Burke, Jr.] take over the Mennonite Church [First Mennonite Church in Chicago, Illinois], was that done while you were in grade school? Speaker 1: He--yeah, he took over when I was, I think I was 11, yeah I was 11. Speaker 2: Okay so would have been around the sixth grade, I guess. Speaker 1: Fifth, sixth grade. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: You know there is an infamous thing that happened when I did when we moved and I began Kipling [Rudyard Kipling Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois]. They immediately put me in what they--there the mobile, the mobile classrooms that were outside of the school building and I would finish my work so quickly and just sit there with nothing to do for the rest of the day and the teacher contacted the office and said "Alfreda Burke is finishing her work in the morning. By ten o'clock she's done, we start at nine and before ten she's done with her work and has nothing to for the rest of the day. She is advanced, you have to put here in the third grade in the building". So they assumed because of my coming from 54th and Indiana and from Mary Church Terrell [Mary Church Terrell Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois] that I would need to be in a remedial classroom and they found out differently. Speaker 2: Now is there a racial-- Speaker 1: And my mother [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke] was coming, and my mother. Speaker 2: --component to this? Speaker 1: No, that school was also inner city. Speaker 2: Oh it was all blacks? Speaker 1: Even this 93rd and Lowe, yeah it was still black. Speaker 2: But they had like, the students that had an educational challenge out in the trailer? Speaker 1: They did, right and my mother found out from me, she said well how was school, she would ask me every day because she was there and when I got home, get that homework done, eat dinner and then you can do something recreational, you know play or even watch or even read a book, watch television or what-- what have you, but she, when she found out that I was done with my work really early she was on her on her way up to the school and to the office to see the administrators the same day they were bringing me from the mobile classrooms into the school building into the office to put me in the right classroom. Speaker 2: Did they make it in time? Speaker 1: And she said I was (laughter), she told them, "I was coming up here for this express purpose," she--so that was really a funny story. Speaker 2: Okay so you finally got with your proper peers. Speaker 1: I did, then you know you gotta figure that weeks had gone by and they were already on timetables so then I had to catch up with my timetables, but, but then everything was smooth sailing after that transition took place. Story_ID: 117490 Speaker 1: Now, now did you--what was your favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Loved history, loved science, I did love math, so. Speaker 1: So you liked school basically? Speaker 2: I loved, yeah all the subject matter and then it you know go into biology--to that was very intriguing to me, but because that [Rudyard Kipling Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois] was a public school, Chicago Public Schools which did not have the funds to have someone just there for music and the fine arts and the performing arts, allied arts, you, you did, did not--I couldn't say well I have music class and therefore music is my favorite class. Everything was integrated so that--just because we had a talented person in the field of music teaching seventh grade, we got that benefit and I'm grateful that Sedonia Brooks [ph.] was in the building. Speaker 1: So you were already involved in music in the church right? Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: At this point. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Could you play--now how early did you start playing the piano and keyboards? Speaker 2: I was taking lessons either nine or eleven, age eleven and I continued, so by that time--and then I started going from playing very simple versions of hymns in church and in Sunday school to being able to play the hymns and the hymnals. Speaker 1: Did your parents [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke and John Henry Burke, Jr.] teach you or did you have--did they send you some (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, they sent me to lessons, dad taught me how to play his trombone, not--I wasn't gonna be proficient on that instrument but I did take lessons for piano and organ and the formal training in voice came later in college but I always sang in school, always sang in church and had the honor of singing, no, not just talent shows and musicals but also for my class sing when I was a senior in high school and also the graduation ceremony, I was a singer on that program, so I--it was hard in high school, the balance between art, because I had an artistic talent as well, so the commercial art teacher was helping me build my portfolio which she wanted me to submit to the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], which seemed very daunting to me it, it was intimidating to me but she was like "No, Alfreda you can do this, you can do this. In fact I'll see you through all the way," and so we had the forms and the applications filled out for the Art Institute of Chicago. I had the portfolio, I had to have all of these different mediums of art, in it--I did. My specialty was printmaking, linoleum blocks and wood blocks especially and I still had to represent oil paintings in my portfolio, I had to have sketches, I had to have the pastels and acrylics as well as oil paintings, so all of that was put together and the linoleum block those prints were, they were really very intricate. I wished--there was some water damage to my parents home--or and my portfolio was in the room were the water, where the roof had--was leaking and I think that, that is, it breaks my heart to even think about looking at that portfolio because I hoped to keep it as a keepsake to show my son [Dean Perrin, Jr.], and his children you know in the years to come, but just I--those things were very intricate detailed and my sister [Renee Burke Davis] was amazed because I would take the gouge, I forgave and forgot the utensil and I would begin to carve out, sometimes you draw on the wood or the linoleum and then you carve out, but I began to use that tool to, as, as my pen, as my pencil. Speaker 1: Okay so you were-- Speaker 2: So that, so she was lobbying for me to do art and then Dr. Eckstrom, Robert Ekstrom --that's Anne Greaney and Robert Ekstrom was lobbying for me to go into music and so he taught me how to sing from my diaphragm, actually so that was my first technical knowledge of what to do with my just to produce a tone using my body acoustically. Speaker 1: Yeah, so this. Speaker 2: Coming from the diaphragm. Speaker 1: So, well as your finishing grade school you, you have you know artistic talent and musical talent, you're developing that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then in high school, you know, you continued to, to develop that talent. Story_ID: 117491 Speaker 1: Now did--were you involved in clubs and events in high school? Speaker 2: I had, I was involved in a social club (laughter) and it's funny 'cause dad [John Henry Burke, Jr.] was Pastor, well he was Assistant Pastor--at that time he was doing Associate, he had his Associate and Assistant Pastor duties and he was very, my parents [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke and John Henry Burke, Jr.] were very strict so they didn't want me to go parties and sets, and but I did try the social club and we had our tee shirts and he did allow me to participate in those functions, but I was very active in everything else and pretty well known in my school and, and a lot of my friends thought that I would go on to have a career in music one way or the other. Speaker 1: Now what high school did you attend, this is? Speaker 2: Lindblom Technical High School [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, Lindblom. Speaker 2: And I loved, and I loved, it's funny' there, there's just gonna be teachers you remember. I mentioned Anne Greaney for the commercial art class and Bernard Granger was one of my colleagues one of my classmates who could--his artwork made--it looked like the person was gonna walk off the canvas and say hello to you and shake your hand, that's how real his oil paintings and his drawings were and people like he, people like him made me think "Ms. Greaney, you know, are you sure about this Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] thing" (laughter)? But I felt more confident and more at home, you know I felt what is it; you're comfortable in your skin. I was comfortable in my skin with music and with singing and with playing the piano accompanying myself and I did so and you know I was singing anything from classical music in arias to Cheryl Lynn, you know "Star Love in the Night" [sic, "Star Love"] (laughter) you know. So it was always diverse and, and gospel music was always part of my upbringing, as I said the anthems, the spirituals, the sacred music, the hymns. Story_ID: 117492 Speaker 1: I wondered when I saw that your father [John Henry Burke, Jr.] was a Mennonite minister. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: 'Cause I was tell you before we started that I--when I imagined a Mennonite, I think of the beards and the black hats and that sort of thing, but. Speaker 2: Right, we were part of the Mennonite Conference, Central District. Speaker 1: Was the Englewood Mennonite Church a former white Mennonite Church that had you know turned to, flipped to a black congregation or did the white congregation leave? Speaker 2: Well that's an area--well at our Church for instance First Mennonite Church [Chicago, Illinois], we still had white members in the congregation and they were the--even as the area began to change and there were more blacks coming in and they still decided to stay. My Sunday school teacher was Mrs. Lutz [ph.], and she braved until her family said "No, it's not safe for you to go any more" (laughter) but she, oh her heart, and she cried and cried, and cried and in her will she even left the Church and me, and my dad something because she and her family did give us some, some portion of that, but her heart was with that Church and that congregation. Speaker 1: But Englewood has quite a few churches and at one time (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah you had an Englewood Mennonite Church, it's still there but they've had some interior damage done to the pipes, but and then they may be back in their Church by now 'cause that was a couple of years of, year ago. Speaker 1: Let's say that neighborhood, at one time it was one of the premier white, neighborhood, neighborhoods in Chicago and now it's known for gang activity and that sort of thing, but. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: But it was-- Speaker 2: True. Speaker 1: --at one the rival of Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], you know the first neighborhood in the city to get the electric lights you know. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 117493 Speaker 1: But, so you spent--Lindblom [Lindblom Technical High School in Chicago, Illinois] is also considered, that's considered Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] too isn't it or near, I mean just west of Englewood. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Sixty? Speaker 2: 63rd and Wolcott. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: 62nd. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And Wolcott, yeah. Speaker 1: That' Englewood, yeah. Speaker 2: And that school, now see that, that was a mixed population, that was diverse when I was there. Speaker 1: Englewood was like, was almost like a magnet school or something when you were going there. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a technical high school. Lindblom was the sister school to Lane Tech [Lane Technical College Prep High School in Chicago, Illinois], so it was gonna be diverse and it was a college prep high school. Speaker 1: Right so this is a special--did you have to test to get in the? Speaker 2: Patrick Ahern was the Principal (laughter); yes you did have to test to get into there, into Lindblom. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was a wonderful school, wonderful memories there and I remember the Eckhart twins that taught English, and "Canterbury Tales" [by Geoffrey Chaucer] and [William] Shakespeare and they really got my engines going towards the, the arts as well, the theater side of the arts. Mrs. Thompson was one my English teachers as well , (laughter) and Mr. Fagan [ph.] taught Modern World History and the French Revolution, he would just talk about that--as it would come off the page, he was so passionate about those--so that subject matter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think Lindbloom was full of dedicated, special teachers that loved what they did and they weren't just collecting a paycheck, they were really dedicated and devoted to the, to education. Speaker 1: You know that's what all the, the Lindblom alums in Chicago [Illinois] really, all of 'em feel that way pretty much. I haven't met anyone that did not feel that way. Speaker 2: And all of my--lots of my friends that I stay in touch with or they "friend" me on Facebook, they're doing great things you know (laughter), they are--at the ones who were supposed to be in music are doing you know they're in California writing jingles, producing things that even that Michael Jackson was a part of. Jon Nettlesbey on trumpet, he's a producer now and a recording artist and also writing jingles, so. Story_ID: 117494 Speaker 1: Okay. So now were you--did you have when you were poised to graduate from Lindblom [Lindblom Technical High School in Chicago, Illinois], did you have, did you graduate with any honors or anything or did you go? Speaker 2: Well I made the mistake of--one of our Church [First Mennonite Church in Chicago, Illinois] members said "Alfreda, you wanna earn some extra money to get things that you like, or on the side from what your parents give you"? I said, "Yeah, let me hear, what do you have to say"? And she told me about Health and Human Services, the Department of Health and Human Services so it became the Department of Welfare--downtown is actually Social Security Offices and they were hiring, they had a program called "Stay in School." So if you were in school, you know, seventeen and up you could work and go down there after school, after your last class and work a few hours and go home and so I, I did that, but I should--probably should not have done that because that meant that now my load is--I'm gonna miss out on not only social things like the homecoming (laughter), you know but also you know it, it compromises your class work as well, so where I could of and I was getting A's and B's because you know that's, that had been the pattern of my life up until that point, I--in my senior year that's when I fell off and I got like a first, like my first C or D and one of--said economics class and I cried buckets. I was like you can't let this be on my transcripts (laughter), but he said "No, Ms Burke you're like sleeping in my class." I said "Well, I work and I my life is changed", but anyway so, no so but I did go on to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] and I think--at that time the big thing, the big elephant in the room was the ACT exams so if you did well on that then your entry into the college of your choice. Speaker 1: So I think Speaker 2: wherever you applied was fine. Speaker 1: Okay now you talk about the two teachers [Anne Greaney and Robert Ekstrom], you know, trying to push you in opposite directions, I mean in art or music. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What kind of counseling did you have from the staff at Lindblom? Speaker 2: My counselor, was let's see, my division teacher was my counselor (laughter) who also was the auto shop teacher so he, I guess he pretty much said "Well what do you want to do, where do you feel the passion" and that's when I did go into music, 'cause Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College [now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois] was where I did end up. Story_ID: 117495 Speaker 1: Okay so, so this is 19--, when do you start Roosevelt [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1979. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you participate at all in Upward Bound at Roosevelt? Speaker 2: No, there was this, there was this group similar to Upward Bound, gosh, in which you would come--see what I didn't say was that the ACT exam, I left early 'cause I get to get powerful cramps back then, so the ACT Exam fell on a Saturday when I was having cramps like you wouldn't believe. So and my sister [Renee Burke Davis] and I we were (laughter), it was strange we would just be flat on our backs with a hot water bottle and lots of pain killers and hot tea. We didn't even want food at that time so, so I left my ACT exam early on in the middle of the exam and I had to bite that score, I had to eat it and so then when I entered Roosevelt, they were like okay, well you--this, do this entry program and then when you do all of your courses you come back to us and you do all of your homework and all your exams, let us know how you're doing and if you need any of our staff to give you any tutoring, then you do that; but, but they found out, "Well okay you don't need us at all 'cause you're fine". So it was just. Speaker 1: So (unclear). Speaker 2: That you walked out of your ACT Exam, and so that--it was similar to (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Some sort of a bridge between? Speaker 2: Yeah it's like an Upward Bound situation, they--yeah that was a great group of educators that did that. Story_ID: 117496 Speaker 1: So okay, so at Roosevelt University [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois] you're a music major from the onset? Speaker 2: I'm Music Education/Comprehensive Special Ed because I get to the point where I wanna do music, we know that--and I'm taking piano lessons and I'm taking voice lessons so we know that I wanna use those two and then there was the question of how do I wanna use it? And I always--since I was a "PK" [preacher's kid] there was always that teaching element so I knew that that's something that I could do and that I enjoyed doing, imparting to others. Speaker 1: Now this is critical and I should have asked this earlier I think, but like what was your perception of your own vocal abilities at this point, I mean were you praised at Church for your singing, or that in school did the choral director talk about how great you, I mean did you really-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --have a sense of? Speaker 2: Yes, that's why Dr. [Robert] Ekstrom was forcing me to go into music, he was like, "You should be in musical Alfreda, this your calling" and I'm in Church all the time we have people--always let me know I was gifted. My parents [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke and John Henry Burke, Jr.], I mean they were the nurturers, they were the supporters and they were the ones that planted the seed in music and in diversity of music and their love for music and their examples so, and then sending me to the lessons and then I'm also in Church and I'm teaching others what I'm learning as well so--and all of my teachers even the piano and the organ teachers they were, "Oh yes you definitely have a future, you've got to you know continue this, continue to apply yourself and to prepare and study and work really hard and you can do this and I'm gonna enter you in these competitions." So yeah, that was something that I knew and then of course the student body because they had me sing at my graduation and at my class sing which is part of the graduation festivities as well. It leads up to it and then talent shows and-- Speaker 1: What did you sing in a group (unclear)? Speaker 2: So we all, yeah, and the jazz band met after school and we were all together in the room and everybody's just you know, jam session time, so I always knew, just the feedback from my peers as well as my teachers and my parents and the people at church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just knew something--it resonated with people, it touched them, and they told me. Speaker 1: Were you part of a singing group or in, in high school [Lindblom Technical High School in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I even did Wooten Choral Ensemble [led by HM Robert Wooten, Sr.] in the early '80s [1980] so that was college years. Wooten Choral Ensemble and the Summer Workshop Chorale which became the Doris Ward Workshop Chorale named after the founder, Doris Ward. Now these groups sang spirituals, classical music, spirituals, anthems, gospel music--I'm leaving out something, hymns, you know they did the--the more the classical in nature and then maybe the second half of the programming would involve traditional and contemporary gospel music. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And I would be featured in solos for these groups and I even won competitions that they had. Speaker 1: Okay now did you know [HM Reverend Dr.] Lena McLin by any chance? Speaker 2: I did, I knew of Lena McLin but because I didn't come through Kenwood Academy [High School in Chicago, Illinois] I came through Lindblom Technical High School and so Kenwood Academy was east, Hyde Park area, and I was west in the Englewood area for school. I use to commute from my home 'cause I was further south living at like 94th and Green, but. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm thinking of yeah, the-- Speaker 2: But I knew about her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her writing, and her, her how she taught her chorale and taught them the technical things, aspects of tone production and a lot of them went on to major in music, those that were very serious. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I mention it because the (simultaneous). Speaker 2: But unless she (simultaneous) (unclear) said she's the composer. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) Chicago classical music community is, you get smaller. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: And smaller and smaller when you get to that level. Speaker 2: Everybody knows everybody (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, so Lena McLin, Chicago Sinfonietta (unclear) Speaker 2: 'Cause we've all worked together. Speaker 1: And all the people in those circles. Speaker 2: And then you're, you're doing [George Frideric Handel's] "Messiah" so you know "Handel's Messiah's" around the--actually it's usually at the Christmas Holiday and sometimes Resurrection Sunday, Easter Holiday. "Handel's Messiah" is performed so you are bumping into them again. Speaker 1: Oh you--the "Do-It-Yourself Messiah"? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) yeah the "Do-It-Yourself Messiahs", so I'm singing the soprano solo for that, I'm bumping into orchestral members as well as fellow singers. Story_ID: 117497 Speaker 1: Okay. So Roosevelt [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: So for many years. Speaker 1: --is located near the Chicago Symphony [Chicago Symphony Orchestra in Chicago, Illinois] and you know I mean it's a classical music community over there. There's another--there's a couple of musical schools associated with, I mean or down adjacent (Unclear). Speaker 2: You had DePaul [University in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: DePaul University--the big three in my mind (laughter) were Roosevelt, Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois] and DePaul University so, so those were the ones that whenever did a competition you met up with these same people, and. Speaker 1: Did, did all three have a presence downtown in those days? Speaker 2: Northwestern was of course--Evanston further north, North Shore, but DePaul, Columbia [Columbia College Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] and Roosevelt were closer together. Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear). Speaker 2: Some of DePaul's on-campus is downtown and Lincoln, Lincolnwood, not Lincolnwood, but Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois]. So, yeah those are pretty, and even now to this day they share dorms, dorm space, those three. Speaker 1: Okay so now who were some of your significant mentors at Roosevelt? Speaker 2: My teacher, my voice teacher, voice teachers, they--I had one in particular that was a visionary. She saw me before I saw me (laughter). She saw where, where the gift could go and she was really--this, this was Alice Dutcher Thornton. Speaker 1: Spell her last name? Speaker 2: Alice Dutcher Thornton. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: D-U-T-C-H-E-R, Thornton was her married name. After she left Roosevelt she went to San Antonio, Texas, the university there and was teaching, she taught--continued to teach voice and married another professor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she was the one that nurtured my young gift because I, I tend to; I was going to bring my chest voice way up, much higher than it should have been. Now people that do that masterfully, God bless them that's wonderful, it's wonderful if you have pipes of steel and you can do that, but I would pay for it, I would, I would get raspy and have laryngitis maybe for a couple of days and then the voice would return. If I belted out gospel or any other genre, you know, R&B, if I took the chest voice way high into the stratosphere instead of switching over to the head tones and supporting that from the diaphragm. So I learned quickly and, and she was an Alexander technician. Speaker 1: Now what is that? What is? Speaker 2: Alexander, the person that it's named after [Frederick Matthias Alexander], this technique, is all about posture which I should be doing more of right now. It's all about the alignment of the body, the spinal column continuing up (laughter) and the aligning your neck (unclear), it's if somebody's pulling you by the hairs on the top of your head, so and you're lengthening that torso. The tailbone is tucked underneath and you inhale and you can feel the expansion all the way around and you're using your diaphragmatic muscles to support your tone so that there is no undue stress on the vocal chords. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So as the air goes through the chords you produce that tone and you know so there's in the larynx in the voice box, and then those, those are very delicate, the vocal chords are very delicate muscles, those tissues that can you know you have to not misuse, overuse, abuse, your vocal chords so-- She was big on that and she had the big table in her room and she would put me on that table and align my body you know the knees up and lengthening the torso and the neck continuing up from the spine. So you're not to elevate then now you get out of alignment and then you cave, if you cave your ribs you know you are out of alignment. So I'm sitting down twice and I have the length and the body. So and, so this, this thespian, Alexander, would always lose his voice and he needed to project to the back of the theater to the exit signs so he wants to know what he was doing wrong and so he found out the alignment and the support the, the breathing apparatus his column of breath support would enable him to, to speak healthily and to keep his voice for all of his performances and not have to cancel or be replaced by an understudy, and so she was a technician of that technique, loved her for that and she would come behind me in the hallway. If I'd slipped out of the posture and she would pull me up again (laughter) and she would, for-- she would compel me to speak in a higher tone and not the lower one the guttural, you know back of the throat tone that I used to speak in, and it sounds like I am today (laughter). Story_ID: 117498 Speaker 1: So how does your voice feel today? Speaker 2: Well today I feel the vocal stress before I walked through the door. I was already in, you know, where I need vocal rest. I, at this point I'm caring for my mom [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke] and I did not realize you know when you are the caregiver of, of a loved one that unbeknownst to you it can be stressful, because I think it's an honor and a privilege to care for my mother. All the things that she did for the support of that, all of my concerts and just you know the sacrifices she made in her own life so that I could, you know live my dream, and to realize my dream so I'm like this is an honor and privilege to care for your mom at this time, the time of your life, whatever you need I'm here for you, and so as I care for her sometimes you know the rest might be impacted. Speaker 1: Okay so is there a lot of things that could impact your voice? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And a lot of conditions that you have to be mindful of right? Speaker 2: Right, yep, and this is a new one, this is a new one, because I know what vocal abuse and misuse and abuses is, you know you know what that is but to, to not be using your voice and to still feel you the stress or the pressure, because even if you lift you're using your vocal chords for lifting too. Yeah if you lift a piece of furniture, next time pay attention, you are using your vocal chords (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so I breathe more now when I am if I'm assisting her, I breathe and I encourage her to breathe as well. So we are breathing together (laughter). Speaker 1: Now there's a tradition I guess in almost every culture when you--I was thinking about what you were saying 'cause when people lift they say "heave ho" or they say, in East Africa they say "harambe," you know and I mean there are people do vocalize their physical activities. Speaker 2: You do and I, I am so intrigued at, at Serena [Williams] and other tennis players like her that whenever they you know hit, and that racquet makes contact with that ball you know she's vocalizing that and that's, I'm really intrigued at to-- Story_ID: 117499 Speaker 1: Your husband [HM Rodrick Dixon] talked about learning something called "moveable do" [solfege] were you taught that as well? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah at Roosevelt University [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois], you have, you to take theory, analysis and that is the technical part of it, the--it is the, the sight singing, the sight reading, notes on a staff, notes on various different staffs. You have many different clefts that are used, that have been used through the centuries, not just treble and bass, but you have next to mezzo-soprano cleft, alto cleft and tenor cleft and various instruments like the cello would play probably the tenor cleft and clarinetists, alto instruments and violas are playing the alto cleft and so the de, the "C" is on a different line. I mean if you are leaning piano and you see the grand staff, the great staff, or the grand staff which has the bass into the treble and you know the kids know the lines "good boys do deserve fudge" and all of that (laughter) and yeah, did I say that right. Yeah, "every good boy deserves fudge and (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: And "great big dogs fight animals", okay (laughter), they've changed it down through the years (laughter) but and so they learn these sayings to go with their lines and their spaces, but it's you--moveable when you change keys you have a different "do" which is the beginning of your scale, do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ti do, and some say si, do and you even have hand signals as well [Zoltan] Kodaly did that, to teach, it's a method of teaching music if you--there's so many different methods. You have the New York School of Music, the Manhattan School of Music [New York City, New York]. You have Kodaly and Dal-Dalcroze [Method] which he [Emile Jaques-Dalcroze] taught the beats, through them physically doing something like bouncing a ball to the beat of the music so now they are internalizing the beat of music, but you're signing, if you sing on the moveable "do" and you can use your hand and so you're, you're finding your pitch even as the, the key centers are changing. You're doing different modes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so you have to learn all that then you even have to be able to analyze a symphony. I loved analysis and the recapitulation you know you're going back and now something's going to be different this time through. It may be shortened and you may modu---have modulations and different things and you learn that different composers have different tendencies and a lot of them use what's in their homeland the influences of their land and their history and their upbringing. Story_ID: 117500 Speaker 1: I've often been intrigued by--I guess what the difference would be in one conductor and another, composing the same piece of music. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I guess there's a difference but I, you know, I don't know if they're measured by how they stay with one piece or what? I mean I don't, you know what I mean? Speaker 2: How the conductors? Speaker 1: Yeah how conductors if you have the same piece of music. Speaker 2: Are they're drawn--you mean? Speaker 1: Music, you know are they measured by like a finite standard of you know things they have to do, or I don't know? Speaker 2: I'm not quite understanding the question, you saying, their choice of composer, the piece they choose or how it evolves over the years or why they choose? Speaker 1: How, how they conduct one piece, just say we have one piece of music and we have five conductors? Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: What makes them different you know? Speaker 2: Oh yes, how they view it, how they see it and they do their, their research and they live with that piece of music and they do the history, the historical background. When was this piece birthed you know, what was, what was the social climate, the political climate, the historical climate during that time? What was going on with this composer and why, what is he communicating? What is the story, the subtext underneath? If it's not a choral piece or a vocal piece and it's all instrumental, they usually do have a story associated with it, you know tone poems about so many different things, the story and that really informs the conductor on how to the conduct the piece, and how does it speak to him or her? Why does this music and what are the strings and how do you want those strings to bow that up, up bow or what, you know it's separated here, different things. What do you, how do you want, that, that phrase to be? The color--I like to say that you know phrases are the way we're shaped and shade they have textures, timbres and we're always telling a story, vocally, instrumentally. There is subtext that you're communicating to an audience and somebody's being touched. Music is always going--my dad [John Henry Burke, Jr.] always said "What come from the heart goes to the heart". Music is always--whether it has words or not, and whether they're in foreign languages, they always touch people in deep, in a deep place. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's amazing, so I think it's what that composer--because they all come from different backgrounds too. Somebody can do the [Giuseppe] Verdi "Requiem" and come from a place of totally believing in God and scriptures and sacred things, you know things of sacred nature and somebody could be an atheist and conduct that piece and you will hear two different pieces. "Dona nobis pacem," "grant us peace" and you know you get to the part where there's the--where there's the judgment of God (laughter) you know, so you're gonna, it's just gonna be played, sung, conducted differently depending on what that person personally believes. Story_ID: 117501 Speaker 1: Okay, so there's a certain amount of latitude even within classical music in terms of the interpretation of a piece. Speaker 2: Right because you're--you're gonna do the research. You have to do the history, you have to find out the, the year this piece was con--'cause I love just the fact we do "Too Hot To Handel" and we do [George Frideric] Handel's Messiah" the traditional, the version of the classical oh it was baroque, but you know what I mean when I say that the traditionally sung one, performed one, and I am amazed that Handel was inspired by God and [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart was, all of these masters of music, you know [Franz] Shubert, [Robert] Schumann, [Gustav] Mahler all of these-- [Ludwig van] Beethoven, and on and on. They all have their moments and their stories of inspiration but with Handel's Messiah, he composed that piece in twenty-four days and it is a monumental work that is done now. It was composed in the 1700s [1741] and he did it in twenty-four days and it is, it's--I can't believe three parts to that piece and if you were to do all of the movements then the audience would sitting there for quite a while and it's the, the birth, life, death, resurrection of the Messiah, Jesus Christ and it speaks to people in different ways. It's, it is just a very uplifting and inspiring piece and the music is very powerful and very beautiful and it is said that he wouldn't even eat for much of that time while he was composing this piece and he just felt the glory of God in the room and he was writing and writing, he even fell ill but he just said I have to continue writing, so he may have rested a while in there but it was done rapidly, twenty-four days is not a long time, less than a month to do such a loved, adored piece. Love it and, and frequently performed, the piece to this day. Speaker 1: As a performer then you have to immerse yourself into some sort of cultural education to be able to really perform the music on a high level. Speaker 2: And it's the stylistic right, because you can't, you're not just gonna sing it like you would an R&B piece or, or--and it's early music, it's baroque so we're talking about the traditional and original [George Frideric] Handel's Messiah, not the offshoots from it which are different interpretations in our day and age now, which I think they have their place too, and Handel would probably be tickled pink knowing because he's said to be a man of the people. Speaker 1: Now just to be simple here what, what does "baroque" mean? Speaker 2: The, the, the 1700s, let's see, 1685 to--it is a period from the, I don't wanna say it wrong, but it is the in the 1600s to the 1700s, and so you have like the "Baroque" period and then you go into the "Classical" period in the 1700s and then the "Romantic" period in the 1800s then "20th Century music" in the 1900s, and now we are the "21st Century." Speaker 1: So these, these periods of music. Speaker 2: They have different stylistic and a different set of rules, different set of tendencies and ways that the music is to be performed. So I, you know I if I would bring portamento into you know Handel's "Messiah" (laughter), that's wrong 'cause that's later on in the you know where we have the Romantic era where you can do that in arias and in opera and that's-- and even in later music you can so, but it's more clean, and you have the figured bass and you have the harpsichord. You even have instruments according to that period, early instruments like the harpsichord which is not gonna be the full sound of the piano that we hear later, in later periods as we get closer you know, 1700s, 1800s--1800s is when--and then you see these instruments evolving and getting--they really begin to have more tone, more resonance. You have--the, the orchestras are even extended to have more orchestral members and you know the brass section is larger, the string section is expanded so, so now a composer like [Ludwig van] Beethoven can and [Gustav] Mahler can really go, you know and they use dissonance quite a bit and have a deceptive cadence so you're expecting this chord to resolve one way and then they fool you and it goes in a totally different direction so that, you can have that back in the early periods, the Baroque and Classical periods where things are sort of more in the box. Story_ID: 117502 Speaker 1: Now, I'm, I'm wondering now, did you have access to the performances of some of the great black opera voices of that period of time, of the '70s [1970s]? Where they-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh gosh yes. I was the biggest opera buff, I loved Leontyne Price, Jessye Norman and Kathleen Battle and there's so many more that, that came on what's that, Roberta--'cause there's one in particular that was an ambassador even. I loved the fact that she represented our nation abroad but all of them had the, the things that were their strengths that they did like nobody else. They were, they were so unique and they like Leontyne was a lirico-spinto with a bit of dramatic tendencies so she had a, you know--Kathleen Battle was a lighter voice, so she was coloratura, so her voice went very high into the stratosphere and it was a lighter voice, but it still had a resonant you know cutting voice. So she could sing opera in the opera houses like the Met [Metropolitan Opera in New York City, New York] and she could sing with a full orchestra behind her and they wouldn't drown her out because she had the--she used the formant where the-- resonance frequencies. Speaker 1: I guess-- What are the different categories of sopranos that are or (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well you have a "soubrette" which is really light, the lighter the pretty much high, you know really high range, stratosphere notes and coloratura, the same, you have like Gilda in "Rigoletta, "Rigoletto" [by Giuseppe Verdi] sorry and she sings the "Caro nome" and she's gonna end on a high "e" or "e" flat, and you know that just sends the shivers up your back (laughter). I'm spinning, I'm very high in tone like above the staff and then you have, let's see, a lyric voice and then lirico-spinto, a full, that's a full lyric. Those are like getting larger now with more weight to the voice. More warmth around this fullness of tone, color, resonance and the use of the formant you know those, those are resonance frequencies that you hit when you get to certain parts in your range and they just cut. They go to the exit signs effortlessly, you don't have to put--you're using the breath to support that tone. You're using your body like an acoustic instrument. Just like you have a hollow chamber, in, in pretty much any instrument you can think of, whether it has tubing, whether it's in the wind family, woodwind family, or the other brass family or whether it's in a string family and they have as you see, you know the wood and there's hollow in the inside. That's how those, the vibrations go into that empty hollow chamber and then they are able to resonate out and then you get a sound that the tone can be heard from afar the larger the root, that resonance chamber is. Speaker 1: Okay, so (unclear) okay. Speaker 2: And our bodies has, you know we have them too, we use our nasal cavity, our vocal cavity which is our mouth, our nasal pharynx which is how that's all connected so as you lift and give space and inhale and apply the breath and then begin to produce the tone then you can produce the sound. Speaker 1: So, so if you're singing from your? Speaker 2: Without a microphone. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous) singing? Speaker 2: You can amplify you can amplify your own sound yes. Speaker 1: If you're singing primarily from your head you're not gonna project as much as if you're singing from your whole body? Speaker 2: Well you need, you definitely need the whole body 'cause see the diaphragm muscle, you know that's under your lungs and your heart and it contracts downward creating more space for the lungs to expand and they're not, you know they, are three dimensional so (laughter) from the front to the back and from the side to side you have that all-the-way-around expansion and then that's what's supporting the tone and it's not, you're not gonna flat the chords with ha (sound), you know a lot of air pressure but it's just low air pressure (hissing sound) coming through there. Story_ID: 117503 Speaker 1: All right, yeah we're just talking off-camera of imitating singers, and you said you use to do that with kids. Speaker 2: It's as soon as you tell a child, like say if you're teaching a chorus and the performance is coming soon and they're singing above whisper and you're like, "I really need to you to get on that breath and give me more sound." If you tell a child any age, "What do you think an opera sounds like? Mimic an opera singer, pretend you're one," they will always go where [Luciano] Pavarotti's sitting right? They will give you that resonant tone. It's like, "That is the place where I want you to produce this tone" and I would always get a lot of sound from my choirs. I love children's' voices. I don't think there's anything more beautiful than the voice of a child. It's so pure it just reaches your heart in the depths of your soul. It just transports you, elevates you. It sounds so angelic you know? A pure ethereal tone, I was listening to a child sing, he was on one of these contests, probably the UK-- America, no the "UK has Talent," something like that. UK got Talent [sic, "Britain's Got Talent"]--he sang 'Pie Jesu' from the [Andrew] Lloyd Weber "Requiem" and oh, I heard his voice and without warning tears just started streaming down my face. It was the most pure, beautiful. Speaker 1: What was the piece? Speaker 2: Innocent tone? Speaker 1: That the Harlem Boys Choir [Boys Choir of Harlem] sang in the movie "Glory," the final attack on Fort Wagner. At the end of the movie they sang this piece and it's--they've used it for about four or five. Speaker 2: So beautiful (laughter). Speaker 1: Other movies, the same. Speaker 2: You really can because it's just, it just impacts you, overtakes you, it's just so--the most beautiful sound. Story_ID: 117504 Speaker 1: So as you, now as you're at Roosevelt [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois] progressing, learning how to use your voice, now are you exclusively singing just in the church and classical or are you doing other, are you attempting to be Diana Ross sometime, or--? Speaker 2: Yeah that got me in a lot of trouble with my voice teacher because Rod [HM Rodrick Dixon] and I do a show called "Songs of a Dream" and, and in it I say "Monday morning in college, beads of sweat on my forehead, a lump in my throat, that pit-the-stomach feeling of dread. I had given it my all the day before in Church, now I would pay dearly with my voice teacher." Yeah, (laughter) she was waiting on me and I had the voice lesson on Monday, why (laughter) and so she told me, you're just gonna have to-- you're destroying your instrument and in, at that time I guess she did believe there was a safe way to sing various genres of music and now I totally believe wholeheartedly that you can. You can do opera, you can do classical concert repertoire you, oratorio you know and you can also crossover as well and do, you can do musical theater, you can do--there are classics in every genre. I mean you can do all of that and, and I think if you use a solid technique and that's what I say in my monologue, "Finally I got it right" (laughter). I realized that I could you know all I had to do was use support with solid technique and then I would have protected my vocal chords and then there were certain auditions that came up where if I had over sung, I didn't have the wherewithal to sing, to represent myself in the way that I knew that I could sing that audition, because I, I always got a lot of solos in college with the chorals, ensembles, the choirs and the concerts. I was featured and in the operas so, if I couldn't sing an audition you know, and that was really a reflection she felt on her and her studio and so she was furious with me. So I was really intimidated to go to my lesson on Mondays. I couldn't do both then, but now I think I know because of more knowledge and more experience that I would just be more supporting of the breath. Story_ID: 117505 Speaker 1: Okay, now, the year you graduated from Roosevelt [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois], was the year that one of Roosevelt's most famous alumnus was elected Mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois] right? Speaker 2: Oh, well see now that's-- Speaker 1: Eighty three [1983] right? Speaker 2: Yeah [sic, Burke graduated in 1984]. Speaker 1: [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington. Speaker 2: Yeah, Harold Washington, yes, I remember meeting him and I was just so excited. I, I was very excited, you're right the first black Mayor of the City of Chicago, and he got in right after [Mayor] Jane Byrne, you know and that's the whole snow where the City was shut down (laughter) locked down and so he got in and he was so, to me just, so, so--for a word that I'm looking for I think that he was definitely qualified above and beyond to do the work that he was doing and I got to sing for him actually, a couple of times in rallies and political--. Speaker 1: Is this in '83 [1983] bef--, when he was running? Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980], yeah, yes, definitely sing for him in rallies and when I met him, he also spoke at Roosevelt University and I came by and shook his hand and or either he spoke elsewhere and I shook his hand and told him that he was an alumni of my school, and he wanted to know my major hoping that it was political science (laughter). Not so, so he looked a little bit disappointed that it wasn't political science and that it was music, but he, he was really a very nice man, a very qualified Mayor. Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you have any courses from Dr. Black when you were there, Tim, Tim Black [HM Timuel Black]? Speaker 2: No, I did not (laughter). Speaker 1: I thought I'd ask, but-- Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117506 Speaker 1: So when you're on the verge of graduation [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois] you had--had you been auditioning for positions or, or for performances? Speaker 2: Well, this is the thing. I knew that I loved education right, and that you know always have the people in your life who say, "Well get a major that you can fall back on because you know the music business is, you know" and you'd hear this all the time so, I said well okay education, that, that would be good and I wanted to have that edge and be able to work with Special Ed [education] students and they give back so much, they are the most loving. After music they would say, "Can we hug you Ms. Burke?" They wanted to kiss me and hug me. I have so much affection, I loved my students (laughter). They "TMH" ["Trainable Mentally Handicapped"] and "EMH" ["Educable Mentally Handicapped"] at that time, that's the classification at the time, but just a wonderful group. So, so I did-- I sing, I did the junior recital, I had to do a senior recital. I did both piano and voice and then after my recitals I always had people telling me, "You sing just as good as the voice majors, you should be a voice major. Why aren't you doing that for a living or considering that"? And so I, then I said with my Master's Degree I will do vocal performance and that is what I did, but in the interim time, and I, I did start my Master's work right, immediately after graduation and I met one of my colleagues, Laura Montague, I'll never forget you Laura. She said "Alfreda, did you know that they're hiring in Evanston? Did you, if you want a job right away you should go interview." And I went out to, to Evanston District, Evanston/Skokie Consolidated Public School District 65 [sic, Evanston/Skokie School District 65], and that day I was supposed to meet with the music chair, the chairman of the music department and she had me sightread, and sing, play the piano, read some music and also talk with her about my philosophy and about various teaching methods, and as I mentioned earlier, Dalcroze [Eurhythmics], Kodaly [Method], Manhattan School of Music [New York City, New York] and I am--Orff, Carl Orff, and where you have the Orff instruments so students are, they're always experiencing music, the whole gestalt through their entire body so they're using their hands, their arms, they're feeling the beat, they're feeling the music. They are playing with the mallets in their hands; they're leaning technique for that. They are bouncing the ball with Dalcroze so that they can feel the beat or they're passing it or they're rolling it, but they have a partner or they're in a circle and with the Kodaly you also have the moveable do though, you have the hands signs "do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ti, do" and you have the syllables, "do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, si do," or "ti, do" and they're singing and they're learning how to read, they're leaning note values. It's so many ways to, to teach children music in a fun way, so through these methods. So I'm talking to her about all of my philosophies about music and how the whole gestalt is experiencing music. It's so important that music is the most cognitive of the arts and it has math, it has science, it has history. So much about music to learn, theory, analysis you know, so, so she loved me and she said "I'm sending you over to human resources." So before I left human resources I interviewed with that, the head of that, that person, then they called over. The King Lab [Martin Luther King, Jr. Laboratory School in Evanston, Illinois] principal said, "If a gifted music teacher comes in keep there, I'm coming right over. I want to interview them," and or "Send them to me" and so I interviewed with my would-be principal and those are people you say who inspires me. That principal inspired me, my first voice teacher Alice Dutcher Thornton was a visionary. This principal Corrine Schumacher was a visionary. She saw me, she stood behind me. She knew I was new and fresh out of college. There were things that you just cannot learn in the college classroom. You have to be out in the midst, I mean course I did my student teaching at the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools [Chicago, Illinois] because they had K through 12, so I had three cooperating teachers, Vanya Wang was the one that--had kindergarten through second grade, third and fourth, I think I had Joe Brach [ph.] and then, and the I probably skipped and went up to the high school level and had Dick Walsh [Richard Walsh], I believe, and that, boy what an experience and the, the Laboratory Schools were a wonderful to be baptized by fire (laughter) you know, wonderful place but, but you still when you get hired and you have your own classes then that's when the learning really begins (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Story_ID: 117507 Speaker 1: So now I have a note here that you taught at, in '85 [1985], you were teaching at Martin Luther King Jr. [Martin Luther King, Jr. Laboratory School in Evanston, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Lab School in. Speaker 2: King Lab School. Speaker 1: That's in Evanston right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Part of the school? Speaker 2: That was Corrine Schumacher's school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she had a theme every year. I taught choir there, in the mornings, at 7:30 a.m. I believe, and I also had general music all day long (laughter) and that was a K through eight school, it was one of the only K through eight schools in the district at the time. Speaker 1: So they had junior high school for the others, I mean K through (unclear)? Speaker 2: 'Cause they, they would have the feeder schools, you know K thru four, K through 5, and then higher six through eight and, but my school had it all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In one building, and so I taught everybody, and my choir. Speaker 1: Right so, so you were working while you were going to graduate school [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois] right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 117508 Speaker 1: And--so what did you--who is your graduate school advisor and what was your, did you have a thesis or some sort of a project I guess? Speaker 2: Oh, this was a Master's of Music and not a doctoral study, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did, but my emphasis was definitely vocal performance in which I received that degree. Actually, it was only two years in which I finished the Master's of Music but I marched and received a degree in the January of '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was done the previous semester in '86 [1986] technically. Speaker 1: So you didn't have to, did you do--was there some sort of a capstone performance or something? Speaker 2: You always have to do the recitals. Speaker 1: Okay, it's a recital. Speaker 2: And yeah, yeah and those were all--I always got an "A" on my recitals and. Speaker 1: So what did you do, what did you do? Speaker 2: Actually at that time I was a coloratura soprano, so I did things like 'E Strano' that's from "La traviata" [by Guiseppe Verdi], that scene that Violeta does 'Sempre Libra,' 'E Strano' is the recitative that goes into 'Sempre Libra' the aria where she, she just establishes you know this, butterflies in her stomach. She, she meets Alfredo and she feels strange (laughter) and she wants to know whether or not she should let her heart fall for him and she goes back and forth, yes, no, maybe, not sure, alas, you know, damsel in distress moment right (laughter) and she is the one that you know ultimately, sadly, dies of consumption, and coughing up blood. Speaker 1: Right, is it based on the Alexandre Dumas novel, Camille, ["The Lady of the Camellias"] yeah. Speaker 2: There are so many operas where you have that theme where Mimi died from consumption or TB [tuberculosis] it you could say that was for [Giacomo] Puccini's "La boheme" so they say for her consumption and, and for--no TB one of them tuberculosis or something but they're both coughing and then the hand drops and you know that's it (laughter). Speaker 1: Curtain falls. Speaker 2: Right and of course there's a tenor screaming you know, "Mimi, Mimi," or "Violetta" (laughter). Story_ID: 117509 Speaker 1: So are operas usually sad, I mean you know I don't know how (unclear)? Speaker 2: They're full of drama and everything that you can think of that goes on in modern day life, adultery, fornication, (laughter) somebody getting murdered, somebody's being betrayed. Like she [Violetta in "La traviata" by Guiseppe Verdi], she had to betray her heart and leave the family 'cause the father tells her you know "you're really not, you've been a kept woman, you're not fitting. You will keep my daughter from being married if you continue to associate with my son so would you just walk away? Send him a letter, say you don't love 'me. So and he believed that letter and you know she suffers loneliness for years because that's her true love. She has been a kept woman, but she fell in love with Alfredo. Speaker 1: This is in La traviata? Speaker 2: Yeah so near the end of course he find out and he comes, all is forgiven, he loves her and, you know, 'cause there was a scene where he meets her at a party and she's taken on another suitor and you know he's heartbroken so he throws money at her, you know biggest insult you could do, and so another gentlemen of course slaps him on the cheek with a glove which means, okay, we're gonna have a duel (laughter), yeah fistacuffs, but in that day and age you will die, it's a fight to the death. So swords and guns if they were there you know that type during the time period. Speaker 1: In La traviata, do they use swords or for the--? Speaker 2: I don't remember what happened with the duel other than that he still walked away alive so (laughter), yeah, but he does get to come back to her in the end, but you know it wouldn't be the drama that it is if she didn't have a resurgence of life and feel as if you know she's being revived and they're gonna be together and then she falls on the floor limp, and dies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "Rinasce," she feels like she's being reborn and then--so at that time [1987, during her graduate recital at Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois] I was coloratura soprano so I did in French, Italian German, they were the, you know the chanson, the German lieder because the program had to be well-rounded and I was gonna do my Italian arias and that was a whole scene so that really pretty much was the first half and I did do some pieces by [Claude] Debussy I did, I neglected to mention Ms. Phyllis Hill was my pianist, piano teacher and she really had me ready for that recital, but I did, let's see two [Gabriel] Faure--a Faure and the Debussy piece on piano, but so the, the it was a wide mix and I'm sure I did spirituals as well, American art songs and spirituals in the second half. Speaker 1: Which spirituals did you do, do you remember? Speaker 2: No I remember for one recital, 'His Name's So Sweet' arranged by Hall Johnson, "Just come from the fountain, his name's so sweet" and I always loved 'Give Me Jesus.' I did arrangements by Edward Boatner which I later recorded on the "From the Heart" CD in 2002, loved that piece "Give me Jesus, you may have all this world, but give me Jesus." Story_ID: 117510 Speaker 1: So this is your Master's [in Music degree from Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois] and so you actually walked in '87 [1987] you got your diploma and so what happened next, did you--were you recruited to sing? Did someone come after you to try to get you to be part of a company? Speaker 2: Yeah, I found out about an audition which leads me to the third visionary, and so I wanna mention Robert Long, Louise Parkin who at once Alice Dutcher Thornton left Roosevelt to get married and to move to San Antonio, Texas and to teach at the university there, I had to get another teacher so I did have two, Robert Long who was really up in age in his 80s and he was continuing to teach. He had at one time been the, the Chairman of the Voice Department at Chicago Musical College, Roosevelt University and so they kept him on because he was a dynamic teacher and one of the teachers who had studied with him and knew his style of teaching was also on the faculty and that was Louise Parkin and she was a coloratura, he was a tenor and so they both took me so that I could the accredited, the credit for my voice lessons and then so they were wonderful. They were able to nurture a young singer further and then Velia Balti [ph.], once I graduated was on that list of, of voice teachers who was really a wonderful teacher, very charismatic, loved her spirit. I think she can get music out of a rock (laughter), but the next visionary, I've said Alice Dutcher [Thornton], Corrine Schumacher, the principal and then Margaret Hillis, awesome woman. She use to give me covers with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and chorus, the [Ludwig van] Beethoven Ninth Symphony, the [Gustav] Mahler's Second Symphony ["Resurrection Symphony"], the Mahler Eighth Symphony ["Symphony of a Thousand"] and there were two times because under--(unclear) also gave me a cover. Two separate rolls because that had three sopranos in it, the Mahler Eighth. Speaker 1: So, so a cover means (unclear)? Speaker 2: Off the top of my head Speaker 1: Like being an understudy. Speaker 2: Yes the understudy and she just saw something in my. She saw where the voice was going, she said 'cause I liked her being a coloratura and the voice was picking up some weight to it so I was in lyric land (laughter) lyric soprano on the way to full lyric or "spinto." So what I am now is more of a full lyric with dramatic tendencies, qualities so the voice just has it's metal, you reach that format where it can cut and it has surround it some warmth, richness, certain amount of weight to it, but it's still lyrical too, and so I'm not a dramatic voice, I'm not Jessye Norman, one of the people that I love that I mentioned, went to see all of them in concert, Kathleen Battle, Leontyne Price, and Jessye Norman. Others there, you know that there are the recitalists that were able to just get German lieder, French chanson, American Art songs whatever it was, they were able to get that across so well. The communication, the storytelling was there it was like you were experiencing the text. Story_ID: 117511 Speaker 1: What I've read about you is that your eyes are so expressive when you sing, and that you really that, that the listener really gets, they've gotta watch you. Your expressions enhance whatever you're singing. Speaker 2: Yeah, the eyes are the window to the soul. I try not to close them and when I was teaching students--I would even in college I told them don't always close them. There are moments when you will but they are your way, your vehicle of expression. The text is your vehicle of expression, the music, the phrasing. Speaker 1: Well, what do they mean by "phrasing," in terms of singing? Speaker 2: You're gonna shape and shade your phrases. I learned as time goes on people wanna hear that core so they don't want you to take it away. They don't want to play with them too much. You know they wanna hear core sound, and sometimes if you're shaping and shading phrases too much you're you know you start soft and then you crescendo, and you begin to swell, increase and then you decrescendo and so you're decreasing the volume, but sometimes music lends itself to expression in that way, the way you shape and shade it depends on how your heart depicts this story and its experiencing this moment and what you've lived in your life. What you're bringing to the table because you're not just all character. You are still bringing your heart and soul and your authentic story, your life, to the table. You have to bring all of yourself there. Speaker 1: So in, in opera is it, is there--say you're doing a--how much latitude do you have in a, a role in terms of expressing your own personality? Speaker 2: Well you're still staying within the confines of the style and the direction 'cause you have the director and you have the conductor and you can't take too many liberties unless you are allowed, unless these liberties are given to you with the phrasing and the breaths and the--I'm not, I'm gonna slow this down and I'll come in here, you know (laughter), you may be afforded that, that freedom, but you still--does--the story is all yours so you do the blocking that direction has given you. You're downstage or upstage or stage right or stage left. You have to interact with various characters and roles, other roles opposite yourself on stage and so and you have to make your exits and your entrances. All of that's part of it, but when it comes down to the recitatives and the ensemble work you know the duos, the trios and your aria where you stand flat foot yourself, and some people I mean in the golden era when you had a Jussi Bjorling and a Luciano Pavarotti, Placido Domingo, Leontyne Price, all the ones I named, Elisabeth Schwartzkopf, Joan Sutherland and, and Beverly Sills and Kathleen [Battle] and, and Joan Sut--I mean what's that, Norman, Jessye, Jesse Norman. When you had this and there was a time when they didn't have to walk all over the stage and probably jumping from one part of the set to the next set while they're singing an aria. They could stand still, "park and bark," but in this day and age--and they really did, I--still came across. They were masterful, that's why I call it the golden era, but and even those that preceded them but in our day and age, you have opera on the big screen so there's close ups and you can't be dialing it in you have to really be totally invested and connected with the character and you've got to use your life, the pain, you know the joy and everything in between, everything that you've experienced, the hardships. Story_ID: 117062 Speaker 1: Okay so you were training to cover some of the artists at Chicago Symphony [Chicago Symphony Orchestra in Chicago, Illinois] and had you started any association with the Lyric Opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] at all at this point? Speaker 2: No, I'll get to, remind me to get to that 'cause that's where I meet Rod [HM Rodrick Dixon] and he's at the Lyric Opera Center [the Lyric Opera Center for American Artists, now The Patrick G. and Shirley W. Ryan Opera Center, part of the Lyric Opera of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] and I'm at CSO and I'm getting these wonderful opportunities to see and be close to the world's greatest singers and the world's greatest conductors and great minds and great interpreters of all kinds of music, just awesome, invaluable experiences. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: So the other cover that I didn't name besides the B9, the [Ludwig van] Beethoven Nine [Ninth Symphony], the [Gustav] Mahler Second [Symphony, "Resurrection"] and Eight [Eight Symphony, "Symphony of a Thousand"], was the Leonore in "Fidelio" and also [Daniel] Barenboim decided to do some on, some on, some semi-staged operas, the [Lorenzo] Da Ponte, [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart/Da Ponte operas. So this is--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: (simultaneous) This is a Daniel Barenboim? Speaker 2: --the book, the libretto was by Da Ponte. Speaker 1: This is Daniel Barenboim, the conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra? Speaker 2: Maestro Daniel Barenboim yes and he was doing the on-stage. There's semi-stage versions of things and so he decided to do those three operas by Mozart, "Marriage of Figaro," "Cosi fan tutte," and "Don Giovanni" and so I had really some on-stage roles in there but I decided to think for him--I was like well you know it's classical era and it's got to be light and they're using a, a smaller orchestra, it's gonna be a chamber orchestra so I'll use my lighter voice, more like coloratura light lyric voice, and that's not what he wanted at all. He hired me and they choose me because he wanted me to use my voice, Alfreda's voice and so that was a very valuable lesson 'cause I still got to go on stage and I still got paid for doing the, the role. It was the, gosh it was the marriage during the wedding in "Marriage of Figaro" where the singers come on and they say, they have their moment and so I went on--he said you know, they are singing so softly I'm gonna have Cecillia Bartoli, the other soprano. Have them do the singing and we'll have these, these two that we hired lip sync, you know move their lips, and I was so upset. I was like I could've given him all the sound that he wanted but that wouldn't be the last time that I would work with Maestro Daniel Barenboim. My time would come with "Elektra," [Richard] Strauss'-- Speaker 1: I just wanted to, I just wanted to for you, if you could, to give us an example of what you're talking about. Use your light voice (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can't do it today. Speaker 1: You can't do it today? Speaker 2: Can't do it today because of the stress on the chords yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: No singing today. All right, okay. Speaker 2: I'll be glad to do it for you later. It's just what--I was just taking volume and body of the sound away, body of the core sound and you know, you know you use your voice because I watched a wonderful singer come from Germany and do that with the [Gabriel] Faure "Requiem" or yeah, I think, and she was replaced for doing that. So the lesson came home hard and she was awesome. I have recordings of her doing Mahler Eighth Symphonies and things, so I won't mention her name but I loved her and I'd--I went up there and told her I said, I love you, I love your voice, you're awesome, and she, you know, was very apologetic for what had happened but, but that's you know when a singer tries to think for the maestro at that doesn't end well and so I learned that first hand. Use your voice, you've been hired and handpicked for what you bring to the table. Story_ID: 117063 Speaker 1: Okay, so now, I take it you're still teaching? Speaker 2: At that time yes. Speaker 1: And, and so when you're doing the covers and that sort of thing you're doing this in spare time, I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So as a second kind of job? Speaker 2: Yeah, then I--when '95 [1995] rolls along--'cause I'm doing Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois] Concerts with Orchestra, so I'm singing professionally and I'm doing oratorio around the City of Chicago as well in outlying areas of the City. Speaker 1: What do we mean by "oratorio?" Speaker 2: What that is--oratorio's main function is like it's very dramatic, it's storytelling, it's usually sacred in the nature of the story, biblical stories and it's done during--it was done during Lent and so the--you cannot have stage productions during Lent, the theater and the opera houses were closed and so they would use biblical stories and the artists, the singers would stand and they could use their scores, not be a slave to it but use--you could use the score, and so you're singing the story, [George Frideric] Handel's "Messiah" is an oratorio you know the [Johann Sebastian] Bach-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)? Speaker 2: "St. Matthew Passion" and all of the "St. Passions" (laughter), you know. Various works like that "Elijah" by [Felix] Mendelssohn, those are considered oratorio. So you're standing and your singing these biblical stories and you're not--you can be dramatic all you want with your voice within the confines of that era and period of music, that style, but you just don't stage. You don't have costumes and make-up, wigs the whole nine yards set design, and you know. So that's-- and it was done in churches. Story_ID: 117064 Speaker 1: So I'm going around and I'm doing oratorio, now oratorios down in symphony halls everywhere now, performing arts centers, in school and in educational institutions and churches alike so I was doing that and also doing the Grant Park Concerts [Chicago, Illinois] and then I auditioned for Maestro [Daniel] Barenboim again and I--this time he said, "Sing that again, Burke" and I sang it again and he cast me in a role, a fourth maid from--which was a pretty dramatic role. It's, it's a comprimario smaller role, but it--because at the time I would not be singing the title role "Elektra" [by Richard Strauss] that would not, my voice wasn't suited for that but it was on its way with dramatic tendencies and full lyric body to the sound. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that was just wonderful. Speaker 2: This was in '95 [1995]? Speaker 1: This was the debut, yeah with the symphony at, at Symphony Center, the newly--they did some renovating of the Symphony. Speaker 2: That's here in Chicago? Speaker 1: (unclear) Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I forget what year they did that (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Now before. Speaker 1: But they--but that and the Carnegie Hall [New York City, New York] debut, because "Elektra" was done there and this is what Chicago Symphony under the baton of Daniel Barenboim. Speaker 2: Okay (unclear) Speaker 1: And this is a world class conductor we're talking about, speaks several languages, plays instruments in the Orchestra with proficiency. He played violin I believe or, or it was a string instrument (laughter) and play piano like it's nobody's business. Did concerti with the orchestra so those are you know piano pieces with orchestra where he's featured and then he would conduct from the piano, so this, this was an amazing world class conductor so to work with him was just awesome and it's funny because he did, after years and years of studying voice and getting around the voice, the chest voice, "Well do we use the chest voice, do we not use the chest voice, let's use a mix. No, that's too heavy, no, no just use a mix here, that's fine," but when you get with an orchestra you have to give full power and the chest tones, you can't really do a mix unless it's in higher-- you know. Depends on where it is in the register, but you're just--so he was one of the ones that said, "Alfreda, sing this like you do that gospel, give that sound" and I would look at him like "Wow, what do you mean" (laughter), but I'd soon understood, you know he wanted me to really give it at that point. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A full bodied rounded chest voice tone because the orchestra's sawing away on Richard Strauss', Strauss' score and this is a tragedy, a Greek tragedy we're talking about (laughter), Elektra, Klytaemnestra, Orest and the gang. All of them and Elektra's gone mad and she's gonna avenge her father's death. She's gonna have her say and it's gonna be a nasty bloodbath before it's all over, and my character was more sympathetic toward "Elektra." It's look at how they treat her, they have her eating you know on the ground like a dog, you know she was eating her food on her all fours like a dog. Speaker 2: Okay now, so this is? Speaker 1: And that character was more dramatic in nature than what I sang for him in the audition. Speaker 2: Oh so you, you've--the debut of that performance with the CSO was here in Chicago? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then? Speaker 1: And then it traveled to Carnegie Hall. Speaker 2: Carnegie Hall the same year? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So this is. Speaker 1: It was with Deborah Polaski. Speaker 2: So here's a historic--Carnegie Hall at the world class Daniel Barenboim and here you are with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra on stage at Carnegie Hall. Speaker 1: With Deborah Polaski and Alessandra Marc (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay so this is--how, how did you feel about this? Speaker 1: Oh it was exhilarating, I wanted everything to be perfect (laughter) and they were, a lot of the cast came from Germany as well, and they were giving me their information for their German agents and managers and they were taking me to dinner and, and paying for the tab and Alessandra, bless her heart, was giving me the, the telephone number to her agents at CAMI [ph.]. She's like "you go over there and you tell them that I sent you and they'll be coming to tonight's performance." (laughter) Story_ID: 117065 Speaker 1: Now you were singing "Elektra" [by Richard Strauss] in what language? Speaker 2: Uh, German. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Richard Strauss' "Elektra" so that was all in German. Speaker 1: How do you, is there a--what's the method of how you learn, I mean how do you learn how to sing in German? Speaker 2: Well as a voice major, you have to--and even in music that I was taking courses that voice majors had to take. That's really a five-year degree, music and comprehensive Special Ed [education] is a five-year degree actually 'cause you're squeezing so much in and you take such long--semester hours are like eighteen, it's nothing to take an eighteen semester hour load just to get through, you know get out in time, but so I had to take foreign languages, the Romance languages. So French, Italian, German [sic, German is not a Romance language] and then past that you can take more, I did take some Spanish too but I--when I sang other languages like Russian, Hebrew, Czech I would go to a coach and coach those and even if I were going to do a recital, I would still get with a coach and coach because singing as a soloist in these languages, you--there was much more that you--you have to spit out that text and the double consonants have to be really given more emphasis and the vowels are, whether they're closed or open, you know, long, short and the, the rules change from language to language. Are you gotta flip an "R", or you gonna role an "R"? Is this gonna become a schwa? Is that last vowel going to be voiced or is it going to be silent? It's just various rules. Story_ID: 117066 Speaker 1: Now coming from, out of a gospel background, it's interesting when you said that Daniel Barenboim, the maestro asked you to bring the gospel to the classical music? Speaker 2: He wanted that chest sound that he heard. Because see, I found out that he was one, he was not--he was unconventional in his musical choices, and even the staging, the semi-staging and having a stage built for symphony orchestras. Now they are doing semi-staged productions but that wasn't always the case and so he was a trailblazer for things like that, but he also liked other styles of music. He appreciated jazz, so he had heard the voice, how the voice was used in gospel music as well. Speaker 1: Now, did, did your studies in classical music inform how you approach gospel in any way? Speaker 2: Yeah, it had to, I had to sing gospel using a, a solid technique. There, if I wanted to be able to phonate (laughter) and to be able to have my voice at a whim you know and when I needed it and to earn money professionally. You're going to treat your voice as if it's a precious gemstone you know (laughter), like it's a diamond, you're not going to abuse it. So yeah I still sang other styles of music but with great care, with great technique and support and on the breath. And you still--what it is I think, it's the spirit behind what you're singing. You know people were--in church were mad at me because I wasn't screaming and those other groups, that I--the outside community of groups that I--groups that did solo work and, I was like "Look I could do the spirituals, the anthems, the classical production, but if you wanted me to do an authentic gospel, what a primal scream, no, I wasn't doing that anymore," so there were people that were very disappointed, you know my sister was disappointed too (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think even with "Too Hot To Handel" today and musical theater there is still a way, it's the spirit behind it, I believe. Story_ID: 117067 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about "Show Boat" [by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein, II] directed by Harold Prince [at the Auditorium Theatre in Chicago, Illinois in 1995]? Speaker 2: Right, and it was a Livent production and they had several shows going on simultaneously from Toronto [Canada] to Broadway [New York City, New York] to the National Tour in various parts of the nation, and even outside, but they had things like Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" [by Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber], "Cats" [by Andrew Lloyd Webber], "Les Miserables" [by Claude-Michel Schoenberg and Alain Boubil], "Sunset Boulevard" [by Don Black, Christopher Hampton, and Andrew Lloyd Webber], "Candide" [by Leonard Bernstein], "Show Boat," "Ragtime" [by Terrence McNally, Lynn Ahrens, and Stephen Flaherty] later was added as well and I did "Show Boat," Rod [HM Rodrick Dixon] and I were in the cast together and that we--one thing that I took away from that is a different discipline because you have eight shows a week. Wednesdays and Saturdays are two show days, there's a matinee and an evening performance, and so you have long days and you have a long week and you, the theater is dark on Monday so Tuesday through Sunday you were performing and then you have a very--the rehearsal process is--yes, but it's pretty rigorous, you have to dance, you have to act, you have to sing, you have to cover as well (laughter), so, and so. Speaker 1: Had you quit the public schools at this point? Speaker 2: At that point I took a leave of absence because I was told by--was it the superintendent or the assistant, that I would have to--because I would need to take off so many days to do these professional jobs and singing and I said, "Singing goes hand-in-hand with education. I believe it's important the two just go together." I said, "I need to be able to do this" and so at one point she said, well you can take you know--the superin--you know, a day from the superintendent can pull a day from your chair pool which is music then a day from your principal's pool and so like three days is not enough and so I said well at this point I will have to take a leave of absence and I will give you a decision you know after a year whether I come back or submit my resignation. So I did take that leave of absence and I learned quite a bit about that singing and dancing and acting (laughter) you know. I mean of course you walk--you have to act and do blocking and movement and even dancing and opera too but it's a really rigorous thing and musical theater and it's a different animal. Story_ID: 117068 Speaker 1: Okay, now what role did you play in "Show Boat" [by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein, II]? Speaker 2: Well when I was at the Kennedy Center [John F. Kennedy for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C.] in the National--part of the National Tour, a balcony soloist. So I sang in the middle, in the misery scene from the balcony on the set where there was a spot on me. I sang "When I die, let me rest with a dish on my breast." "Some give nickels, some give dime and these are friends of mine," something like that. "All these folks are friends of mine," so and another thing I learned about that particular musical. The day that we put on our costumes it was such a disparity in the, the white cast members and the black cast members because it, it was--it had to reflect that time back and this talk about emancipation, you know, time and the--there's another word I wanna think of--where blacks were sharecroppers and they were beginning to--? Speaker 1: A Reconstruction? Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that period, so they were still working and picking cotton on plantations, so the costumes are going to reflect this and the roles that we play and the dialect that we use and the scenes that we're in and so they purposely waited until--see we wore our street clothes all throughout rehearsals, but when we got to that tech week and we got to the theater and we went to hair and make-up and costumes, dressers, then that's when and when we got on that stage you could hear a pin drop. It was silence, because we had bandannas on our heads and we had, you know, the dress, slaves and/or post slave period times. Speaker 1: Now did you imagine that before, I mean was it kinda, kinda like a shock to you? Speaker 2: It was shocking for everybody because even our, our white, white cast members, colleagues and friends, they were silent too because their clothes were silks and satins and on sequins and you know flappers, dresses and the finery and beautiful shoes, the, the time that that period, the turn of the century and all of that you know, just what was in style during the period where the Charleston dance was occurring you know. So what they did was show a montage of scenes where we changed periods, we went from those early 1800s later into the 1900s where you're gonna have the Charleston. So then our costumes began to change and looked better and more finer. Speaker 1: The show moves into the 1920s I guess? Speaker 2: They showed it, it was great. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Post-World War I (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: It was great, the choreography, using Susan Stroman's chorography and the direction of Harold Prince and the idea of them to make that montage as the music played we went through the 1900s, 1800, yeah, late 1800s to the 19. Speaker 1: Interesting you're our younger generation playing a musical that was one of the first I think big Broadway musicals right? Speaker 2: Film, yeah. Speaker 1: "Show Boat"? Speaker 2: In 1927, filmed in the 1935 [sic, 1936] filming of it and you have Paul Robeson singing 'Ol' Man River' and that 1927, right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then William Warfield singing in the 1935 [sic, 1951] one, and even Lena Horne was she, no, yeah sang, I believe she was the voice for Grayson, that's Julie [sic, Annette Warren dubbed the role of Julie for Ava Gardner, Kathryn Grayson played Magnolia]. She was, she couldn't be on screen playing a Mulatto woman. She couldn't play Julie mixed, you know, miscegenation, all she couldn't do that, she could sing and they dub, and the white actress would play Julie. Speaker 1: Yeah it's interesting--a minstrel show, the "Show Boat," but you know it had some interesting implications about American race relations. Speaker 2: Um-hum, it did. Speaker 1: Now, I was just was, I thought. Speaker 2: And Julie was the tragic heroine who gave her all for Magnolia, right, even her job and turned to the bottle because her white husband does leave her when he finds out, and he can't take the pressure of that day and age knowing that you know if there's one drop, one drop of black blood in you, you could have parents you know bi-racial parents but, one drop of black blood says that you are black. Story_ID: 117069 Speaker 1: Okay well, we were talking about "Show Boat" [by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein, II] and I was asking you what role you played in "Show Boat" and-- Speaker 2: We were talking about the disparity in the costumes. I did the balcony singer when I was at the, in the National Tour at Kennedy Center, D.C. [John F. Kennedy for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C.] in Washington, D.C. and that there's a--in the misery scene she sings "When I die let me rest with a dish on my breast. Some give nickels, some give dime, all these folk is friends of mine" and that's significant of how funerals were paid for back during that time by those who couldn't afford it, you know the towns folks would come around, put money in the dish and that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Which is on you, on your body. Speaker 2: Now you can get on your chest, that's exactly right so then you could get a proper burial because of that and they're all of them chipping in with their meager wages and so the spotlight was on me for that and it was a wonderful time. In D.C., I was also talking about how they also the, the disparity in the costumes, the black cast members as opposed to the white cast members and when we left the rehearsal where we were wearing our dress clothes, our own street clothes, and we came into the theater and had to put on the costumes, go to hair and make-up and to the dressers then you could hear a pin drop in the theater. It was a somber mood, I don't think we even said anything when we walked out of the theater to go to lunch because our clothes were that of slaves and those that were working in the field and picking cotton, and it was just reminiscent of that time period and our white counterparts had on the finery, the silks, the satins, the beautiful you know the even the, the chiffons what on them, sequins, the very heavy sequined costu--you know as the time progressed because they did do a timeline sequence, a montage of the music of how they went from the 1800s into the 1900s, so you did have the Charleston dance represented and the flappers and the costumes for that and the just very--you know festive and-- Speaker 1: It's interesting (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --just the intricate details of the, yeah. Speaker 1: A new generation, I mean a younger generation doing "Show Boat" really didn't imagine historically what it actually looked like until they got the costumes on and-- Speaker 2: Yeah because I mean you can watch the 1927 [sic, 1936] version with Paul Robeson and you can watch the 1935 [sic, 1951] version with William Warfield singing, 'Ol' Man River' and you can see, and you're thinking well "That's then, this is now," but then you get in the theater and, no, it's still dated and it's still reflective of that era and that period and the goings on of that time and the pain that people felt and the, the hard labor and the sun and on the--and the beatings and the--as you said the racism and prejudice, the injustices. So all of that and even that one scene of (laughter)--I remember how Bob had to call Queenie, the young lady, Jo Ann Hawkins White, who was playing Queenie. He got to call her the "N" word, he was--it took him such a while to be able to do it and to--every time he did it and walked off the stage he would grab her and say "I'm so sorry, I'm so sorry, you know I don't mean it, I don't mean it. I would never say it, I would never"--(laughter), so but it was so difficult for him to call her that day in and day out and I was talking about the disciplines of a musical theater being in a show and it was a wonderful show that we were talking about Livent productions, how they had simultaneous shows going on at the same time, "Sunset Boulevard" [by Don Black, Christopher Hampton, and Andrew Lloyd Webber], "Cats" [by Andrew Lloyd Webber], "Les Mis" ["Les Miserables" by Claude-Michel Schoenberg and Alain Boubil], "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" [by Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber], "Candide" [by Leonard Bernstein], "Show Boat" and later they would add "Ragtime" [by Terrence McNally, Lynn Ahrens, and Stephen Flaherty] and so--then you'd have Hal Prince's [sic, Harold Prince's] direction of this and it was ingenious, Susan Stroman's chorography and that montage and how you can move time along in a very cleaver-wise way. And so all that they, they did to really produce and the cast members were coming from--we would start in Toronto, we would have to be to get our measurements in Toronto, Canada and then--and that's when our contracts were outta there, it was a Canadian company, and then they would go to Broadway [New York City, New York], they would go to throughout our nation on various stops so that's. Speaker 1: So you traveled with the show if it's a? Speaker 2: Right that's if--I told them that I couldn't totally commit because my son [Dean Perrin, Jr.] at one point was in the show with me as well and they offered me the Tour and I said well, and they offered my son the Tour. I said well I can't, I really don't wanna you know take him out of school and have him on the road living out of a suitcase and in each new vocation we have to find an apartment and a tutor, someone that work with him, but now thinking back on it I wished that I had done that, but they did say, I said call well call me if somebody goes down. So they did call me and I performed at Kennedy Center. Story_ID: 117512 Speaker 1: I had asked you at one point about the dramatic content of "Show Boat" [by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein, II] and which was meant to address American race problems in some ways, in a dramatic musical way. Speaker 2: Um-hum, that's one way--I mean even in opera you had [Giuseppe] Verdi, [Giacomo] Puccini they were reflect--and [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart--they were all in their different eras and time reflecting what was going on in their time politically and socially and if they were speaking out against something and they felt injustices were happening or they wanted to send a message to a leader, a king of sorts, they would do it through their music, and you know they would also--composing music for the court and so here we have a musical theater they are showing the segregation, miscegenation, all of these are things being spoken about in, in "Show Boat." So you see the pain and the misery, you see Julie's plight where she's mulatto and she has one drop of black blood in her veins, so she's considered black and she loses her white husband, even though she looks as, as fair as a white woman. Speaker 1: The part is played by a white woman right, so? Speaker 2: She, she--yes it's played by, I think it's Grayson [sic, Julie is played by Ava Gardner in the 1951 film. Kathryn Grayson plays Magnolia], but she is the tragic heroine. She gives it all up for Magnolia, the daughter of Captain Andy who runs the "Show Boat" so it really is a wonderful love story. All is well in the end except for our tragic Julie. Speaker 1: Okay, so now-- Speaker 2: It has those iconic songs too, fish got to swim, 'Can't Help Lovin Dat Man of Mine', and 'Ol' Man River' of course (laughter), 'Bill,' 'I've Got The Room Above Her' ['I Have the Room Above Her'] and 'Misery' [sic, Mis'ry's Comin' Aroun] which is sung by the black cast members. Story_ID: 117513 Speaker 1: Now, now Rodrick [HM Rodrick Dixon] was in this too? Speaker 2: He was, and then they swiped him out and put him--because all of the Livent has all of his shows going on simultaneously, they put him into "Ragtime" [by Terrence McNally, Lynn Ahrens, and Stephen Flaherty]. Speaker 1: Now Rodrick Dixon, he's your husband and--when did you meet Rodrick? He told the story so I'll give you a chance to tell the story of how you met. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh wow, I wondered if he remembered everything (laughter), and also my son [Dean Perrin, Jr.] was in "Show Boat" after Rod was plucked and put in "Ragtime" then my son joined the cast. It was a blast, but and I know a great experience for him, but we met--I went to the Lyric Opera House [Lyric Opera of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] for a coaching session and we had a mutual friend, Stephen Powell, who was a baritone and a wonderful pianist and so we had seen each other a few times when I went to the Opera House, but also one day Steve--it was getting near Christmas time, December, Steve said that he wanted to hire both of us to do his-- the Quartets for the you know for the corporations, like a quartet of singers for Christmas Carols. So Rod was the tenor, I was the soprano, Steven was the bass and he had, it could've been his wife at the time, that was Annette so if she was available, but we sang that and said, purposely matchmaking, "Well, Freda I have to go home a different way, I have to go back here, would you see to Rod getting home?" 'Cause Rod had ridden with him to the that location which was on the North Shore. I said, sure, sure. So Rod and I found out that we had so many parallels, so many things was alike. We both had birthdays in June; we both had backgrounds in education, in some way. We both were Pastor's kids, we both had been married and had boys who were the same age, give or take a few months, okay. My son was just a few, a few months older than his son [Jared Dixon] but and we loved the same types of music, we were both opera singers so, so, we-- all of these parallels so our conversation, we had great conversations and I popped some Dave Grusin in the tape deck 'cause it was a cassette tape at that time (laughter) and he's this wonderful pianist who has done some treatments of [George] Gershwin's songs, and they were the regular classic Gershwin songs, the America song as well as "Porgy and Bess" songs too and what he did with the piano treatments were awesome and Rod loved them. We found out we just loved so many different styles and kinds of music and we talked about our backgrounds, our family backgrounds. We just really hit it off and we became friends. So that was the beginning of it and then we had a twelve hour date that following month in January [1993], I think New Year's Day, and we went to the movies, we went to, to the Lake Shore in Evanston [Illinois] at Lake Michigan and sat and watched the waves and the glaciers--(laughter), the ice beat against the shore and listen to all of the different styles of music that, that we loved and that was just a marathon date and we even read some literature and did a little bit of dancing and so that, that was just the beginning of a beautiful friendship and our friendship lasted six years. I mean we got married right after six years of a friendship. Story_ID: 117514 Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you [Burke and HM Rodrick Dixon] got married in 1998, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, in Chicago [Illinois] in your father's [John Henry Burke, Jr.'s] Church [First Mennonite Church in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Right and my dad married us. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so. Speaker 2: And you have the pictures of scenes from that. Speaker 1: Now by that time I think, now he's with "Three Mo' Tenors" right I think by that time? Speaker 2: After we got married we got the call from Marian J. Caffey and Victor Trent Cook that he knew that, that regime and he and Rod go way back, I'm sure Rod told you. Speaker 1: Let's pause a second here. (sirens) okay. Speaker 2: He got the call from Marian J. Caffey after we were married and he would end up finishing up "Ragtime" [by Terrence McNally, Lynn Ahrens, and Stephen Flaherty] and then doing "Three Mo' Tenors," at the time it was called. Speaker 1: So you were, you were still doing "Show Boat" [by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein, II] or? Speaker 2: Um "Show Boat" ended, let's see and we both we were--I did the National Tour up until '98 [1998], August of '98 [1998] and that stopped at Kennedy Center [John F. Kennedy for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C.] and then I, as--I did submit my resignation to Evanston Consolidated, Evanston/Skokie Consolidated Public School District 65, cause I knew I couldn't juggle everything and I knew I was gonna do more signing and I would have to travel so I had to make a decision so I then--and then I did accept "Show Boat," then with as I said the National--a little bit of the National Tour then after that came Wheaton College [Conservatory of Music in Wheaton, Illinois] and still, I'm still concertizing, doing performances, traveling in and out of town and everyone knows that if you are a college professor that, that works well because you can reschedule your students, you can do make-up lessons when you return and they can be working on things while you're away, but then that begins to be a bit much because after eleven years I did have to submit my resignation to them as well because to travel abroad meant to do--we were in Prague [Czech Republic] doing the PBS Special "Hallelujah Broadway" [2010]. Story_ID: 117515 Speaker 1: And I knew that-- Speaker 2: --Whoa, wait a second, whoa we're moving really fast now and I just wanna go back and maybe ask you how did you, how did the Wheaton College [Conservatory of Music in Wheaton, Illinois] job come about, and what was your position? Speaker 1: There was actually, I think Mary Hopper, and Robert Black of Chicago [Illinois] Sunday Evening Club, 30 Good Min- Minutes. I did solo work for them and I sold the chorale as a small group of professional singers and she thought the world of me and wanted me to meet the Dean at that time, and I did cone just talk with them and I did receive an invitation to join the faculty as guest lecturer in voice so that was the voice faculty, and it was an adjunct position, and they did, they were so kind to offer me full time, but I just--I wanted to keep my options open for the performances, cause you can do a lot in a week's time so I put all of my voice lessons on one day to work with my students on one day and then if I needed to be out of town I could get back for that one day or reschedule things. So I was there for eleven years, that, that was 1998 [sic, 1997] until May of 2009. Speaker 2: Okay so eleven years and you were working one day a week with (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Right, and there were times that I had a to do juries, voice juries sit on the panel to judge those so that would take more time, and then there were meetings that I needed to be present for. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's a fine institution and the most wonderful people there and some of the most wonderful students as well and very talented individuals. Speaker 2: Okay, all right so, that's so-- Speaker 1: Tony Payne was instrumental in hiring me and as well as the Dean at that time. Speaker 2: Okay so Tony Payne, was he the Chairman of the Department or? Speaker 1: He was over the Conservatory, I forget the, his exact title. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So we had the Dean of the Music Conservatory and Tony ran that area as well, Dr. Payne. Story_ID: 117516 Speaker 1: Now I don't wanna jump ahead, but in, in 2003 is that, that's when you developed the musical Too-- "Too Hot to Handel," was that it? Speaker 2: Well we didn't develop it, we--2002 was when it was first performed by, by Rod [HM Rodrick Dixon] and I at, in Detroit [Michigan]. It was at a church and they loved it so much and it was a church I think in the month of March. They loved it so much that they brought it to the Detroit Opera House, Michigan Opera Theater that December and then it was continually done each December right before Christmas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And certainly anywhere from early the first weekend of the--December to maybe the third weekend of December it was done. So we are going on the twelfth year from 2002 until now, we'll be having the twelfth performance this December. Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: And that's the Michigan Opera Theater and then it did become--it did start getting performed at the Auditorium Theatre under Brett Batterson, CEO of Auditorium Theatre in 2006. He wanted it in 2005 but--that December but he ended up doing it in January 2006 and it just so was like the month of December gets pretty crowded. You have the "Nutcracker" [by Peter Illyich Tchaikovsky] in venues, especially the Auditorium Theatre which is a dance venue. Speaker 1: Okay, just I want to explain for everybody watching this "Too Hot to Handel," we're talking about Handel as in [George Frideric] Handel's "Messiah," right? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So "Too Hot to Handel" Speaker 2: It's Handel's "Messiah" on steroids. Speaker 1: The Jazz Gospel Messiah? Speaker 2: Gospel Messiah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was written by, well we should say "rethought" (laughter) there's so many ways that you could say it. It was a new vision by Gary Anderson and-- Speaker 1: That's Gary Anderson from Detroit or? Speaker 2: Gary, I don't know where and there's one more, Bob Christianson. Bob Christianson and Gary Anderson were the two arrangers, well they took Handel's "Messiah" and they maintained the classical elements and added jazz, gospel, blues, rock, fusion, you know, it is, it's just, what I said, on steroids, it's a hybrid, it's a mix and it's something for everybody and the audience participates, they jump up out of their seats, they sing along, they clap, they dance, they--we feed off of their energy. It's an exchange between stage and audience and it's a labor of love. The powerful text of Handel's "Messiah," its biblical scriptures set to music, powerfully transforming-- and I think because it's just artistic, it's, its powerful, it's exciting, it's energetic, it something that resonates with all kinds of audiences and all ages. It's, it's a family affair. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: All races, creeds, cultures and it is very diverse and that way it's not only diverse musically and in the message but it's also diverse when you look up on the stage and you see cultural and racial diversity in the orchestra and in the chorus and the chorus is prepared by Bill Fraher of Old St. Patrick's Church [Chicago, Illinois] as well as Suzanne Acton is the helm conducting. Now she is from Detroit Opera House, Michigan Opera Theater and Rackham Symphony Choir [Detroit, Michigan], she's the director of that. So she conducts operas at the Opera House as well as Musical Director and Conductor for Rackham Symphony Choir. Speaker 1: Okay, now the version that you do, was this--I mean--I know your husband was saying it was done be, before but this was a new production of it right? Speaker 2: The ones that we do we do in Detroit and Chicago [Chicago], so the Auditorium Theatre Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] because we met Brett Batterson in Detroit and he use to work for the Michigan Opera Theater, and this is just a piece that everyone loves and he said, you know, when he realized that he was going, coming to Chicago, said I definitely want "Too Hot to Handel" to be performed here too, but yes Marian Alsap that is something that she commissioned and had Bob Christianson and Gary Anderson realize this vision with her (laughter) and arrange this piece. So she had done it at Concordia Orchestra in New York, Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York City, New York], Lincoln Center, Denver Symphony [Colorado Symphony Orchestra] and now I think she's still doing it in New York, maybe at Carnegie [Carnegie Hall in New York City, New York] and at outreach with younger people involved, students. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it has been done in Florida. It's been done many place across the nation, but yes the one that we are involved and sing and love it, it's a labor of love for us and we do the solo work for that as Detroit and Chicago. Story_ID: 117517 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm-- Speaker 2: And this piece ["Too Hot to Handel"] was written with Thomas Young in mind you know, one of the Three Mo'-well, Cook, Dixon and Young [Victor Trent Cook, HM Rodrick Dixon, and Thomas Young, formerly of the "Three Mo' Tenors"], let me say it that way, because he has an enormous body of work for classical music as well as jazz, be-bop it's nothing for him to sing jazz just so effortlessly. So it's written with him in mind and Rod is really along that, that journey and that, that road of being just a very diverse artist-- Speaker 1: First of all now (unclear) Speaker 2: 'cause he has to wear so many different hats in that piece 'cause he has to bring it classically, he has to sing "Why do the nations," he opens with "Comfort Ye" and the, the notes that he has to sing he's up in the stratosphere for most of the night and so from the beginning hour to the ninth hour he still has to be technically on point and so and my job is the narrator. I am the Angel Gabriel, the narrator and I'm the messenger I'm the Angel, I tell the story, I move it along. "There were shepherds abiding in the field keeping watch by their flocks by night and lo the Angel of the Lord came upon them and the glory of the Lord shined around about them and they were so afraid" and on and on, that's my monologue there, and I come back with "Rejoice, oh daughter of Zion" ["Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion"] which the soprano would normally do so and I did it for "Trumpets Shall Sound" that's something a baritone would do in the original, traditional "Messiah," so we do exchanging of pieces and different voices are doing different things and the alto gets to really, you know let 'er rip, but my, my presentation is more spiritual, operatic style and gospel and the "Rejoice, Rejoice, Rejoice greatly", that, that's jazz. Speaker 1: Okay now are--is this, this is something you've been doing for a number of years now right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And are you doing it again? Speaker 2: Twelve years in Detroit [Michigan], this is what we're coming up on the 12th year and we're coming up on the eighth or ninth--see there was one year remember that in Chicago we did it twice, we did it in January and then that December as well and then at home now on Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], the weekend right before the National Holiday commemorating Dr. Martin Luther King's life and legacy so we, we celebrate him as we do this piece of well because he was a man of peace. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now so this is still going strong now "Too Hot To Handel" and-- Speaker 2: In both cities for us. Story_ID: 117518 Speaker 1: Two thousand four [2004], you and [HM] Rodrick Dixon form a company called DiBurke Incorporated? Speaker 2: Actually two [2002] I believe it is? Speaker 1: 2002? Must be. Speaker 2: Two [2002], I think so, yeah, yeah, it is 2002. Speaker 1: So 2002. Speaker 2: Because one of our first projects was "From the Heart" CD, which was my solo debut CD. Speaker 1: Well tell us about that? Speaker 2: Well Rod decided that--we talked about and came to the agreement that we should incorporate, and we would be to subcontract musicians and do projects and if we wanted to produce we certainly could do that as well and then we did. We took on the project of the "From the Heart" CD as I said, my dad [John Henry Burke, Jr.] always said, what goes from the heart goes to the heart or reaches the heart, and so I took songs that I loved that were close to my heart and they were you know 'Laudamus te' from the Mozart C Minor Mass ["Great Mass in C minor" by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] and, see, even French chanson by [Henri] DuParc, "Chanson triste," "L'invitation au voyage.' I did pieces that I loved by [Richard] Strauss. I love his music, it just fits my voice like a glove I feel, like [Giuseppe] Verdi, he's a composer who can just really write for the voice you know. He does that for me as well but I, did pick of the two. There were treatments of "nacht" which means night. I did the Alban Berg which is the 20th century atonal, twelve tone row, that type of a presentation, but it's a little jazzy too 'cause it is the 20th century. So Alban Berg's "Nacht", the treatment of nacht, and also [Richard] Strauss who talks about the, even though the night covers everything he's you can see little shimmers of light peaking out and draw closer so that the night won't take you away from me, talk close. So I, I thought those were just very beautiful, serene pieces they are and then I did some Duke Ellington, "Don't Get Around Much Anymore," Jerome Kern, "Can't Help Lovin' Dat Man of Mine," "Fish Gotta Swim" you know, and some spirituals, "Sometimes I feel Like a Motherless Child", it's from John Carter's "Cantata" that cycle of songs and "Give Me Jesus," Edward Boatner which was one of my favorites. I did an aria also, the-- [Arrigo] Boito's "Mefistofele," 'L'altra notte,' and Margherita, another tragic heroine, (laughter) you know she falls for Faust and then she has his baby and she goes mad because he leaves her and the she kills the baby, horrible. Don't ask me (laughter) why I chose that aria, 'cause it's far from me, and then there's the-- "I speak" but and then did two contemporary Christian pieces "There is a Savior" which is a piece that all of Sandi Patty Helvering did and she was part writer with another co-writer on that piece, "There is a Savior" and it also goes into "My Tribute" by Andrae Crouch, so those were the renderings on that CD. Things that were close to my heart and lots of diversity, so it's an eclectic mix of the things that I enjoyed singing. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so this was released commercially in 2002? Speaker 2: Right, and it's still on Amazon.com. Speaker 1: Oh yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know if we have it still on CD Baby and it's all throughout Europe as well some distribution tills so. It's on many different markets, people can get their hands on it probably download songs, separately digitally, yeah that's-- they can. Speaker 1: Okay today's music market is, is really interesting. Speaker 2: Vast (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, so what was a CD now can be. Speaker 2: Yeah, sold in tiny pieces (laughter), and you don't know whose, and, and I love the fact that, that "Sound of Majesty" on WMBI Moody, Moody Bible Institute [Chicago, Illinois] station and plays songs from that CD selections. Speaker 1: Okay, so this was. Speaker 2: Spirituals, "Give me Jesus," "Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child." Seems like there's yet another, oh, oh, "I Keep So Busy Serving My Jesus Ain't Got Time To Die" ["Ain't Got Time to Die"] and that Hal Johnson's/Alfreda Burke rendition 'cause it's done with just bass, upright string bass accompaniment. Story_ID: 117519 Speaker 1: Okay, so this ["From the Heart" in 2002], this is the first project of DiBurke Incorporated, is the CD. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the first things we did and we certainly how we went into the studio and had our people who we wanted to work with. Speaker 1: And so, so what is the scope of DiBurke Incorporated? What--your husband [HM Rodrick Dixon] spoke to it, but what's your version of the scope of DiBurke? Speaker 2: Well providing arts and on education and even master classes, performances and, and different musical mediums or genres or styles in different places from institutions to churches to venues to performing arts centers and theaters, just diversity, offering diversity in music to a wide audience and a wide demographic, wide age range. Story_ID: 115202 Speaker 1: Okay so, 2005 you served as alumni ambassador for Roosevelt University's [Chicago, Illinois] sixtieth anniversary, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well what did that entail? Speaker 2: When I was a student there they were so kind to put me in advertisements and they had a live, actually that--those tall windows on Michigan Avenue as it went around the Congress, Congress Parkway, so the Wabash side they had just life size--wow how many feet were those, huge, huge window, big boards that had students and their faces and what, what they were doing since they've graduated. So they had me down as someone that had taken my degrees and I was doing things, successful things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they did, they did call me back and allow me that honor of being an Ambassador for their sixtieth anniversary. So I came to the festivities and participated and I did also see--I was invited back for convocation and at on this day I also serve on the--it is now Roosevelt University Chicago College of the Performing Arts Advisory Board. It was Chicago Musical College when I was coming through so it's CCPA now. Story_ID: 115203 Speaker 1: Tell us about Daisy Newman's Project in, in University of California at Berkeley [Berkeley, California]. Is that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yes the Young Musicians Choral Orchestra and it was formerly "YMPA" Young Musicians Program and she founded this instead, well no she did not. She came on board and really took it to the next level and, and this it was on the campus of U.C. Berkeley and she being a stellar soprano and performer herself who worked with Leonard Bernstein, she could certainly--it takes one to know one, 'cause she could certainly spot the use and the talents for this program and they were wunderkinds, they were genius, brilliant, talents but her program was centered around those that were under privileged or children or risk or you going through all kinds of adverse circumstances in their lives and their homes and may not be able to get that type of training that she offers, and the type of training she offers for master teachers, and she had a staff of teachers that taught the students around the year, through the, the summer they were learning musical instruments, they were learning vocal, they had voice lessons and training as well as choral rehearsals, so they had to be able to be proficient in more than one instrument. She wanted them to sing as well as to play their instruments and they--and academic subjects they also had to main a certain GPA and they also had to be students of excellence and respect one another and the campus and the opportunity. So she has her program set so she could talk to you on more about more eloquently about Three Tier. The, the rate, rate of the students leaving her program by the time they're ready for college they--100 percent acceptance rate. They were accepted by and some of the leading music conservatories and schools and institutions in our nation, Juilliard [The Julliard School in New York City, New York], Manhattan School of Music [New York City, New York], on and on you know all over the nation, some of our leading institutions for music; and many times they were receiving full rides, full scholarships or partial scholarships but because her, she raised the bar and because of her own standards and what she had achieved in real life. She also worked for the Detroit Symphony Orchestra [Detroit, Michigan], she worked for other New York Philharmonic [New York City, New York]--you know as far as an administrator with educational outreach tentacles that as well as having been a perform--an international performer so she had auditions and interviews, interviewed the parents, interviewed the stud--the children, the students and there were times when she--she had an age group that she wouldn't go lower than but there were times when she even had to take young ones you know, eight year olds, nine year olds, because they just exhibited such extremely genius ability and the capacity to go through her program and to be able to digest and process all of these great people that are in front of them. I mean she even has a jazz group, so we're talking classically at first and operatically and then they're learning German lieder, they're speaking foreign languages, they have to know their theory as well, they have to read and then they have wonderful proficient voice teachers, prolific staff of people that really can produce abundance you know-- Speaker 1: So that means you right, you're part of the staff that teaches voice and-- Speaker 2: Well we [Burke and her husband, HM Rodrick Dixon], well thank you for that (laughter), we're honored to be part of that but we come two weeks in the summer and this is the first time that we didn't because the program is transitioning off-campus to its own location now and she has a board of directors and donors and sponsors, supporters. So she has a lot of support, she knows a lot of people and she you know she's had people like Martin Katz who is known concert pianist and a recitalist, come work with her students, Frederica von Stade, a world class mezzo-soprano from the Metropolitan Opera [New York City, New York] and other venues around the world, all of kinds of people and for the jazz, Patrice Rushen, and she her staff oh, they are, they're just amazing what they are getting out of those students, those children and they--plus the students come to work and she provides two meals for them. So I just think there is a special place in heaven for her. Story_ID: 115204 Speaker 1: (simultaneous) I can't say enough. Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Okay, from what I understand though, it's not easy to present for these students [in the Young Musicians Choral Orchestra], you have to be sharp you have to really know what you're doing? Speaker 1: Oh yeah because they're already at a such a high level in their skills, in their ability to digest and they want to learn so really very badly (simultaneous). Speaker 2: What's your experience with the students, that's, you know? Speaker 1: Lovely, wonderful, delightful, delightful. They're able to implement what I'm teaching them about-- whether it's tonal production, technical things, about the vocal production and the even artistic and dramatic things that we're imparting about the storytelling, they're able, they just soak it up like sponges and implement it and spit it right back out at you, so I mean it's been like no other program that I know. Speaker 2: Okay, now-- Speaker 1: Even some of her students are teaching students, that's how good it is (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So we [Burke and her husband, HM Rodrick Dixon] enjoy going there in the summer months. Story_ID: 115205 Speaker 1: Now, 2010 you're involved in "Hallelujah Broadway," explain what that is and what you did? Speaker 2: Bill Hughes, Executive, I'll say CEO of Mind The Gap Films, and also producer of this, this was his brainchild. He wanted to take selections from Broadway musicals that were uplifting and inspiring, beautiful classics, sounds that would impact, transform, touch people and put them all in one performance and he named it "Hallelujah Broadway." And so, so he thought, he said we have these wonderful quotes from him where he said that Rod [HM Rodrick Dixon] and I completed is dream team. He also produced the Irish Tenors [The Irish Tenors] so Anthony Kearns is one of the three of us and then there's the guest what's, what shall I call Linda Eder that, that's how she makes guest appearance and sings about four numbers and she's from Broadway so she's a household name from Broadway, but so you have the four of us on this program with the Prague Philharmonic [Orchestra] and there's a chorus of voices also and it's beautiful how that--because nobody in the choral speaks English so they're using IPA [International Phonetic Alphabet], the phonetic system, in order to sing the English to get the English pronunciation correct and we, we would break during the film, taping "Hallelujah Broadway," no one could speak to us because of that, the language barrier, but they were very, very delightful people and so we were there in Prague for the, for the and studio too, to record for the recording the CD and that is on EMI Manhattan Record Label and then we did the of course the-- filmed the PBS Special in Prague [Czech Republic] at the Church of, or the Basilica of, St. Simon and St. Jude and that oh, gosh alone the history in that place. The gold leaf, it's Baroque splendor and then there is an organ in there that it is said that [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart and [Joseph] Haydn played themselves, I touched it, and that was up in the choir loft, I went up there and touched it. I got goose bumps, aw just amazing history in Prague and most places in Europe certainly they're much older, centuries old, than, than our young county, America. Speaker 1: Now what, what songs did, did you sing, you (simultaneous) (unclear), yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I opened the show with 'Oh, What A Beautiful Morning.' Speaker 1: Now that's from "Oklahoma!" [by Richard Rogers and Oscar Hammerstein, II] right? Speaker 2: Yes, I sang 'You'll Never Walk Alone' [from "Carousel" by Richard Rogers and Oscar Hammerstein, II] later on in the show and 'Climb Ev'ry Mountain,' [from "The Sound of Music" by Richard Rogers and Oscar Hammerstein, II] Rogers and Hammerstein so, "You'll Never Walk Alone" from Carousel "Oh What" and "Climb Every Mountain" of course from Sound of Music and then did some things with Rod [HM Rodrick Dixon] and Anthony Kearns that were like from "Jesus Christ Superstar" [by Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber], did 'I Don't Know How to Love Him,' and Every-- what is that-'Can We Start Again Please' [sic, 'Could We Start Again, Please?'] and there's even another one in there, so it was a medley of "Jesus Christ Superstar." It went on to, to even the things that we did together. I did some things alone, did some "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" [by Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber], did 'Day by Day' from "Godspell" [by Stephen Schwartz and John-Michael Tebelak] and so I had the solo moments and we had our wonderful ensemble moments that were just, it was just so much fun to work with Bill Hughes. Now Mind the Gap Films, his company is out of Dublin, Ireland and he wanted to do the filming and recording in Prague. It wasn't so far across the pond for him, it was for us. Story_ID: 115206 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, and we did do subsequent performances [of "Hallelujah Broadway"] with Cincinnati Pops Orchestra and Cincinnati, Ohio at Riverbend [Riverbend Music Center in Cincinnati, Ohio] the summer venue and later we would do it at the Auditorium Theatre in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: With the Chicago Symphony or? Speaker 2: We, we actually allow the Roosevelt University Students of the Chicago College of the Performing Arts [Chicago, Illinois] an opportunity to sing and play that performance which they did a wonderful job, it's a wonderful institution, the school. Speaker 1: Okay, so do you see the- Speaker 2: And of course the Cincinnati Pops under the baton of Maestro John Morris Russell, and then when we did it at Auditorium Theatre we did it under our Music Director, Gavin Murphy's baton and he is the one who worked with Bill Hughes in Ireland on the project. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As well with the, I think the Irish Tenors [Three Irish Tenors]. Speaker 1: Okay now are there any plans to do it again, you know live (unclear)? Speaker 2: Sure, Bill Hughes is always looking for an opportunity do the show. It's his baby, it's his brain child and he loves it and any variations of it. In fact they penned the song, the title song "Hallelujah Broadway" he and Gavin Murphy which speaks of the, of the whole theater experience and how it transports and impacts lives of people makes a difference and people can leave the circumstances that they're sitting in, you know, whatever that's troubling them. You know even the worries of the world when we were sitting there in Prague, February 2010, I was speaking to them about the earthquake in Haiti and all the devastations around the globe that happen and then you can get one piece of music that inspires and touches somebody's heart. It makes a difference, it uplifts and that what our jobs are, so what we do and what we love to do. Story_ID: 115207 Speaker 1: Now you participated in 2012 in "Siamsa na nGael." Speaker 2: "Siamsa na nGael"? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That is a production by Old St. Patrick's Church [Chicago, Illinois] and it's at Symphony Center [Chicago, Illinois] and it is a big Celtic celebration that's done for the celebration of St. Patrick's Day and it's always the week of St. Patrick's Day, mostly before and they will have, you know a wonderful announcer, of course an Irish announcer, or narrator like you have the picture of Martin Sheen, they've had Brian Dennehy, Carol Marin, so many household names of Irish narrators and then they do include other cultural groups that have certainly been part of Irish history and culture. You know you always have that and that's why we are a part of it because it involves African American involvement. I know Frederick Douglass. Speaker 1: Yeah, Rodrick [HM Rodrick Dixon] played Frederick Douglass right? Speaker 2: He did. Speaker 1: Interacted with the. Speaker 2: He does narrating as well. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's interacting with the Irish leader Daniel O'Connell, I mean the character playing him. Speaker 2: Exactly, right, exactly. Speaker 1: Now what is that story, it's a nice little story in there? Speaker 2: About how the two are intermingling and helped one another out? Yeah, I can't give you the exact, the entire story but there are just so many races, because when you think of "downtrodden," the downtrodden Irish who can identify with the downtrodden black conversation, African American conversation, slavery and then you can also weave in the Jews and the Holocaust conversation. It's so many cultures that do, do connect. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the rights of, of working men and women and you know that should be respected. Story_ID: 115208 Speaker 1: Now, well this brings us pretty close to today, so what are you working on now in 2013? Speaker 2: Oh, we [Burke and her husband, HM Rodrick Dixon] have a dual concert, a "Songs of a Dream" that we'll, we'll be doing a national tour on that, a CD release as well as some, there are--I can't really speak to them but some television appearances as well. Speaker 1: Okay now-- Speaker 2: So there's always projects boiling (laughter) and brewing. Speaker 1: Thematically, what's the "Songs of a Dream" about? Speaker 2: It is Rod's and my story, it's the story of our lives, our love, our careers, our dreams, our family. It's the story of how we came together and what our dreams were collectively and individually and so we, we do a lot of--there's some, there's a lot of interaction as far as we speak as well as sing and give a musical story and we tell, we take people on a journey, the journey of our lives and there are photos and you can see pictures of our--of us and our family members, our children as songs are playing-- as we're singing and performing. So it serves, it's multi-media as well, and it is eclectic, and diverse in genres and styles; it is, so it really shows you of our journey in music and how we still we come back to our roots. We can go away, but we still come back to where we started. Speaker 1: What songs do you sing in this show? Speaker 2: Oh well 'Tonight' from West Side Story, [Leonard] Bernstein, gosh there's so much, 'Summertime' [from "Porgy and Bess" by George Gershwin] 'Vissi d'arte' by [Giacomo] Puccini from "Tosca." Wow, we have a lot of duo moments in there, we do the "Ragtime" [by Terrence McNally, Lynn Ahrens, and Stephen Flaherty] 'Wheels of a Dream' together that's pretty much. We end the show with that and 'Seasons of Love,' if we need an encore from "Rent" [by Jonathan Larson]. We do selections from "Porgy and Bess". Some 'Summertime,' 'Bess, You is My Woman Now,' so, so if you see that and then there is medley from "Show Boat" [by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein, II] so there's a little dance in there too, so you have the, the heavy hitters and there's some American Song Book but we still have the classical. We even did a piece by Edward Hart and he's from University in--is it South Carolina [University of South Carolina in Columbia, South Carolina]? And, his piece his, is "I Know Why The Caged Bird Sings," he did an arrangement of that based on that, that poetry and so we have done that, so it's we're, and we are in the process of even tweaking and maybe switching some things out and putting some things in. Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's-- Speaker 2: So that's a Paul Lawrence Dunbar lyric, "I Know Why The Caged Bird Sings," yeah. So that and we're trying to just reach a very, again wide and diverse audience and demographic so the, the show, the storytelling--people were like, "Oh we wish you had--we could have listened to your stories some more--what happened you left a big hole, what happened between this year and that year? (Laughter) 'cause we go from how we got engaged during "Show Boat" sittin' on the levy backstage (laughter), and my son [Dean Perrin, Jr.] opened up the show, "Show Boat" when he did join the case, he was the young man swinging on the rope at the opening overture and he jumps in what everyone thinks is "Ol' Man River" he was one of the five children. It's only five in the show. Story_ID: 115209 Speaker 1: So we do-- Speaker 2: So these songs all have a personal meaning-- Speaker 1: They do. Speaker 2: --for you and Rod's [HM Rodrick Dixon's] career as you...progressed. Speaker 1: Right, as it progressed so the type of work that we've done and we end up saying, just the message is that--so and Rod just of course (unclear) 'Anthem' [from "Chess" by Benny Andersson, Bjorn Ulvaeus, and Tim Rice] and 'Somewhere' [from "West Side Story" by Leonard Bernstein] and we, and we do quotes to just make everything cohesive and just, but it is out story so people--we have gotten feedback that people want to hear our story. They wanna know what the lessons are that we've learned and that's basically what we do share. We open and share like we haven't before. Like I said about the music, the musical choices that I was making, how I would have to change and not everybody would be pleased that I wasn't going to sing things in the same style that I had done before but it's still the spirit behind it, and you know you can do it with technique and you can still get your runs and rips in if you want to (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay now what are your, now you touring with this show and constantly redeveloping and refreshing it right, is what I hear you saying? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And. Speaker 1: It's the nature of the beast, everything we've done has evolved, it, it has a life of its own after you're doing it for a while and it gets richer and it has more depth and you know what works and you know what doesn't work and you know what you can switch in and switch out. That just makes things more relevant to your audiences and you can even add other outside components. We've added choirs, we've added other artists--come in and join in it. Speaker 2: Okay, and. Speaker 1: And we do master classes and educational outreach with this project as well. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we'll be doing the show in New Mexico, well a version of it (laughter). Speaker 2: And it may, we may see it on television, at some point? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, you're not at liberty to tell us? Speaker 1: Right, can't tell you when (laughter) but there are some things in the making as we speak. Story_ID: 115210 Speaker 1: All right, what are your, now what's next, do you have a ideal project that you wanna develop next? Speaker 2: We [Burke and HM Rodrick Dixon] still have, yeah we've always been toying with the idea of doing--of having a project commissioned that would tell various stories and we've had some various stories that we talk to various composers about and so those things are very exciting, Tuskegee Airmen, Jackie Robinson, you know and it's not the first time that, that's been done. It's been done but we have just a group of people that were interested in telling various stories and having a-- you know, you can use the different--you can do it, it would be an opera but you can, that doesn't mean that you're limited in the styles in this opera. Story_ID: 115211 Speaker 1: Okay, okay now are you part of a African American musical, I mean a classical music organization? Speaker 2: Yeah, lots of those, those are music societies and they are professional organizations for either teachers of singing, that's National Association of Teachers of Singing and AGMA, AGMA is a union and Actors' Equity Association is a union. AGMA is for the American Guild of Musical--of Music Association, of Musicians, sorry. Musicians Association [sic, American Guild of Musical Artists], so you have these organizations that have your back and fight for you know the various, for the fees that opera singers and classical artists, concert artists receive. You have to be protected by your unions and also these wonderful organizations that have conferences and conventions and master classes and workshops, where you're constantly growing and then you have literature and you get the journals, all sorts of things like that and then the Musician's Club of Women who gave me an award when I was a younger singer and at the University [Roosevelt University Chicago Musical College, now the Music Conservatory of the Chicago College of Performing Arts in Chicago, Illinois] and I always received scholarship awards from Roosevelt every semester as well, so and Lake View Musical Society [Chicago, Illinois], a lovely group of, of women they've opened it up to men as well. So they have performances. I'm an Associate Member of those 'cause I may not always be able to get by and pull out a performance, in and out of town sometimes. Story_ID: 115212 Speaker 1: You wanted to tell us about orchestras you've been associated with. Speaker 2: Just various orchestras that I've worked with down through the years. Some you can find them in my bio and in on line on the website as well. www.sopranoalfredaburke.com and so just internationally and throughout the nation. Story_ID: 115213 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I always felt that it takes a village to raise a child, as I said it did for me (laughter) and well I've--my mom [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke] and her generation they just had that intrinsically in place, it was just there, but I think that we have to pour into our youth and yes we would like for it to start in the home and then in the schools, the institutions, the communities, the extracurricular activities, the coaches and the mentors of all sorts and kinds and even through the arts, oh, what the outreach that you can bring to the community just to give a child hope and give them another set of ideals and possibilities what they can accomplish with the support of people pouring into them and sowing into their lives. I mean we've all had someone that did that for us and opened up doors for us and if we could continue to do that and our churches are a big part of it as well, the leadership there. So just giving back to the communities and then to have them pour into the youths which are not really the generation of tomorrow, it's of today and to, to think that we can live, that I've lived in this time to see a black President, [HM] Barack Obama. That just it's, it was just the most exciting thing ever and Dr. King's, Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] work and his dream was not for naught and that his life was not in vain and his legacy lives on and, and if we--you know what we stand for just if we could give back and if we could unify and surely we have leaders today that are still alive and still fighting for, for civil rights and for justices and to block injustices. So I just hope that just unification and working to help those that are the generation of today as well as future generations to achieve and be all that they can be and to do all that they can do. Story_ID: 115214 Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back over your career to this point and you're still in the middle of an active career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you can go back and change it? Speaker 2: Everybody has a learning curve and so those lessons, like I said, I found out after thousands upon thousands in tens of thousands of voice lessons, you know, dollars in voice lessons, and coaching sessions and classes that you really should use what God gave you. It's funny to avoid chest voice and then to come back and at this time in my life, I am, I was asked and even by the Maestro [Daniel Barenboim] in '95 [1995] and even now I know to use what I have naturally what's there. Why reinvent the wheel? And to be your authentic self and to bring that to your art because that is, that is what really resonates with people and it's relevant and causes people's lives to be changed and that is just my wish to impact those that come to a concert that they leave uplifted, feeling a little lighter, transformed, have a feeling of hope. Story_ID: 115215 Speaker 1: Now what today, once again when you look back at your career, what today would you consider to be your artistic legacy? Speaker 2: As you said (laughter), I'm still in the middle of it. Oh, wow. That's a power-packed question, I think diversity in music, first the preparation of, you have to get a skill down and you have to have a high standard for yourself, you have to prepare. You want to have that work ethic of working hard in place. You want to be an artist of integrity, you don't want to be high maintenance, and you want to, you want to-- so you want to do the classics and the opera but you also, if you were me, you want to be diverse as well. You don't wanna shut the door and say "Oh no, I am above that or I can't find any type of appreciation in that." No, I, I believe that there is some artistic, dramatic, musical merit in a lot of different mediums and styles and genres and that's why I said to, to be open to theater, to be open to the fact that you have to bring now, not only your music, but the dancing and the acting to the table and now you have a totally different schedule where it's back to back performances, whereas in opera you would never do back-to-back performances. They would be spaced apart so that the singer can rest, but now you're finding that "Oh the more flexible I am, the better". Speaker 1: And how do you manage that flexibility, do-- can--you were mentioning how you do it in terms of how, how you approach gospel music you really don't scream, because you know that'll ruin your voice-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But, how do you manage (unclear)-- Speaker 2: You support that tone, even if it's an impassioned tone and it's coming from a place, you know, whatever, whatever the text is and wherever you are emotionally and dramatically, it's real, it's honest, it's true, it's authentic, it's you, it's your life, it's that character. It's you and that voice, that persona, that role and so it's real. So each tone it could sound different depending on where you are and what you are suffering, or if it's coming out of joy, exuberance, you know. Story_ID: 115216 Speaker 1: How do you--what's your view on being labeled as someone with "crossover appeal?" Speaker 2: It just says that I am unique, I am versatile and I've always been versatile and I, I think it's a good thing and I think if you're versatile you'll always work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there's always someone saying "I wanna do a project with you." "I have something in mind, I'm gonna write something for you," "I just got through seeing you on television," "I just got through hearing one of your recordings," "I wanna work with you". So I think versatility and being eclectic in your choices. I think that's a positive thing, and I see more world class conductors doing it. You know they're not condescending to the, the art forms and to the styles as much as you would see past, in the past. Story_ID: 115217 Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about your family, now you've got two sons right? Speaker 2: Yes, we are the blended family and Dean [Perrin, Jr.] I think he is the, one of the high points if I had to have a personal highpoint. Certainly marriage to Rod [HM Rodrick Dixon] and that six-year courtship of friendship and the things that we had so much in common and then our, our boys, they're just special people. Dean is majoring in sports management. It's funny 'cause he's heard, been in the theater, has his equity card, and has heard music. In fact he use to lean over the loft area while I was practicing a [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart practice aria and he'd start singing with me in his falsetto voice. Had every note down perfectly, he has an incredible ear but he also is very interested in sports and he as majoring in business administration and said, "No I'm not really passionate about this," so he's switching over to the sports administrate, sports management in which he really wants to be a sports agent. So, so he still has his equity card when he didn't have to part with it we kept him going in case he wants to do a commercial or voiceover or something, the day might come where he might want to some print work, however it is the he'll have that card paid up, and Jared [Dixon] has found, he did a major in I think it was education and then he decided after that, after graduating that he wanted to do performance--musical theater and even writing music of his own, you know beats and various things. So they're very musical. They grew up hearing it all of their lives and they've made their choices, and they've both been very athletic. Dean was playing on his school teams, basketball and Jared did-- in Southern Connecticut University [Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven, Connecticut], he was doing high jump of all things. So Dean is, I don't know if I said, DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois], so there's just a very bright road ahead for those two young men. We're very, we're so proud and thankful to God for them and their lives and just that they have good hearts and that's, that's at the top of the list you know having a wonderful spirit and a generous, generosity of spirit. So we're proud of them and, and we're still all very active. It's a family affair at our church and caring for my mom [Mamie Ruth Lewis Burke] now and as I said that's a privilege and an honor because of all the sacrifices and all that she's done in my lifetime and for me and the support is just over the top. My father [John Henry Burke, Jr.] passed October 6, 2009 and his life and legacy lives on, but just a generous person, both of them. They would give you the shirt off of their back and they always worked in ministry and helped people. That song, "If I can help somebody as I travel, as I walk along"--I'm leaving a word out, "as I pass along" I'll get it right, "then my living shall not be in vain." That certainly signifies what their lives are about and what we're about, and my sister [Renee Burke Davis], as I said she's an educator in District 65 Evanston Schools [Evanston/Skokie School District 65] to date, and she was counting the other day. She said I think thirty-three years, but she loves the arts, she loves music and sings and plays piano and she didn't go in that direction professionally, but she does direct a choir and she's another person that could get music out of a, a rock (laughter). So, and very talented with interior design and, does all these wonderful things like knitting, crocheting and embroidery and latch hook, quilt making, tapestries that hang on your wall. So many things, so I guess that helps to de-escalate her but she give back and pours into the youth of today, fifth graders and she was an administrator. She has her Type 75 so she's extremely talented, and who else in my family would you like me to talk about you know all know Rod, my husband, 'cause you interviewed him but I think that we are, we have a corporate anointing together. We work well together and we complement each other in our in our differences and we have more in common than naught. Speaker 1: Now is there anything-- Speaker 2: I think he's an awesome talent, I'll throw that in (laughter), powerful. Story_ID: 115218 Speaker 1: All right, now is there anything else we haven't raised that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Wow, I'm not sure, I'm sure there is something that we're leaving out, we're gonna say oh, we forgot that. Speaker 1: At any rate well the last one for today is similar to legacy but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That is similar to legacy. I'd like to be remembered as someone who made a difference, someone who changed the atmosphere where I went on and off the stage as a performer helped to transport, to transform to impact, to touch, to uplift, to give hope, to help someone who's struggling and the spirit within me that that touches those that are listening and hearing and just again we come back full circle to what goes from the heart goes to the heart, and the fact that we are, in my household, ambassadors for Christ, and we are chosen for certain purposes. We're salt and light and nothing should stay the same when we come in contact and you don't have to beat anybody over the head with that message, but they, many people say I've really feel something or I get goose bumps or you brought me to tears or you know the hair on my neck stood up whatever, however they process what you do. It's, it's all about others. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's how I'd like to be remembered...