 Story_ID: 373121 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, and observing is Lurma Rackley. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: I am Gloria Blackwell [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell]. I was earlier in my life, Gloria Blackwell Rackley and was known at that time in history about which we'll be talking, Gloria Rackley. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And can you spell your name for us? Speaker 2: G-L-O-R-I-A, Gloria, Blackwell, B-L-A-C-K-W-E-L-L, Rackley, R-A-C-K-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 11, 1927, Little Rock, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. So we have a Little Rock, South Carolina? Speaker 2: We have-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yes. Speaker 1: All right. And, ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm retired. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My profession most of my life was in education, was a teacher in various levels of education from primary grades through the university. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Hm, I don't know. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): June 18th. Speaker 2: June 18th. Speaker 1: Two thousand and? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, 2006. Speaker 1: All right. Okay (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Peachtree City, Georgia, just south of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 373122 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that I'm compelled by management to ask (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, all right. Speaker 1: --and they only require short answers. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Maybe it's grits. I'm a southern girl. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Maybe it's, maybe it's green. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I don't know, maybe, maybe the State of Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I guess, my favorite thought is do unto others as you would have them do unto you. Story_ID: 373123 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] side of the family. But we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother was Lurline Olivia Thomas [Lurline Thomas Blackwell], Thomas was her maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay. And how do you spell that? Speaker 2: T-H-O-M-A-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Lurline? Speaker 2: Lurline was L-U-R-L-I-N-E. There are various spellings in our family annals (laughter) but mother insisted on L-U-R-L-I-N-E. I think her father [LeGrand Thomas] spelled it differently and relatives did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so Lurline Olivia Thomas. And, and what, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in, on September, she was born on August 15, 1895. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, and where was she born? Speaker 2: In South Carolina. Her father was a Methodist minister. And I'm not really sure where because he moved a lot, so she was born one place and woke up the next morning and found herself somewhere else, I guess. But it was in South Carolina. I think maybe south of Sumter [South Carolina] down in the, what we call the low country originally, but she grew up in the Piedmont [South Carolina] area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Now, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? I mean, how far back can you trace that group? Speaker 2: We can go back to her great-grandfather and maybe great-great-grandfather if we cross the color line. Her grandmother was born a slave and her father was a French Huguenot who came over with his father, maybe, I can't remember if he was born here or came over with his father and excelled in South Carolina, they were trying to escape religious persecution and they wanted to be free here, so they came to South Carolina. We have information on the colony that they founded and formed and all. And her mother was a slave. We're not able to get much information about her mother except that her mother was a slave on a neighboring plantation from, other than the one where she lived because the, her father left her with his cousin to rear her, maybe it wasn't politic to have her over in the house with his wife, I don't know, but anyway she stayed with her father's cousin. And the father became a Methodist minister, was a very distinguished person in the Methodist church. And I think the only stipulation he made for her safety, and I don't know if this was in writing, was that she could not be sold. But, but she really grew up with these cousins of his. And she was taught to read and write and so dainty things and stuff like that. And married young at maybe fifteen, sixteen and married a black man who had a great deal of land. He was a McDonald and they settled in, near Mayesville, South Carolina. And we have found that--I have found, I think maybe they knew it all the time, that he was somehow related to Mary McLeod Bethune, you know, she's from May- from that area, so he and Mary McLeod Bethune were relatives, all over there in Mayesville. So my grandmother, my great-grandmother, great-great-grandmother married McDonald and they had ten children. Speaker 1: Now this is your great-great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is my mother's grandmother we're talking about. Speaker 1: But, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just be one great, just be one great. Speaker 1: For my mother (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Great-grandmother, great-grandmother, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): She'd be your mother's grandmother, and she'd be your great-grandmother. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): She'd be your great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. So she's your great-grandmother. And what's her name since we've, I, I know you probably-- Speaker 1: Harriet [Harriet Deschamps McDonald]. Speaker 2: Harriet. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and she was, they took the name I guess of that family and it's Deschamps, D-E-S-C-H-A-M-P-S. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And then McDonald, I guess is a-- Speaker 1: Yes, when she married a McDonald (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yes, and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And your mother became Blackwell 'cause you just left her Lurline Thomas. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 373124 Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something, that's a lot of history there. Now did your mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] talk about growing up, what it was like for her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. She was the youngest of her parents' three children. Her father [LeGrand Thomas] was a Methodist minister. And there were two boys older than mother. So mother was favored. She was, (laughter) you know, the boys grew up and soon went out about their business travels, went north and all that. But she was younger and the daughter. She was brought up in private schools. She was a minister's daughter which is kind of a big thing to be I think in the South and in her time especially. So she was favored and well educated and, you know, sent to college and became a teacher. But when she thought that she was, would be free to start her life, she also was interested in music and talented in music, played piano and but when she thought that she was free then (laughter) to go out and I heard her minister father, you know, no, no, no, so she couldn't have been, he was moved, she was living then in the Timmonsville [South Carolina]-Sumter [South Carolina] area. And so there were other friends her age with whom she could associate and I think she thought nice things to do but he was sent to a little country, just a little country stop in the road which was Little Rock [South Carolina], and she, she was adamant that she was not going to leave the Sumter area and go out here to this place. And he had, I guess, it was called a circuit, he would preach every other Sunday in Little Rock, but on those alternate Sundays he would go to country churches out, you know, I guess, in the woods and surrounds, surrounding areas. So, she didn't wanna go there but she had no choice and she came kicking and screaming, she said but she found my, very, very, very handsome father [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] across the street from the parsonage and closed her mouth and fell in love and married him (laughter). So really shortly after she got, she became--she was a teacher there, he had her teaching right there, my grandfather had her teaching right there in the school. And he had tried to placate her, the minister's home I guess back in those days might have been the best place for you to stop if you were traveling in the South and you were black. So the other teacher who came to teach at this little school was also of kind of well-bred, educated young woman and she and mother were friends, so that did give mother a friend. And he the, he was the preacher and he had I think a buggy, I think she said whatever was fashionable to have in those days and she and her friend could go, you know, breezing around (laughter) wherever they were allowed to go. And then there was daddy. And so (laughter) she was satisfied quicker and never left. They were married in 1915 and were married until he died '56 [1956], I, I, I'll, I'll have to think of, of that but and I do know that but I forget, but they lived forever (laughter)-- Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: --together in happiness. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, now what college did, did she go to? Speaker 2: Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]]. Speaker 1: Claflin. Speaker 2: Which was a Methodist school. Her and all of her, all those little boarding schools and things she went to were all church schools. And she made her daughter follow that same path. Story_ID: 373125 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You all skipped her mama, you all skipped grandma's [Blackwell's mother' Lurline Thomas Blackwell] mama. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Grandmother's, your, your-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): 'Cause you talked about-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --you talked about-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --Harriet Deschamps [Harriet Deschamps McDonald] but she had a daughter who was-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --who was-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --grandmother's mama. 'Cause you talked about-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --grandma's father being-- Speaker 1: I told you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So your grandmother-- Speaker 1: --I said she had ten children. Speaker 2: Well, let's talk a bit about your grandmother before we-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: --we leave this. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, grandmother's-- Speaker 2: She, what, what was her name? Speaker 1: Her name was Estelle, it was Estelle McDonald, Sarah Estelle McDonald [Sarah McDonald Thomas], Sarah was her first name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she was one of ten children born to Harriet and her husband John [John McDonald]. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And then she married LeGrand Thomas. Speaker 2: Sarah Estelle married LeGrand Lee-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Thomas. LeGrand Lee Thomas was, as I said a Methodist minister also (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And then, then-- Speaker 2: It's a lot of Methodism in your family (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We have Methodism, yes, all, I, I say that, you know, I was Methodist long before I was born. Story_ID: 373126 Speaker 1: Now are there any stories that come out of that kind of rich history, it goes back so far, are there any stories about the end of the Civil War or the, or Reconstruction or any stories about that period of time that are passed down through your family? Speaker 2: I think that we only know that they were industrious, this McDonald, the McDonald, that man [sic.] we call my grandmother, Ma. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Your great-grandmother. Speaker 2: The great-grandmother, Harriet [Harriet Deschamps McDonald], we called her Ma, M-A (laughter). And they had a huge farm. And, and she had lots of sons but her husband [John McDonald] was killed finally, not, not, there was no foul play or no suspicion of foul play but he was injured and, and died because he worked on the railroad also as something, I'm not sure. But it was, it was a vocation that many black people had at that day and it elevated them because that was a regular income, you see. So he could put those ten children, I guess, to work on the farm (laughter) and, and he could also work at this railroad job. And he died and that, and, and he died early, left her a widow fairly early in her life. And then she, she and her sons managed the farm and everything and then when the boys finally went away, she came to live with her oldest son. Her daughter, one of her daughters, was my grandmother, Estelle, Sarah Estelle [Sarah McDonald Thomas]. We called her Sissy [ph.]. The son that Ma came to live with was Samuel J. McDonald [Samuel McDonald], we called him Bubba [ph.] (laughter) so all of my life he was Uncle Bubba and all of my life my grandmother was Sissy. But we didn't have that I can recall any, you know, any stories of horror or anything. I think they were industrious and I think they were, they seemed to have been, they believed thoroughly in working, everybody worked, and work was, work was noble, everybody was supposed to work. And I think they taught their children to work and we were taught to work, you just could not be lazy and idle. And everyone was, was to be educated. They really, my mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] was deep into this business of uplifting the race, I guess, I guess, that had been the thing when she was growing up. And so every black person had an obligation to, I guess, maintain and support and do the best you could for yourself but also for others. My mother would have been utterly shocked if in her classroom, as so often happened in mine, and you asked somebody what are you going to do when you grow up, nobody ever would say anything like I'm going to, you know, get me two cars (laughter) and, you know, whatever. Everybody had something to do that was going to help. You know, if you, if you wanted to be something that wasn't going to make a contribution you would be laughed out of the classroom, I guess, or, you know, what, what's, and, and who will that help, you know, what, what good will that do anyone. There wasn't any, any idea that you were just supposed to sit around and better yourself, I guess, or-- Speaker 1: Accumulate goods and merchandise, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and entertain yourself and, and be happy (laughter). You were supposed to, you really were obligated. And I don't remember any thought in my mind ever that you were just supposed to take it easy, you know. But it, but, but it wasn't, but it was not frightening because it was natural, it was, that's, was just the way it was supposed to be. And I think that also was a part of that whole Methodism teaching. I, I don't know about all the churches but I, you know, the Method- the Methodist church, not the, you know, those a, but our church had organization and the discipline and also it was organized and there were commissions in the church. And the commission that I feel in love with very early in life was the commission on Christian social concerns. And so if you, when you came in the church and decided you wanted to work with Christian, you could, there was another one that always attracted me and that was youth, first I was one and then later I worked with youth in the church. But the other was Christian social concerns, whatever was wrong with the community, anything that you, you know, if there was too much poverty somewhere or crime or politics or segregation or whatever it was, then you worked with that, what are we doing about that. But you were always doing, you know, there was something to do and you tried to do something about it. Story_ID: 373127 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was Harrison Benjamin Blackwell [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.]. He was his mother's first son and second child. Speaker 1: So he's Harrison Benjamin instead of [President] Benjamin Harrison-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --who was a president. Speaker 2: I don't know what that meant (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I don't know why they reversed it but she named him Harrison Benjamin. And we don't know, we don't, we'd never talked about his father [John Thompson]. She lived with her mother, she was extremely industrious--his mother, his mother was Ann Blackwell. When I go to the records in South Carolina she's very often Ann Black instead of Blackwell, I don't know if they got tired of writing or, (laughter) or what, but she was Ann Blackwell and very often it's just Black, on, on papers and deeds. I know she owned property and she worked in homes as a cook or in, in the kitchen, and owned a little shop. I don't know if people could come in and eat or if they just could come to the window and get pies and things. But she lived in the town of Little Rock [South Carolina] in a very, very nice house right across from the parsonage (laughter). And by the time mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] got there, daddy was already barbering. He had his own barbershop. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And oddly enough it was for, oddly enough, it might not have been odd at all, but it was for white only since it was segregated. So this is the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that, now that's something that I think I was discussing that with our videographer earlier-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --about how the early black barbers would only cut white people's hair-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --often, I mean that was a spillover from the 19th century, yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, if it was segregated-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --they, they couldn't go to the same places. Now the barber could make up his mind, he could decide that he's going to have a black barbershop. He would also probably be deciding, certainly in a place like Little Rock and evidently Atlanta [Georgia] also if you look at Herndon [Alonzo Herndon], but if he's, how he wants to live, you know, how-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And daddy-- Speaker 1: But you're suggesting if he had a black barbershop the clientele wouldn't be as, I mean, as rich or they couldn't pay the, they wouldn't be maybe enough people to-- Speaker 2: I'm not only suggesting it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) make it. Speaker 2: --it's just a fact (laughter). So it's just a, you know, like a fact. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --and especially in where, where we lived because we lived in the middle of a little farm, Little Rock, is just a kind of crossroads in the middle of rich tobacco farm land, corn and cotton and tobacco. They had a railroad coming through and had high hopes of being big time one day but it didn't materialize. So we very, I don't know if the population ever got to be more than four hundred and I never could count more than two hundred, counting pets and, you know, frogs and anything else that might have been hopping around at the time. So it was a tiny, tiny town but the farmers came from all around to daddy's barbershop. And his barbershop was right in the center of town, our house, and the barbershop. Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The barbershop was on Main Street. Story_ID: 373128 Speaker 1: Were there any stories from your father's [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] side of the family about, that go all the way back to slavery and Reconstruction? Speaker 2: We just know that his grandmother brought her pretty daughter [Ann Blackwell] to that area. I'm not even sure where they came from. The grandmother, my grandmother, his mother, might have been mixed with something, she was, I know, but I don't know, I really, and people didn't talk, and my father never, ever, ever, I never knew that there was any question or something about his background, it was just daddy and his mother and his grandmother. The grandmother was dead long before I was born and the, his mother died when I was nine months old in her arms, she came to see me and hold me again and then had a stroke. So but there was never any discussion, many, many people just did not talk about those things because they didn't like the, I guess, the stories or whatever. So daddy never mentioned it and we never mentioned it in our house. And I didn't know it, I was away in boarding school [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] when someone from my area told me in a mean sort of way, they were saying something nasty about the fact that, about my father's parent, parentage, uh-huh. And so I came home and asked mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] and mother told me very nicely because she was a teacher and everything and I guess she had been practicing this for years in her mind, and so she explained how that happened historically and how, you know, young women who went to work very often came home with a child and so forth. And so, so anyway, she somehow managed all right, she had a, as I said a very nice house and a business and his grandmother took care of the children, her children and she worked and, and that was it. But he never, ever, ever, ever all of his life never said anything, I've never heard him mention any reference, nor any reference to any trouble that he had. Story_ID: 373129 Speaker 1: He [Blackwell's father, Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] said once before, you know, they, they, they bought land, I meant to ask someone how much land we had but we had a big pl- I don't know if that would be called four acres or five acres, right in the center of this little town [Little Rock, South Carolina], from Main Street all the way down almost to the next corner and, you know, taking up almost a block. And his barbershop was on the corner when I was born and grew up. But before that time it had been down on Main Street, a rented place. And, and he said one night when he closed the barbershop on a Saturday night, his grandmother--his mother [Ann Blackwell], my grandmother, was standing there across the street with, with something, a cane or a stick or something because someone had told her that young white fellows were waiting for daddy, they were going to attack him and beat him up because he had a thriving business there and was doing well, he was young (laughter) and, and this was on Main Street and I guess they felt that somebody else could have that spot and have a barbershop, I don't know what they meant to do about it. But she came to protect him, see he had no father, and but she came out there to meet him but, of course, nobody bothered them and they came home. Then when he married mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] they bought the land and, you know, he built his barbershop, that's still on Main Street. And he was there, as I've never known any, I've never known any threat or any, anything mentioned. He was highly respected in that area. And I saw when you asked that I get pictures. Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] sent to, to, to your home, notices of your graduation or your finishing the doctorate, you know. So it just went back home to Dillon County [South Carolina] that Gloria Blackwell [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell] had received a Ph.D. at Emory or something. And they mentioned (laughter) at the, at the last sentence in there, she is the daughter of Harrison Blackwell, a highly respected Negro barber or citizen or something. And then later when I was all in jail and in, in the papers a lot in Orangeburg [South Carolina], I was told that the SLED [South Carolina Law Enforcement Division] officers or someone came to South Carolina, came to Dillon County to look up this Blackwell, they found out that I was, I was Gloria Rackley but, you know, my maiden name was Blackwell. And they came to see about me, they were looking for some, anything, I guess, that they could find. And they went to the courthouse and said we want to, we're looking for in this Blackwell. Somebody said, someone said, if you want, if you want anything on, on Blackwells you'll have to go to Orangeburg and see about Gloria Blackwell, there's nobody, you're not gonna find anything on Harrison Blackwell, no one in this county will give you any information. And I'm sure they, nobody over there now was ready for integration but they just were protective of-- Speaker 2: So you think being a barber really helped him, I mean, in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)I-- Speaker 2: --have, having a positive client, all those-- Speaker 1: Maybe. Speaker 2: --influential (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know, I-- Speaker 2: --people that could afford a haircut coming in, you know. Speaker 1: And maybe so but I know none of us was ever in any trouble. If I were speeding or something I was never insulted by anyone in Dillon, it was just, but I never thought about it, you know, I was, I grew up there, and I just never thought about it. Story_ID: 373130 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you have some additional information that you followed up on, up, up, up on about your father's [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] people? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: I'm saying that we don't have really any documentation. I guess, we could call it, family lore or something. Speaker 1: So what you have is family lore you're saying right? Speaker 2: Yes, and that that says that his father [John Thompson] was a planter and a well-to-do farmer right there in Dillon County [South Carolina]. And when I later went to the courthouse after daddy died to look through the papers and get things straight, I was executrix for his estate, and I found property transferred from that same man to daddy but, of course, it could just have been a business transaction, I don't, I don't know, I don't have any proof and daddy never ever mentioned it. So I, I never have seen any reason to claim it. (Laughter) Once, once when I was little I had made friends somehow with a girl who called me, we would talk every day after school, a little girl her name was Happy [ph.]. (Laughter) And it just seems so funny that I could talk with Happy. Now we were in Little Rock [South Carolina] and it's a tiny town and we were segregated and yet not segregated as people were in the South (laughter) you know, it was, you're just there and it's so tiny. But anyway, this girl called. And so once, her mother called her when we were talking and she said, "I can't come now, Mom, I'm talking to my cousin." And so when we finished talking I said, "Mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell], guess what Happy said when her, when her mother called her," and mother said, "What," and I said, "She said 'I'm talking, I can't come Mama 'cause, because I'm talking to my cousin,'" I thought it was funny, it just seemed a joke. Speaker 1: Now Happy is white then? Speaker 2: Happy is white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was the granddaughter of the man who is reputed to be my father's father. And so mother just said, "Yes that is funny" (laughter). That's all she said about it. And see mother never told me, I'm saying until I went away to school [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina], I was a little girl then, when I came back from school and asked her then she told me the whole story and that fell into place with, but all those people you find later as a grown woman went to the bank to make a deposit, I would run into somebody who was, you know some maybe a cousin or somebody's child if that, if we were cousins and they were always, "Oh, you're Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell]. Hello Gloria," you know, and all that. But I just thought, you know, they were being friendly and there was no reason to pursue it, I, I, he didn't, so I don't see (laughter) you know, any, any reason to do it. And whatever they did I, sometimes I imagine that they might have had a relationship, you know, the dad, my daddy and his father or they, or they may have, it may have been cold business or it may have been a cool relationship, you know, (laughter) I don't know what it was but he did not, he did not talk about it and didn't share, he didn't say I want you to know this is my father or, or anything he never ever and I think he thought it wasn't necessary. Story_ID: 373131 Speaker 1: Tell me now, what were your parents' personalities like? Speaker 2: Mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] was talkative and energetic and inquisitive. She played piano beautifully and sang. She was I said, as I said committed, totally committed to serving and giving and doing. She was elegant and very, very proper (laughter). And she was tall, had blue-gray eyes that flashed (laughter) and she had a, she was, she could be very stern, very demanding, very exacting of us. And daddy [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] was handsome, had a beautiful smile that just seemed to always be, I don't think he could frown, it just seemed to me he could hardly frown, he seemed so pleased, he loved his wife, adored his children. Was, I don't think frustrated would be a good word for him but I could say a frustrated farmer because he made half of the yard into corn, he, he planted a garden between the barbershop and the house and so he was always out there, you know, planting and digging and enjoying the fruit of his lab- fruits of his labor. So we had pear trees and apple trees and peach trees and every kind of fresh vegetable. He had chickens and all, all out here on Main Street now, (laughter) the property bordered, bordered Main Street, (unclear). Everything, it, when a, when a chick was born he'd say--he called me Glory most of the time--and he said Glory so beautifully, he, in a slow Glory (laughter). And, and I thought I was Glory to him and he acted as though I was. And he would say, "Come look at this" and this was this adorable little bit, little bitty (laughter) I was supposed to be admiring. Mother, I had never saw mother's foot in any of that part of the, (laughter) of the yard, you know. He had hogs out there, a cow, and the cow would have a calf and we'd come and see the calf and go over it, you know, make over it and everything. But she didn't, she really would prefer that we not go out there because we may step in something (laughter). And so there was a fence dividing our real backyard that surrounded the house and then all of this other stuff that he had out there. But he understood that, she never, she never was in the garden, he would gather the produce and wash it and everything and then bring it into the kitchen to the counter then she would cook it, you know, but she never, you know, picked any peas or any corn or anything like that but she kept an immaculate house and, you know, took care of the children and all of that. He loved her dearly, Lurline--I thought he loved me more than anything but later in life when he, when crises came, once we almost lost him from an appendectomy or appendix bursting maybe (unclear). And, and he wouldn't come back from the ether and I'm saying, "Daddy," I just knew, and mother would, mother had always built this up, my relationship with him, you know, so she said, "Your daddy, you have to go to your daddy," (unclear) (laughter) you know, so I'm, I'm there, knowing that I can bring him back and get him to answer me, he, he wouldn't, he wouldn't come around. And I, I changed my voice to mother's and said, "Harrison." He said, "Lurline?" (Laughter) And all, always she was just his, that that was the most important thing in life to him. And his children, he loved Little Rock [South Carolina], I think he could have stayed there, I think he felt that there was no place better than Little Rock other than heaven. And so he would just stay there until, so mother had to make him leave to take us, he didn't see any reason to travel and mother, of course, felt that we needed to know that there was (laughter) a greater world out there somewhere. Story_ID: 373132 Speaker 1: So we went, we were taken to the world fairs and to-- Speaker 2: Now what world fair did you go to? Speaker 1: Chicago [Chicago World's Fair, A Century of Progress International Exposition, Chicago, Illinois], New York [New York World's Fair, New York, New York], (laughter) you know, where, when, when things were happening that's where we, she would have us go. We were taken to the beaches and to, you know, where, wherever we-- Speaker 2: So you were really a little girl in Chicago World's Fair in 1933. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Is that that the one you went to? Speaker 1: Well my-- Speaker 2: About? Speaker 1: --brother [LeGrand Blackwell] was born in '31 [1931], yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he was not quite, he was the baby. And we drove, she [Blackwell's mother, Lurline Thomas Blackwell] hired a babysitter, she could always have someone to stay with us and we would, 'cause she was a teacher, you know, (laughter) she could pick out a, the, the right young girl. And we drove up and the, and the, the girl had never been out of the country either and we drove through the Cumberland Gap [Virginia] and the girl wouldn't sit in the, in the seat, she stayed on the floor and prayed (laughter) all the way, it was so risky, you know. But I can-- Speaker 2: Those are the days of the two lane highways, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Just, just two lanes and-- Speaker 1: Yes, but, of course, we were too young and ignorant to be afraid. But, (laughter) but-- Speaker 2: No, no seatbelts either, right? Speaker 1: Oh, no. Speaker 2: No, (unclear) okay. Speaker 1: But, but we went to the World's Fair and that's, so I must have been, I'm four years older than my brother so I guess I was about six. And see by six mother had us well-heeled, you know, so we knew where we were going and everything. My big brother [Harrison Blackwell, Jr.] and I were alert and aware of everything so we knew the, we knew the roads and we knew what we were passing, we knew, she did geography and history and everything as we moved along. Speaker 2: It took a while because people couldn't, they, they well they drove about fifty-five [miles per hour], maybe, the top speed? Speaker 1: Daddy [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.], daddy never went over fifty-five, I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --he, he, he got whatever the speed, he was, he was solid, you know, and everything (unclear) he was quiet and nice, you know. And he, I know he didn't see any reason why we had to leave the peace and quiet and beauty of Little Rock [South Carolina] to be, (laughter) to be doing this. But we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) so he really didn't wanna go anywhere else then? Speaker 1: No, he was quite happy to be right there. Story_ID: 373133 Speaker 1: And I remember once she [Blackwell's mother, Lurline Thomas Blackwell] was going somewhere, I can't remember where we were going and he just, he [Blackwell's father, Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] just said, "No," he liked to say, "No, sir, I'm just not going" and. So mother packed the car, he worked late on Saturday nights 'cause that was the farmers did everything and then came in, you know, finish and get their haircuts, I guess, for Sunday. When he got in from the barbershop [in Little Rock, South Carolina], the car was packed and she was going. She was taking the children and we were going where, I really think we were going to New York [New York] this time, I don't know where we were going. And, and so he went in and got his bags (laughter) and got in the car and drove, (laughter) I think she had his things packed already, (laughter) you know, 'cause I knew, I know she knew he was not gonna let her go alone. I know now as a woman, I didn't know it then. And, and they were not fussing, they never fussed over us, I mean, they would disagree about things but I mean there was no ever any, any fussing. There was no drinking. They were married ten years before she became pregnant, nine years before she became, ten years before I was born, nine years before she became pregnant and had the first child, my older brother [Harrison Blackwell, Jr.]. So I'm assuming, that they got rid of all of their, you know, they understood each other, decided that they really loved each other (laughter) and had the basis for a good marriage. And though they were different in lots of ways, daddy read farm books, The Progressive Farmer, you know, the barbershop was filled (laughter) with the, you know, the literature that, and that's, that was his stuff. Story_ID: 373134 Speaker 1: When he [Blackwell's father, Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] came to church, he sat in the men's corner and went promptly to sleep, you know. (Laughter) Closed, he claimed he wasn't sleeping, he, he just said, "I'm resting my eyes." But I don't think he was particularly interested in the gyrations or anything else that went on-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --in the church. Speaker 2: --with, with all the clergy men in the family he, he isn't, he wasn't, really wasn't, they're, they're mostly on your mother's [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] side, right? Speaker 1: They, they were all, yes, they were all on mother, well, I think his grandmother too, his grandmother was interested in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church. And had come to Little Rock [South Carolina] I think in an interest and owned property and owned the property that the A.M.E. church was on and they started a little burial ground in that town. But that church did not thrive after her demise. And so, but no he, he was, he was pretty much indifferent to, I mean, I don't wanna really say it because he went to church, you know, and everything but he was just kind of there. And he was a steward and whatever else you could be and because he was a man of some means he was whatever you are in the church for, you know, money and stuff (laughter). Story_ID: 373135 Speaker 1: So it was you, it was you and your, your-- Speaker 2: Older brother [Harrison Blackwell, Jr.]-- Speaker 1: Older brother (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and a younger brother [LeGrand Blackwell]. Speaker 1: And a younger brother. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A brother four years younger and this brother, older. Mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] was, mother took me, she took us, sent us away to school as soon as we finished seventh grade or maybe even sixth grade, my brother may have been in sixth grade in, in Little Rock [South Carolina] because she wanted us to have, I guess, better libraries and all of that. When we were small, she bought books for us and my father--her father [LeGrand Thomas] had a library because he was a minister so we read everything that she had and everything that my grandfather had left and then she sent us away to school. So my brother finished high school and entered college at fifteen and I entered college [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] at sixteen because we had just got through everything sort of quickly. Story_ID: 373136 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna go back a little bit and like who, how would you describe your, your personality growing up? What did you like to do and what bothered you and, you know, what would people say you were like? Speaker 2: I guess, it depended on the way people looked at things. Some people thought that I was spoiled. I couldn't see how they could think that way 'cause mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] was so strict (laughter) but I, I guess, I was allowed a lot of things that many children did not have, it seems to me that I had most of the things. And when, and I was a little country girl but I didn't know it, you know, I was, I was living right off Main Street, (laughter) right. But the town [Little Rock, South Carolina] wasn't as big as a minute but I saw myself as a, you know, at least a town girl if not a city girl. But when I went away I, you know, to boarding school [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] or anything I never found, I never found that I was inadequate, you know, it seemed that she had prepared me really well. So I seemed to know just about as much as anybody else and had been exposed as much, and that's what she was trying to do. And so we were comfortable, my older brother [Harrison Blackwell, Jr.] and I. The younger brother [LeGrand Blackwell] just has never even left home, he stayed right there (laughter) and I guess she was tired and didn't exert as much energy on him. Story_ID: 373137 Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after the most, your, your, your mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] or your father [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.]? Speaker 2: I thought always that I took after my father and my mother told me that if she had been my father she would have assumed that there had been some hanky-panky going on because I was so unlike her. She just could not understand how (laughter) I could be so, and, you know, I, I, she wanted me to play piano for instance at two and three and four, I'm sitting on the piano stool and we had the spin around stool, and my little legs hanging down and I'm sitting up there doing the scales and she's way across on the other side of the house making beds or doing something, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell], that's an F sharp, F sharp," (laughter) you know, what you're practicing. So I hated piano, hated the whole, I had no talent at all and still today I play, (nods head) you know, like that (laughter). And mother's fingers just were a part of the instrument. She never, she was so talented. And so she had reason to wonder where I came from. I think just never gave, never got used to the idea that I had no musical talent. When she sent me to college [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], she still paid for piano lessons (laughter) and, and the music teacher there suggested that maybe she get me a typewriter (laughter) I mean, 'cause, because it just was not working. I didn't have anything. So I thought I was like daddy but now when I pass mirrors in the house and I just bump into mother all the time (laughter). And when I talk to the children I hear mother in my voice and everything so I, there's a lot of mother in me. Story_ID: 373138 Speaker 1: Where did you start school? Speaker 2: Right there in Little Rock [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Probably the Little Rock Colored School [Little Rock, South Carolina], I don't think it had any other name, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And grandmother was your teacher, you could say that. Speaker 1: Well, no, when I went to school the first, I can't remember first grade, I might have been too young but I remember second grade and, and then second grade was Miss Annie Mae Davis [ph.], was my second grade teacher. And the third grade teacher was Mrs. Blackwell [Lurline Thomas Blackwell], and mother had third and fourth grades. We were not allowed to call her mother, we were not allowed to say mother, she was, taught my brother [Harrison Blackwell, Jr.] and I were told before we left home that she was the teacher and she did not mean for any children in the school to feel that we were more favored than they. And so we had no privileges there and she was Mrs. Blackwell and, and that was it. So she was harder, much, much harder on us. We had no slack at any time. And so she took third and fourth grade. And then when I finished fourth grade I was so delighted, I would go, we had a four room school house and so I was assuming that I would get into somebody else's room, mother then took, took fifth and sixth, she just switched right into fifth and sixth. Speaker 2: So you had her again? Speaker 1: Yes (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, and you had to spell, you know, I had to stand up and spell. You had a, you had a list of words but you had to stand on Friday or whatever day and spell. And if you didn't spell the words, you were, you were whipped with a strap and you had, now there was no problem whipping children in that school, right. (Laughter) No, the teachers, the, the parents brought children to school saying, "Now if he gives you any trouble you just--." They always, all the parents said that. So children were punished physically. So I was there from, in mother's room third, fourth, fifth, and sixth grades, and I'm trying to think, seventh. Anyway, I left when I was twelve. Story_ID: 373139 Speaker 1: Went away to school when I was twelve to Mather Academy [Camden, South Carolina], to a boarding School. Speaker 2: To, now what's the name of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mather, Mather Academy in Camden-- Speaker 2: Mather-- Speaker 1: --South Carolina, a Methodist church-- Speaker 2: --Academy. Speaker 1: --(laughter) boarding school. Speaker 2: Now is this, now what's the history of this school? I assume it's a black school-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --it's gotta be in South Carolina. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But what's the history of it? Was, was it a United Methodist school? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And-- Speaker 2: Was it formed during Reconstruction times or-- Speaker 1: I don't, I'm not sure but it was, there's, there was another Mather somewhere too and the church supported those schools, um-hm. And, and anyway, that's where she [Blackwell's mother, Lurline Thomas Blackwell], she sent me. Speaker 2: So the boarding school, where was Mather? Speaker 1: In Camden, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Camden, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Is that close by Little Rock [South Carolina]? Speaker 1: Camden might have been fifty or sixty miles away or, I guess. It's-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Maybe more. Speaker 1: --maybe eighty miles, um-hm. Because Little Rock is right in the northeastern corner of South Carolina. Back in the day when there was highway, what was that highway, it wasn't 1, it was 301, Highway 301 [U.S. Route 301] ran in that, but now 95 [Interstate 95] does, it's, well, 95. And most people who have ever traveled 95 South or North remember passing South of the Border [South Carolina], big overnight stop. And that's just five miles from, our house is right on the border of the North Carolina, South Carolina land but not up see in the Charlotte [North Carolina] area, this is down in the northeastern corner, not too far from Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] and, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the Atlantic Ocean. But it's less than an hour from, from the ocean. Speaker 2: Right, you said, you were saying, I think, off-camera earlier that Marion [Francis Marion] and Sumter [Thomas Sumter] were the-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --heroes-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. And mother's people were from Sumter [South Carolina]. When mother was young, if her mother [Sarah McDonald Thomas] didn't like the parsonage when her husband [LeGrand Thomas] was sent somewhere, if the house was disreputable or the conditions weren't comfortable then they would stay in Sumter, her mother would stay in Sumter and they had a, they had property in Sumter, until either the, the parsonage could get fixed up or maybe just not go, he would have to just go out, you know, and serve that that assignment and then come back. And they would go out with him, I guess to services but she just wouldn't live in, you know, in that, those places. But so mother really felt that Sumter was her home because she was there, a lot of that, that's where all these cousins were and the other McDonalds, you know, and also. Story_ID: 373140 Speaker 1: Well how did you like going to boarding school, to Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: It was nice. I was a successful student. But then mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] sent me after, see I didn't stay on campus, I stayed with a preacher who lived right across in front of the campus, a preacher and his wife because she was afraid for whatever reasons mothers are afraid of girls (laughter) being, and so, so anyway the preacher was sent somewhere else and then she sent me to Sumter [South Carolina] to relatives there and I finished high school in Sumter, South Carolina, and stayed with my cousins. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. But anyway I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) were there any-- Speaker 2: --I didn't, I wasn't afraid, mother had prepared us well, I was a successful student always and so and that was no problem and I made friends easily. Mother made me as a child, she would come in and say, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell], there's a district conference coming up next month and the youth will be doing orations so you must find a speech and in, and involve yourself in this," you know, and (unclear). You could not say to my mother, I don't want to, and you could not say I can't, I can't was not in our permitted vocabulary. So (laughter) she said one little, she always these little rhymes and one was I have two friends, I can and I will, and (laughter) those were the answers we were allowed to give, I can and I will. And she sent me away to some church camp down on the beach and Charlotte Hawkins Brown was, you know, with the school [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] up in North Carolina, that very famous school, came to talk with us and she told us among other things that ladies, somehow we were supposed to answer I'll be glad to. And we would practice out on the beach, sitting on the beach with the beautiful waves and the sun and the sand, and we would say, "I'll be glad to, I'll be glad to." And she said if you say it, it actually makes you feel better. And you're gonna have to do it anyway, (laughter) you know, if your parents ask you to do it. So I learned very early to, to do those things. And I don't remember having, I, I, I was not, I can't remember being afraid and I can't, because she made us, you just had to go, I had to speak, and I had, and I had to play, mother made me play the piano for Sunday school, I couldn't play it. (Laughter) You know, I was very, very poor at the piano but I still had to go. She'd, she'd tell me, "You're playing for Sunday school Sunday" and, of course, I'd cry quietly but I had to go Sunday morning and play 'The Little Brown Church in the Wildwood' [sic. 'The Church in the Wildwood'] or some kind of little church (laughter) and, and whatever, whatever I was supposed to play. It was miserable but I had to do it and I couldn't say no. So, you know, when it was time to go away I just knew how to do what had to be done. There was nobody to turn to and mother wouldn't like it if you said, well, you just couldn't say, you couldn't say, "I can't" (laughter) 'cause you, you had to do it. Story_ID: 373141 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or, or anybody at, at Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] that was like a mentor for, for you? Speaker 2: We had, I, I remember the teachers were all nice, some were young, I enjoyed the classes, I enjoyed the friends, friends that I've known all of the rest of my life. And many of them, of course, were Methodist and were in the youth--I had always been in the youth groups with the church and so I knew them. We had a Methodist Youth Fellowship [United Methodist Youth Fellowship], so I knew the kids from across the state anyway. I remember it was my, my conversion that occurred when I was in school there and they always had that religious emphasis week or whatever that was. And Reverend Howard [ph.] who was one of the noted preachers in the South Carolina Conference and he conduct, he was conducting the service, and I decided to, you know, I pledged to be a Christian at that time. And at home and in many places in the South, you know, you went down to a bench and jumped up and shouted, you know, and my mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] didn't believe in those kinds of gyrations either even though we lived in the heart of the rural area where that was the thing and it certainly occurred in our church there [Little Rock, South Carolina]. And she didn't admonish those people not to do it but she, she was amazing because she reared me to be different without ever criticizing what other people did, (laughter) you know. Story_ID: 373142 Speaker 1: I was asking you about Mather Academy [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, yeah, that that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I, I was-- Speaker 1: --that's the point, I mean, you're leaving, you're leaving this paradise it seems-- Speaker 2: But Mather was nice too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a wonderful--yeah. Speaker 2: --I enjoyed, I enjoyed Mather. And, and as I said, I became, I declared myself a Christian then, so now I'm going to, I'm going to dedicate myself to the same things that we Methodists believe in, you know, working (unclear) I'm at Mather, so that means I may grow up to be a teacher and teach at Mather (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is this-- Speaker 2: --become like some of the young women were doing. Speaker 1: --now is this school named for Cotton Mather? Speaker 2: I doubt it. I, I don't even know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The old reverend from the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --eighteenth century. Speaker 2: I know Cotton Mather. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: But, you know, it could even have been if he gave enough money, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: Or his descendants maybe or whatever, okay. Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know-- Speaker 1: I just thought I'd ask 'cause it seemed like it would be, you know. (Unclear). Speaker 2: And I might have known at one time but I think it was enough for mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] and for us to know that he was a, I mean, that it was a, it was a Methodist school, it belonged to the Methodist church and there was another school also, another Mather there (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And I was asking you about mentors there, if anybody, you know-- Speaker 2: And I was gonna say Reverend Howard [ph.] influenced me a lot because I made my commitment when he was there. He had a daughter there but I, as I recall I was much more impressed with, with Reverend Howard (laughter) than the daughter who was, who was one of my teachers there. And I can't remember really any, any other significant thing except the friends, you know, I had lots of friends. And then the next year as I said I went on to Sumter [South Carolina] and, and went to school there. And-- Speaker 1: This is, was it like Sumter High School [Sumter, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I finished by, by the age of sixteen I was entering college. Story_ID: 373143 Speaker 1: Now we wanna stay on high school [Sumter High School, Sumter, South Carolina] for a minute. Now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I think it was alluded to during the break that you liked to read. Speaker 2: Oh, yes-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --well, see we had to read there was nothing else to do. We lived on, and, and, of course, this is interesting, I guess, maybe for people who later wouldn't realize that, you know, we did not have theaters, I lived in this little town of Little Rock [South Carolina]. We didn't have a police force, we didn't have any police men, we didn't have a doctor, we didn't have a drugstore, we didn't have paved streets, we didn't have, you know, there, there was one paved, there was a Main Street where daddy's [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] barbershop was, it was paved going down from the, the highway that crossed the town on one end to the railroad track that crossed it way down the other end. And there was nothing to do. Now most of the children lived out on the farms and things, you know, their, their parents might have been sharecroppers or, or whatever, some of them. There were some, there were on, a number of black farmers who owned farms but they weren't all in one little segment, they were, you know, somebody here, and somebody there and all. And they may have had children grown already and, and worked there. So there were no, there was no host of kids to play with. But mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell], mother alone kept us supplied with, you know, like Bingo games, she allowed us this, this isn't, this is the preacher's daughter but she allowed us to play cards all the time. There never was, so she, I think, she was unusual, I'm only realizing this way up here (laughter) in my advanced, advanced years because most southern Christian religiously brought up people were afraid of dancing, you know, and afraid of cards and all that kind of, mother loved music, had all of the latest sheet music. And so we would gather around the piano and sing and she would show us how to do the Charleston and the Black Bottom and, you know, the dances from, from the musicals or wherever she got them from. And my brother [Harrison Blackwell, Jr.] and mother were very much alike. He enjoyed all of that and they did all that. I was very, I wasn't very, I said musical and nor, nor did I dance very well. You know, I, I could jitterbug pretty well when that came along but I didn't just pick up on steps and all but my big brother and mother would do those things. And mother was, you know, quick-witted and everything and so was he. So they would move right on in to whatever the jargon was and, and all. But it never, it didn't leave me out they were just faster than I because they, you know, did those things. Story_ID: 373144 Speaker 1: She [Blackwell's mother, Lurline Thomas Blackwell] played, she had us, we had a, a screened in front porch that went almost all the way across the front of our house. And on Saturdays we would put the card table out there and the games and she would let us invite children in, we could play cards and play games, dominoes, and things, dice, whatever we wanted, things that some of the other people would have thought, I think in any other place, there could have been criticism, mother couldn't be criticized where we lived [Little Rock, South Carolina] because she was the teacher, do you see, (laughter) and so there was no, you know, there wasn't, they, they didn't, I don't know what they might have thought about it if anybody sucked their teeth or something somewhere but they certainly never would have said it. Speaker 2: She set the standard-- Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So it was, it was quite all right. So in a, in a way, later in my life I think that kind of thing might have helped me be daring. And it certainly helped, I never grew up wondering what anybody else had or trying to be like anybody else, that never was a part of my, there was nobody, you know. I didn't wonder who was going to somebody's birthday party, all the things that other little girls wonder about or whether some boy liked Mary and not me or, or anything. I never had any of those kinds of things because I never, we never had any competition. There was just never anything like that. We did lots, as I said we read through everything, I read everything. Mother let me read True Story magazines (laughter) we'd go to Dillon [South Carolina] five miles away to shop that was the county seat. And I had read through all the stuff, you know, all the Orphan Annie and whatever, all the little books and things that she had got for me. And so I started reading the True Story magazines. Now those things were supposed to be very risque and (unclear). And I'm maybe what, eleven or whatever I was, and mother never, never, never in her life did she say you cannot read that, I think she felt if you're reading it, you know, then that's, okay. So I would go through them, I'd get a stack of 'em, but it didn't take me but one summer, maybe not the whole summer to find out that they were all the same, you know, that it was junk. She never had, so then I was through with that. And when I was sixteen and went away to college [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] I was shocked to find the college girls huddled up in their rooms giggling and being titillated by the True Story magazines and cheap, cheap books and literature that I had outgrown years before, (laughter) you know, I mean, 'cause it was just, they were all, and you could tell right away that it was just the same, you could understand the, you know, the scheme, the setup or you knew everything if you read one you had read them all. And it was so amazing to me. And yet I thought it was, I didn't think then but I have thought later how smart she was to have exposed me to all of that. So she was an unusual, a real, and yet she was very, very, she was loved in that town, she spent all of her time working with people. And we had the only telephone, I guess, I don't, I don't know if any black person anywhere around had a telephone and there were just a few other, might have been one or two other telephones in the town too. But, you know, people who needed to call anybody would come for help, these are children away like in New York and other places, you know. Or if people needed letters to be written or if anybody was sick or anything mother was always there, she would go and visit and take whatever was needed and give advice and everything. She was just a, a good Christian woman but not mealy-mouthed and, (laughter) you know, she was a preacher's daughter, Christian, and so I think she was familiar with the, she, I never was dragged to church and had to say, you know, amen, when, when she took me to church if there were conferences and things she'd sit with me and mother knew how to whisper without moving her lips (laughter). And she would sit beside me and tell me all the dirt or gossip or funny stories about the people, the, from the bishop on down to the, you know, justice, just everything. And it was just so exciting. So-- Speaker 2: Your family must have known everybody's business with your, your father [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] being a barber-- Speaker 1: (Nods head) (Laughter). Speaker 2: --and your mother being the, the school teacher. Speaker 1: Mother made sure she knew everybody. Daddy never, he must have told mother some things and she might have got it out of him but daddy didn't, he didn't, daddy was quiet and didn't, you know, didn't, didn't talk much. And whatever he said was just terse and concise. But mother knew everything in the county, at the very least for, for about every race, (laughter) every age group, and everything. Story_ID: 373145 Speaker 1: Now, Sumter High School [Sumter, South Carolina], what was that like? I mean, what, where was it, it wasn't in Little Rock [South Carolina], right? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Well, where was it about in, in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Sumter was the town of-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --Sumter, South Carolina. And, and I stayed with my cousin and I enjoyed it. I had, now I had friends at my age level and I remember being in somewhere, I guess, it was like ballet or something, you know, going to those kinds of things. And I was given a lawn party and, you know, it was, it was nice. But I also, I had a boyfriend and it was, and I would sneak out. Mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] bought clothes for me to wear that I didn't like to wear. We got a lot of our things from Sears Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and, I guess, I can tell this, if not you can, we can (unclear). But anyway she bought the, the underwear was a kind of rib-knit and that was, it was supposed to keep, mother was always afraid, you know, that I might get tuberculosis or, you know, get something worse. So anyway, I had this, among the things that I had to take to school was a ribbed-knit, gray, they weren't white and frilly, you know, slip and I didn't wanna wear that thing because when you walked up the steps, boys, you know, your, your pleated skirt is flaring out and they might see this ugly slip. So, (laughter) so I didn't wanna wear it and I wouldn't put it on. So that if you're, like if you're running or dancing or turning, a quick turn and your skirt flares out, you would at least have pretty legs and things showing, (laughter) you know, and not this funny looking slip. So, showing you where my mind was. And (laughter) my cousin would say, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell], do you have your underwear on?" or slip or whatever (unclear), and I'd say, "Oh, yes." But then she'd make me show and I didn't have it on, so then I'd have to go back and put it on. And then I'd walk out the door, take it off in the front yard. See when I put it on, (laughter) when I put it on I wouldn't put it over my arms, I'd just pull it up, you know, and then I'd show her that I had it on. And then I'd just pull it down, ball it up, and put it up under the shrubbery. And, (laughter) and go out so that I could be whatever look it was that I thought I wanted to have. And (laughter) I had-- Speaker 1: Did she ever catch on to that? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. I had lost a lot of slips (laughter) and sometimes I'd come back in the afternoon and pick it up if I thought about it, you know, and bring it in, it was hiding up under the bushes in the, surrounding the lawn, you know. So I had a boyfriend who lived two doors down, he was tall and handsome and his name was Bill [ph.]. And my job was to do the kitchen, the dishes after dinner. I don't know if I had to wash 'em and dry 'em. Anyway I, my, I cleaned up the kitchen after, in the evening. And Bill's house and Willie [ph.], my cousin's house was set back, and the kitchens were, I could look across two yards right into his kitchen. And we would blink the lights, he would blink his light and I'd blink mine and then I'd go out to the fence and he'd come over and we would kiss over the, (laughter) over the fence. But he was tall and the fence had barb wire across the top and so (laughter) well I, I got scratches, I'm trying to get up high enough to get a kiss over the fence. And Willie would come to the door and say, "Gloria, what's taking you so long?" And I would claim that I was going out to empty the garbage, and I said, "Oh, I'm coming, I'm just emptying the trash" (laughter) and come on back in. So I was up for a lot of stuff (laughter) all the time. But she was young and she was a teacher and so she was pretty, she was able to stay pretty close (laughter) on to my, you know, on to my trail. And so I finished there. I enjoyed Sumter. Story_ID: 373146 Speaker 1: About, how, how many students were at Sumter [Sumter High School, Sumter, South Carolina] would you think? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: A couple hundred maybe or I don't know, more than that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sure it was a very nice, Sumter [South Carolina] is a nice sized town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a very, it wasn't big, it, the schools weren't huge monstrosities as they are now but it was a nice well populated school. And-- Speaker 1: Well it could be pretty big (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) she was a math teacher. And I, I liked all the teachers and she had friends who were teachers and I liked all of those people. And, you know, it was, it was nice, I liked that whole situation. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they have like school clubs and all that kind of stuff in Sumter? And were you involved in school clubs or did you run for class office or-- Speaker 2: No, I did not run for class office. And I don't know, I don't know, I can't remember having anything. I remember, no and I wasn't on any choir, (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Well when it came time to graduate, now, now were you, were you, were you a pretty good student (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was, see I, evidently I jumped up all the time, you know, sort of like Jamelle [Jamelle Rackley-Riley] did, my own daughter. And so suddenly I was ready to leave, you know, I had all my units and so I left. Maybe I transferred and left or something but anyway I would, I entered college [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] at sixteen with, so I finished high school, I just, it seems to me I just had my credits so I probably could have been, should have been much, you know, (laughter) farther down but I had some, somehow maybe really helped make sure that I got all the units of English and math in or something like that. Story_ID: 373147 Speaker 1: What year was it when you graduated from Sumter High School [Sumter, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Nineteen- I entered college at, well, well, I was born in '27 [1927] and I entered college at sixteen and I married in '41 [1941], '44 [1944]. Speaker 1: Okay. So that would be, I guess, if you, well '27 [1927] and sixteen we're talking about 1943, I guess. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Is that, is that about right? Speaker 2: I probably, I think it was '43 [1943] because I think I married in '44 [1944]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As soon as I got there before I could shake the dust off. I was, I got married in college. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what college did you go to? Speaker 2: Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Claflin, okay. Speaker 2: --a Methodist school. Speaker 1: Okay. Claflin College. Now how did, where was, that that was close by too, right? Speaker 2: That was in Orangeburg, South Carolina. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which might have been a couple of hours away from Little Rock [South Carolina] in those days, hour and a half (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At least an hour-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --uh-huh, or a hour and a half. Speaker 1: --a couple of hours away from Little Rock, it was? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Orangeburg is in the middle of the state and Little Rock-- Speaker 1: It was-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --is up at that North Carolina line. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And grandmother [Blackwell's mother, Lurline Thomas Blackwell] had also gone to Claflin, so. Speaker 1: Um-hm, and her father [Blackwell's maternal grandfather, LeGrand Thomas] had too, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: All right. So-- Speaker 1: He had taken courses there, um-hm. Speaker 2: So, now did you, so you, you were married in college, correct? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Was it the same young man who lived down the street or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, no-- Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: --no, no, no, unh-uh, (laughter) no. But when I came to college I was still representing the church, I was the youth, I had become the state president of the Methodist Youth Fellowship [United Methodist Youth Fellowship]. And I was on a, I had a, a church scholarship also. And I was, see what else, and so I was supposed, I was obligated to organize on the campus a Methodist church club, that was a part of my responsibility when I came there. But it was during the war, that's why I keep wanting to think it was '41 [1941] but I guess it had to be '44 [1944]. Anyway-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) this is World War II [WWII], right? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was World War II. And there were no boys, there were no, well, we had five, to my understanding now there might have been some fellows who were coming up on the campus taking classes and going back home or something but I, I'm aware of only five boys in the freshmen class. And quickly one of them became my boyfriend (laughter). Speaker 2: Did you feel a sense of urgency (laughter) (unclear)? Speaker 1: No, he was just available and interested (laughter) and so, you know, it was okay with me. And we were, his, I can't, his name was Robert I believe, his last name was Young [Robert Young (ph.)]. And all of the boys were nice. One of the boys, another boy was a preacher's son and we were friends. I was friendly with everybody. Story_ID: 373148 Speaker 1: But when mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] brought me there [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], again, she was concerned and she brought me over in the car and the, the school wasn't ready, the floors were being polished or something in the dorms. And she left me at the president, with the president at the president's house. And when the floors got ready I was still at the president's house. I stayed there the, one girl was working, she was a senior, and she had a job, you know, student job there. And so I just stayed there, her name was Suzie or Susan. And, and so the, I stayed at the president's house, the president and his wife had no children and he had a big beautiful dog. And he was a very, while I can't tell you much about high school [Sumter High School, Sumter, South Carolina] and Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina], as far as people, the person, the thing that impressed me most about college was President Randolph [Joseph B. Randolph]. He was, he had, he was old by that time, a wonderful, wonderful sage, well educated. Speaker 2: What, what's his first name? Speaker 1: Hm, I'll have to tell you later now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he had been president for a long time by that time. And he liked me right but I guess he liked all of his students but I was very young and so I, and I was at his house and so we became good friends. So he liked me I think pretty much the way you like a dog or a (laughter) pet or whatever, right. So when it was time, when the college, when the floors were ready, I still didn't go, he didn't want me to go and I still didn't go over to the dorms to live, I stayed there. So in the afternoon when he came in from his office, we would go out riding, the dog and President Randolph and I. And things that looked like favors, things, things that looked like they were setting me apart didn't look so good and it didn't help my work I was supposed to be doing on the campus. Now I don't know if he was so old that he had become oblivious to, you know, what that would do, and I was certainly innocent, I didn't know, I wasn't thinking about how it looked for me to ride around the campus in his whatever it was, limousine or Cadillac or whatever, he was driving and come back eating, it was ice, ice cream (laughter) and, you know, going to his house. And we were crazy about each other. I adored him. And he gave me things to read. In, in, in the evenings I would sit, he's sitting down in his easy chair with the dog on one side and I'm sitting on the floor on the other side beside him reading. And he would say, "What are you reading" and "How do you like this" or something and I can remember he said, "What do you like about it" and that and we'd talk about it. And he was always so pleased with my comments and insight and so he gave me a, a notebook and I was supposed to make notes and things. And then I'm walking down, sometimes in the day I'm walking down to my class, we're getting out of one class going to other and he would stand in his office and do like that (gesture) and I would just get out of line from the students and go into his office and he'd say, "Have you finished reading something," or "What are you reading?" 'Les Miserables' [Victor Hugo] or whatever I'm doing. And I said, he said, "How do you like it?" I said, "Well so and so, I'm, I'm stopped at this first sentence because he's saying the," and then we'd talk about that and have a deep discussion, forget that he really should be (laughter) seeing other people too, I guess. And the students would ask me, "The president called you in his office, are you in trouble," you know, "are you trouble?" But we were, (laughter) we were just visiting together. Story_ID: 373149 Speaker 1: And the, the students didn't like it when I called meetings for the Methodist Youth Fellowship [United Methodist Youth Fellowship], the girls didn't like anything I had to say (laughter) and voted against any, we couldn't get any, all the boys voted for whatever I had, didn't have but five (laughter). So, so I wasn't getting anywhere. And I came back from one of the meetings very upset and the president's wife told me I needed to talk to the dean and not the president [Joseph B. Randolph] (laughter) because he wasn't gonna be able, I don't think he would, he was, wasn't gonna be able to see, you know, what the problem was. And, and the dean let me see that I should be over on the campus, you know, with the students. I wasn't even eating meals with the students, you know, I wasn't eating in the dining hall. And then he said when I was walking across the campus I was, I was always reading which indicated to the kids that I didn't want, you know, to associate with them, I'm, I'm walking reading the book and everything. So I went over on the campus and, and, and roomed in. I enjoyed that very much, found those girls reading True Stories [sic. True Story] and but they were talking about marriage. The, the, I quickly became friendly with the seniors and they were all planning to marry, some were married secretly already. And some, because it was wartime and, and some were getting married as soon as they graduated but they were seniors and they were very anxious to finish their, you know, credits and get out. But they were having trouble with math and I was very good at math. And so I started a little calculus, the, the, the math teacher asked me to do calculus coaching down in the dorm and I did that. You know, I was just having a wonderful time. And, (laughter) and met a young man [Jimmy Becknell] who was also a senior across at, you know, South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] are joined, just a fence between them. And the boys who were still in school were deferred as long as they made good grades and stayed, you know, until, until they graduated. And so he was a graduating senior and was gonna have to go into [U.S. military] service as soon as he finished. And we met and fell in love and got married, slipped off the campus and got married and came back, we slipped off the campus and got married that's all we were able to do, was (laughter) slip off the campus and came right back on because freshmen were watched like hawks. And we thought we were very clever to be able to do that. So then later when I tried to go back off to meet him, I was discovered (laughter) and then everybody found out that I was married and it kind of messed up my college career. Speaker 2: Could you stay in college if you were married? Speaker 1: Well, no, you couldn't stay in college if you were married and you couldn't, yes, so the president trying to work things out in my best interest somehow they managed to, to do something and they kept me there. I, I'm sure that he did it after he found out. He was very, very, very hurt. I, I wasn't saying, I, I was quite willing to let them think that I had just slipped off and was in, quote, disgrace, didn't make me any difference. But, but he was so hurt when we talked alone that, that I had just let him down so and I said, "Well I'm, I didn't do anything I'm ashamed of," and he wanted to know why was I not ashamed. And so when I told him I was married, he just switched right around, he said, "Oh, well, if you're married, then that's not disgraceful," (laughter). So, so he was busy trying to, you know, smooth it over and make sense, so he, he managed somehow to make it and I was allowed to stay there for-- Story_ID: 373150 Speaker 1: All right. So did you finish Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: No, I just finished that year, I was allowed to finish that year. And it was understood that I was married and, and when he graduated then we went on. Speaker 1: When your, when your husband [Jimmy Becknell] graduated? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was right across the, right across the campus. And so we went on and, you know, to live together and lived in, and moved to, he had to go to boot camp. So he went to Chicago [Illinois]. And I stayed with McDonalds, once again (laughter) we stayed with my mother's [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] uncle and his wife. So that my husband was up there on the, on the base, he went, he did his boot training, I guess, that summer. Speaker 1: Now, for the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: [U.S.] Navy, he was in the Navy? Speaker 1: Navy, okay. So he was up at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] then-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I guess, yeah. Speaker 2: That's what I say he went to Great Lakes. Speaker 1: Great Lakes, all right. Speaker 2: And he could leave home, he would get up in the morning and go out, he went to boot camp without me, I stayed in South Carolina for the summer but then when he finished his boot camp, I went to Chicago with him and stayed with, we stayed with my mother's uncle and aunt. And he would get up in the morning and go to his obligations and then come back in the evening. And he was a teacher. They had so many, the way I understand it there were so many illiterates coming in, or nearly illiterates coming in to service, they were grabbing them up, you know, from everywhere. And he was a college graduate and they made him whatever it was. And, you know, how in the Navy you have those things telling what you are, and at that time the Navy, the [U.S.] military was so segregated most of them were cooks but-- Speaker 1: Right, most of the blacks were cooks now that's, that's, that's true. Speaker 2: But he had a pin, a pin and something, his was the insignia for an educator or teachers or whatever that thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Instructor or something. Speaker 2: --was called, um-hm. So, (laughter) so he had that on. And, and so he taught, that was what he did, taught the, the servicemen coming in. And so he would get up in the morning and go to work and we were playing, we were playing at being married. Oh, I, I was so proud of myself (laughter) because we would get up and, you know, get breakfast and, and then he would go out, you know, like a person going to work. Story_ID: 373151 Speaker 1: And very soon I got a job at Wilcox and Follett book concern [J.W. Wilcox and Follett Company; Follett Corporation] in Chicago [Illinois] down at the Loop. And there I was getting up in the morning and getting on a bus and, and going down to this place, had a desk, can you imagine that? (Laughter) I had barely finished freshmen year in college [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], I had a little, but it wasn't a, it was a desk at a window but it was a desk and all these books, they were just, it was like a warehouse. And just bigger than any library I had ever seen or dreamed of. Speaker 2: Were, were they a book distributor or-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The, the Wilcox and Follett was a book distributing company. And we didn't have paper in those days, right? We're at the war [World War II, WWII], right, and so you could, they weren't doing any books, couldn't print books anymore because we didn't have any paper. And schools were sending to, I was surprised and delighted to get an order from, from Claflin (laughter). And because, you know, they were getting these, I guess, recycled books or I don't know what the, but, this, but I could read, I could read everything, all the latest novels and everything that were out 'cause they were just all there. So I was reading all the time (laughter). Speaker 2: So you'd go to work and read (laughter)? Speaker 1: It was just so wonderful. I mean on the way to work and on the way back 'cause you couldn't buy the books in the bookstore, it was hard to find. You, it was very rare to find but I, everything that came out was available to me because it was, they were, because they were there. And once, you know, I was, there was a little girl there my age, I guess, she was sixteen or seventeen, I was seventeen already by that time so she was seventeen but she worked, she was working, but she lived in Chicago. And she, when I, she would be on the bus I think or would get on the bus after I had got on, and so coming home she got off before I did, her name was Mildred [ph.], I can't remember her last name now, and she would always tell me that she's getting, she was getting off because even if the buses were crowded and we were standing up, I was still reading, you know, I would just stand (laughter) up with one hand and, and all engrossed in this novel 'cause I wanted to hurry and finish and get the next one, you know. And (laughter) so one day I didn't hear her tell me and I didn't close my book and I stayed there and read 'til the end of the line out in the prairie somewhere. And (laughter) it was dark and I didn't know where I was and that bus wasn't even going back. So the driver, I was just there standing up, standing up, the bus empty (laughter) and, and I'm reading. So, I said oh, (unclear) and then I said well what am I, what am I supposed to do? And he took me over to another bus that was going in. And my uncle was, oh, he was an old man and he was so, so upset because, because I was out in the, in the night, (unclear) dark, and Chicago was so crime filled (laughter) and he, I think he almost died, (laughter) you know, from just anxiety. So-- Speaker 2: What was your uncle's name? Speaker 1: John McDonald, um-hm. He was one of the, right, he was the same, you know, great-grandmother's [Harriet Deschamps McDonald] son. And, and he sent for daddy [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] (laughter) and (unclear) and daddy came and he had, I didn't know it, and I was there coming back from lunch, coming to my desk and walked right into my daddy and Uncle John. And daddy had come to take me home 'cause they did not want me in Chicago getting lost and, you know, no one to look out for me and Jimmy [Jimmy Becknell] not there to look out for me. But I, they, I begged them to let me stay and he let me stay-- Story_ID: 373152 Speaker 1: Jimmy [Jimmy Becknell] had been sent to the State of Washington to East Port Orchard [Washington] and so actually I stayed and went on out to, to my husband in East Port Orchard. And then worked in a library filing ship plans, the ships were being bombed and brought back in and we would find out whatever, you know, they needed to repair and get those things identified and send 'em out. So I felt so mature and so grown up (laughter) and wonderful and, you know, a working matron, not a matron, I guess, I didn't have children or anything, we were just enjoying married life. And, and became pregnant out there and had to come back home so he was able to bring me back. But then the war [World War II, WWII] was over and he was able to stay. When he came to South Carolina, this is interesting, when he came to South Carolina he couldn't, he went to Charleston [South Carolina] to work, he's in the [U.S.] Navy, he went to Charleston to report, they couldn't give him a desk because they didn't have any black Navy people, they didn't have a desk for him or any place for him because he couldn't, he couldn't sit with the white whatever they were, I can't remember what he was. And, and they can't change, you know, they, they can't change whatever they are. Speaker 2: What was he an ensign, was he an officer or-- Speaker 1: He wasn't an officer, I-- Speaker 2: Maybe-- Speaker 1: --I don't think he was. Speaker 2: --he was some, some kind of a noncommissioned officer, I guess, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but he was, he had this rank, he had this thing. And I can't, and, and they, he couldn't be anything else, they couldn't make him, they couldn't send him to the kitchen (laughter) you know. And but they did not want him in this place where the other so called teachers, whatever they were, whatever that rank was. And so he, they told him to just take another, they gave him another leave. I'm pregnant so he went on down to South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and, you know, started arranging to get out of the Navy and he got a job at South Carolina State with Veterans Affairs [sic. Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] at the, 'cause he was a South Carolina State graduate. And when he got back, they still didn't have any, they didn't know what to do with him so they gave him another leave and the baby [Ramona Becknell] came (laughter) and then he asked for a discharge and they were glad to give him (laughter) his discharge and we went to South Carolina State. Story_ID: 373153 Speaker 1: Now of everything you've said so far, you really, it really sounds like, you know, a wonderful family, wonderful experiences but this is South Carolina which is, has a history of horrible race, race relations. Did you, did you not see any of this when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I knew everything. My daddy [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.] was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] enthusiast too. He would take me from home to Columbia [South Carolina] to the NAACP meetings. And we would, whatever the issues were, my mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] was a, and, you know, I, I'm to cloudy to know what, but mother, you know, mother and daddy voted and they, and mother-- Speaker 1: They, they voted in-- Speaker 2: You know, I don't know how they voted because I think you, you could vote, I guess, if you had property and something, you know, whatever, whatever the rules were. But mother had voting drives and everything and the person who owned this South of the Border [South Carolina] thing, and mother--he was Jewish and he was from Little Rock [South Carolina] and he and mother worked closely all the time in the political, you know, stuff. And they went all out in the fields and got people--sent their cars out and got people to come and, and vote when, when, they could vote. But we never had any, you know, they didn't like him but he was too rich for them to do anything to him. And nobody ever did any, any, you know, nobody I know they might not have liked it, daddy might have lost some customers but I don't know if he knew it, you know, I mean, if he knew it, he, you know, might, must not have done anything. But they, they worked in voter registration, mother and Alan Schafer who worked closely to get the polls and so they managed to get, usually the, maybe the choices weren't even very good but whoever was the lesser of the two evils and maybe sometimes it was somebody pretty good that they would get in. So but now when there were, you know, murders and issues we knew that. And we did whatever you could do, you know, people would come around maybe if you were raising money for these things and all that, we did that. But I, there were no, there were no lynchings. I've, I've never, I'm not aware of any lynching in, in that area. You know, in that little, it was tiny little area. Story_ID: 373154 Speaker 1: Then in, by the time we got to Orangeburg [South Carolina], when we got to Orangeburg it's now forty--when was the war [World War II, WWII] over, '44 [1944]-- Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, '45 [1945], '46 [1946], my daughter [Ramona Becknell] was born in '46 [1946], um-hm. And, and he [Blackwell's first husband, Jimmy Becknell] was discharged [from the U.S. Navy], you know, shortly after that, the war still might not have been over but it was getting over right then and they were releasing people. And they were building facilities for these returning vets. So we had, that's the, that was the biggest thing, you know, the vets were sometimes abused in South Carolina but nobody in Orangeburg that I know about, you know, it would happen maybe somewhere else and we would, we, we, we used all the magazines, had all the papers, The Afro [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers], and the Virginia paper, I can't remember what it was. Speaker 2: The um-- Speaker 1: And all of the magazines. Speaker 2: --the Norfolk Journal and Guide [New Journal and Guide]? Speaker 1: The Norfolk Journal and Guide-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --yes, uh-huh. And so we knew all those things and we went, and I was, I was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] membership recruiter, the, the chapter died in Dillon [Dillon County, South Carolina], you know, while I was away and when I came back at one time the, the, (unclear) I went all in the fields and highways and hedges to get, you know, membership so we could revive the chapter, and we, I got more than anybody else in the county, so therefore, we got to have the, the restoring meeting in our little bitty church in Little Rock [South Carolina], you know, that was our honor that we got to bring the, you know, revive the chapter which was a Dillon County, NAACP chapter. So we had, and we had always had the NAACP there, so I-- Speaker 2: Were, were, were the returning soldiers more willing to join the NAACP than they were before they left or were they, you think? Speaker 1: I would, the returning soldiers didn't return, people didn't return to Little Rock, there was nothing to (laughter) return there for, you know, they went to, they went north or south or somewhere but these were the older people and their, and the people would send their children back home, you know, if they had young children. So what we were talking about when I was, when I was canvassing for memberships what we were wanting to do was work on integration of the schools, that was our focus. And, you know, South Carolina was in the forefront of that fight, finally with the Clarendon County case [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952]. Story_ID: 373155 Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the, just kind of reconstruct for us what the rationale was behind it, 'cause, you know, people wanna reflect on it now, they have, they still have mixed feelings about it because they, the black schools which seemed to be very strong in terms of preparing black students for, for the world and then, but they didn't have the facilities and other resources, I guess, in, in the, I don't, was that the case there, I mean why, why was integration like of the schools a goal? Speaker 2: It was just obviously, blatantly unequal. The children, it's ridiculous for a child to have to walk five miles from way back in the woods and a bus loaded with children pass that child, splash mud and water on the child and the child can't even get in the bus and ride. The things were separate, the children had books, the children, we--children in the South, in Dillon [Dillon County, South Carolina], I never went to a Dillon library. I'm saying so, now I, I, all of the, I'm saying I read everything right (laughter) but I didn't read it in the library. I never, and those, there were just, we were totally excluded, totally segregated. And the schools had to find their own, teachers would try to buy supplies for the students so that they would have things but they weren't given any equipment, any funds, they weren't given adequate materials. And it was just taken, you know, it was just understood and taken for granted. So the schools that were good, if you were lucky to have good teachers then you were lucky, if you were black. If you didn't have well prepared teachers you still were lucky or maybe then some of the children became because teachers at least cared about the, when they looked at the student they at least saw a person, (laughter) you know, and so there was that advantage that they lost. But the children who could be strong enough to stand that and I know it was hard, it was a, a toll on them, they still were exposed to better facilities, they were exposed to a science lab, they were exposed to books, you know, they were, every, every now and then they might even luck up on a teacher who cared a little bit but it was, it was not, it was not ideal but it certainly, I, I don't, I don't think at all that there was any reason we should have stayed in the separate but equal but (laughter) unequal situation. We needed to open up the schools to everyone and then make the system better. Story_ID: 373156 Speaker 1: Now, you had to revitalize the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] there-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you were saying and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how, I mean, and that was the first project you all decided to take on? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's what we were doing. That was the beginning (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) so what was the plan, how did you think you could accomplish that, the desegregation of the schools there? Speaker 2: By having, just exactly what we did. It was an NAACP plan, this was the NA- I was getting NAACP memberships and this was the NAACP plan we were doing, you know, following and that was to get students to apply. And we had all, at first, first you know, all of us were focusing on the Clarendon County case [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952]. And so finally it came up, we were looking to Thurgood Marshall and had, Thurgood Marshall was traveling all over the South, I attended meetings when he was there. I can't, I'm trying to think of the secretary for the NAACP. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Walter White? Speaker 2: Well, I knew Walter White too but the, the later, right behind him, the one that was there who came-- Speaker 1: Oh, who came South to-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: --it wasn't [HistoryMaker] Mildred Bond Roxborough was it? Was, was it with her? Speaker 2: I'm not thinking about the lawyers so much as the-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --you know, the-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (unclear) secretary? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I'll, it'll come. Speaker 1: Okay. I know Mildred Roxborough was one but I don't know if she was there. I know she went to Mississippi. Speaker 2: Um-hm, this is a man. Speaker 1: A man? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Came to (unclear) but anyway they came because we were very, very organized and very involved in the effort and because of Clarendon County [South Carolina]. And the, and the state-- Speaker 1: It's not Roy Wilkins, you're not talking about-- Speaker 2: Roy Wilkins (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Roy Wilkins. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's who I'm talking about Roy Wilkins. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was too obvious, I, I had kind of gotten--yeah. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, it's Roy Wilkins. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, okay. Speaker 1: So Roy came, Thurgood Marshall came. We, we were, we were very, very involved and very eager to get this done. And so we had to, we had to encourage parents to submit their--allow their children, you see because, because it was not, it was not easy. My, you know, my daughter [Jamelle Rackley-Riley], one daughter was already ready for college by the time we were doing this so only my younger daughter Lurma [Lurma Rackley] was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So about tell me, about, about what year was this that you all decided to-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In September. Speaker 2: --to move-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) . Speaker 2: --forward, I mean too-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: We are way over in the '50s [1950s] when we, in the, in the '60s [1960s], the beginning of the '60s [1960s] when we signed-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It was the late '50s [sic.] when the Clarendon (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when the, when the Clarendon County case came but I'm saying it was when we were getting these signatures and getting people. And then they were losing their jobs, you know, the parents, all kinds of, all kinds of-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, so the black school in Clarendon County, I mean, or the people sued the county to integrate the schools first? Speaker 2: Yes, we would-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --just, a plan was supposed to be offered and they would say, maybe you could have, just whatever they would say that they would think would not work and then the parents would go ahead and apply, they would appeal, and, and apply for admittance to the school that was segregated to have before it went to and it was all white. And it, you might not get but two or three students, sort of like the case in Little Rock [Arkansas] and it was, it was the same kind of thing. Speaker 1: So did it take place before Little Rock or after Little Rock? Was this case before or after? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You're talking about Little Rock, Arkansas? Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Was Clarendon County before? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes, before. Speaker 2: The suit was before but I'm trying, we, if you're talking about the media play and everything when they-- Speaker 1: Well, let's start with the suit now. Was it, that that was filed before-- Speaker 2: The suit, you know, that, what the, the Brown versus (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's, yes. Speaker 2: --the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]? Speaker 1: That's '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: That was, that was Clarendon County was in that suit also-- Speaker 1: Was part of that lawsuit, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that's a separate-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and if you read the whole thing all of that would be there but because of the initial, because of the letters in the alphabet, Brown versus so and so just comes first. But that was the case. Speaker 1: Okay. So they-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --consolidated the cases, Brown versus the Board of Topeka, Kansas, and then the Clarendon County case was, who filed on, on behalf of Clarendon County, who-- Speaker 2: Thurgood Marshall. Speaker 1: --whose name, whose name was on the suit though? Do you know? Speaker 2: Those, I'll have to give you-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --them, and you'd have to look at the records, uh-huh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And they're saying-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --in '48 [1948] the Clarendon County movement started and the suit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do we need to-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --was filed in the name of Levi Pearson, a farmer and landowner. A suit filed in the U.S. district court claiming that black children were denied use of school buses under the leadership of Reverend Joseph A. DeLaine the parents filed a new suit known as Briggs versus Elliott. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So Briggs versus Elliott, I guess, filed in '48 [1948], I guess, (unclear). Speaker 2: Um-hm, was it '48 [1948]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well, it said-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --that the, it said the grassroot, grassroots movement started in '48 [1948] and they go on to say that particular information, but they say culminating on 17th of May 1954 Brown was a landmark case. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): But Briggs, Briggs was the first to reach the [U.S.] Supreme Court but the five combined cases became Brown versus Board. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And it culminated on fifty--in '54 [1954] but it had started as early as '48 [1948]. Speaker 2: But see they, and they were working all cross, crisscrossing across the country and having meetings all the time. Thurgood Marshall was in, in South Carolina, you know, I think any time you could look up and find him there because they were having strategy meetings and all of the, you know, so many of the lawyers who had private practices were also NAACP lawyers, you know, they were working with Thurgood. Story_ID: 373157 Speaker 1: The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapters tried to get the paren- you have to do a lot of talking to get the parents to submit their children's names because there were going to be reprisals. Some, this DeLaine [Joseph A. DeLaine] had his house burned, he suffered a great deal in Elloree County [sic. Elloree, Orangeburg County, South Carolina]-- Speaker 2: Now this is, now what's his first name? This is DeLaine spelled D-E-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): DeLaine D-E-- Speaker 2: DeLaine, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --L-A-I-N-E. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but I think in-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Joseph. Speaker 1: Um-hm. But I wonder how, did they pronounce it DeLaine in South Carolina, I think, they did but I may be wrong. Speaker 2: L-A-I-N-E (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) E. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Joseph DeLaine. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Joseph, Joseph A. DeLaine. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm Speaker 1: All right. So they burned his house? Speaker 2: I think his house was burned. I think I recall that his house was burned. I know-- Speaker 1: So people were putting themselves at risk by being a-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --named in this, yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And, and you were at risk in so many ways. The phone rang all the time, we were again, again now we didn't get any, Lurma [Lurma Rackley] was on the suit in Orangeburg [South Carolina] but we didn't get nasty calls even though we were in the forefront of the movement but we were so busy doing other things, we were going to jail all the time anyway, you know, picketing and, and going to jail. But I don't, I don't know if some people were, one, one woman in, in Orangeburg for instance took some pickets downtown just to picket, asking people not to shop where they couldn't work, if you couldn't get a job down there, then don't, you know, shop in those stores or something. And she was charged six thou- fined six thousand dollars for, for taking pickets downtown. I was fired because I was accused of lawlessness because we marched, you know, it would be soon as I got out of school and finished my school work, I would go by the church and pick up a bunch and we would go down and, and picket or do whatever the program called for on that day. And so I was, and I went to jail a lot. I was arrested a whole lot. And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what was the first, what, how did, well, tell me about the first time you were arrested and how you felt about it? Do you remember? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm not sure-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --(laughter) because, because I was arrested so many times. Speaker 1: And where were you arrested the first time, do, do you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't-- Speaker 1: --remember? It wasn't in your hometown [Little Rock, South Carolina], although, right? Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, this was in Orangeburg. Speaker 1: In Orangeburg, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I may be wrong but I'm saying I just don't believe they would have arrested me in (laughter)-- Speaker 1: In, in heaven (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) In, and see I don't know, I don't know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: -- whether they, I (unclear). I don't know whether they would have or not. But in Orangeburg I was arrested, I didn't have any charmed (laughter) or anything, guardian angels or anything. And I can't--I can tell you about some of the jail experiences. Speaker 1: And what was it typically like in jail? Speaker 2: Nasty. Once I was in traffic court, I was on my way to--we, we had meetings, we called them rallies, every night and we would go to church and just like the keep spirit up, (laughter) you know, and sing songs and announce who had been in jail and who had got out of jail. We had a great operation going and someone had to have bonds money, there was a whole group of people who might not even ever come to church, to the meetings and all but they would put those people all over the state were supplying us with-- Speaker 1: They kind of stationed the bond money to get you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because you, you couldn't go to jail and, and, and pay (laughter) your way out at the same time. Story_ID: 373158 Speaker 1: In Orangeburg [South Carolina], the movement was sponsored by, organized by, and supported by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and that kind of gave a special direction, so we knew where we were going and, and the things that we wanted to do, we had attorneys, we always had attorneys and so there was a plan. And we had a field secretary who went all over the state and organized people. Some of those people were so far away and maybe because of their circumstances they were not going to be picketing anywhere so they might have been people who, we had doctors and lawyers and farmers and teachers who were willing to supply bail money. We needed a whole lot of money to get the kids, the students out of jail once they got in so they wouldn't ruin their lives and their careers and everything (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the students did the picketing for the most part? Speaker 1: No, in, in Orangeburg everybody did (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But the students, students, of course, had more legs and there were more of them, so yes the students would, they, we, we encouraged them to finish their classes, you know, come down on their off days and all of that. We had a church [Trinity Methodist Church, Orangeburg, South Carolina], a United Methodist church right across from, Claflin college [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] adjoined, there's just a fence between them and both of them faced a Methodist church right across the streets in front of that school. It was a, a historic, it had been there a long time, a Methodist church. The minister of that church was Reverend McCollum [Matthew D. McCollum], a Methodist minister, a Methodist minister's son. And the, the state secretary for the NAACP was a Methodist minister, a United Methodist minister, a Methodist minister's son, who had maybe four or five brothers in the ministry throughout the state. So these people could go out and just tell another minister who was way in some little other kind of place, that we're gonna need your support for whatever they needed it for, if it's bonds money or, or cars or blankets or whatever. Story_ID: 373159 Speaker 1: And the support came from all around. We, the students met at the church [Trinity Methodist Church, Orangeburg, South Carolina] always understanding that this was a nonviolent movement and admonished and I really believe accepting the fact that we were not, that we were peaceful in this, we weren't going to fight. If, if anybody tried to hit us or shove us or anything we were not fighting back. Speaker 2: So you had training, had nonviolent training? Speaker 1: Yes. We, and we talked about this and then we would come into this big meeting room and everybody checked to make sure that you didn't have a fingernail file as you do now when you're getting ready to go to the airport. So that we would not be accused of, and these were kids, these were teenage boys but they promised, you know, that they were not, so somebody can spit on you, somebody can curse, somebody can say nigger and you, this is what you were doing, you're (unclear). If you can't do that, then you don't have to be a picket, you know, you can be something else, you make some signs or you can do other, there were all kinds of things that you could do to help in the movement. So most of them wanted to, you know, get out on the street. So they would go and, and they would leave the church, maybe thirty strong, maybe fifty strong, maybe a hundred strong, they would just get out and start walking on downtown [Orangeburg, South Carolina] and get arrested. And they would get arrested for doing nothing. Then overnight we'd get a new ordinance passed, and the ordinance might say you can't picket unless you're registered, so then we'd send people down to register, (unclear) saying we weren't picketing, (laughter) we weren't protesting but it would still be a throng, you know, going down to register and they would get arrested. We had little children like my daughter who was not yet fourteen, and we'd asked those children to picket in front of the campus, so that if there were some students on the campuses who hadn't got the news we wanted to discourage them from going downtown to shop so we thought that was a worthwhile cause and we wanted the young children to stay there in front of the campuses and picket. So they did it for maybe a week, I don't know if they lasted that long but they didn't let, it wasn't good enough for them so they wanted to get down into town too. And so they went and they arrested the kids. But the good thing about the young kids was that they were, they couldn't, they had no place for them, there were, there were no cells (laughter) and they weren't supposed to be in with, you know, the older, the, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] secretary, field secretary, had it put in the papers that they were putting children in jail with hardened criminals. So they had those kids sign and then sent them on back, I was, they would just be on the record as having been arrested. So my daughter, Lurma [Lurma Rackley] and others would go sometimes twice a day, (laughter) you know, and get arrested because they could come back and regroup at the church and then go back. So they ran up a long sheet of arrests but it was keeping the, the movement going. The older boys, the college kids would get arrested and taken to jail. And we would have to get blankets to them, some, sometimes they would come out, we'd have to try to get the bonds money and get bail set. And then sometimes the students would say, and the students were not, I don't wanna say the students were passive, they were thinking too, you know, and so sometimes they say, we aren't, we aren't coming out this time, we're going to stay, we're not going to accept bond. And so they would say because that would make more, it would create more interest to have these kids in jail. Story_ID: 373160 Speaker 1: And we didn't have control of any media not even a medium (laughter) of any kind, so we were doing this, there's no publicity, we had one photo- local photographer. Speaker 2: That, that's a good point that the, that the, the white press in those days were not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, no. Speaker 2: --publicizing-- Speaker 1: Yes, no. Speaker 2: --those demonstrations whatsoever. Speaker 1: And when we did get something it was toned down or misleading (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think recently there was a article in the, well, there, it's been like a, quite a bit of attention given the photographs that a white photographer made in Birmingham [Alabama] of Fred Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] entire movement-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that were never published and they just, now they're online, you can look at all of 'em, and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you know, but, but they never hit the papers-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Well, we were saved because we had Cecil Williams [Cecil J. Williams] who was a local boy born in, in the area and grew up there, very young, I don't think he was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now was he a reverend then, Reverend Cecil? Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --no, I don't know he's a reverend now. Speaker 2: Oh, he's not, he's a not reverend at all. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): He's a photographer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He's a photographer. Speaker 2: Cecil Williams, okay. Speaker 1: And I think he might have been just seventeen or something just a kid, you know, with a camera. But he-- Speaker 2: Now, what, what did he shoot with a special camera or did he just have just a regular (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes--no, no, he, I think he had a, he was, that was his hobby. And, and, and I guess maybe his, also he's had training in it and everything. But he was there always and then he would send these pictures to at least to, he'd send them everywhere, I guess, these, they were accepted by the local, by the black papers across the country. And so we started, started getting word out. It was a good while before they, they, other papers picked up on it. And even if they picked up on it by chastising and misrepresenting, it was still then more--our local paper finally would say--you know, Negroes, wild Negroes (laughter) downtown demanding or whatever they would say, well, at least everybody else got the word. Also we had a crew in the group who just, we had a little paper called The Torch [ph.], just a sheet. And so the news would, we printed that Torch, I think it was weekly, and the list of all the kids and the kids loved to have their names, (laughter) you know, on the, on the sheet, having been arrested. So you'd have a long list of the kids who had been in jail. And when you went to, I guess, it happened when you went to jail too, I know when you went to prison, we came back from being arrested, there was a sheet that was, they put maybe something like the baby things they put on babies in the hospital, a little plastic band or something, and then we would cut that off and pin it to our clothes. And so (laughter) on the night rallies when we had those rallies, then all the people who had been arrested could come down, you know, and stand up and oh, they would get big cheers (laughter). Speaker 2: This is a badge of honor? Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. So we, every, everybody wanted to go to jail. Everyone (laughter) that I knew was eager to go to jail. Now the adults might not have been so eager because some of them were teachers and if you, you know, that that, you might be in jeopardy, but we had lots of South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] professors who went-- Story_ID: 373161 Speaker 1: I went to the penitentiary, I can tell you what that was like, where a whole big bus carried us from the streets of Orangeburg [South Carolina] down to the penitentiary and we had librarians and science teachers and just loads and loads and loads of, we went to the women's prison and, and were, and came back with these just gorgeous (laughter) for us, you know, badges saying that we had been arrested. So it was, it was frightening I'm sure at first and to think that you were in jail. I, I don't think we ever had been, when we went to prison, I stayed, I was able to stay out. The man who was the, in charge of the prison was a New Jersey somebody with a kind of Irish name, and McDougal [ph.] or something like that, and he announced we had to come to some kind of big hall and he said now, you know, we don't care anything about what you were doing out in the street that's not our problem but now you're in prison and you'll abide by the prison rules and whatever and whatever and this is what's going on. And, you know, the girls, these are girls who have been sent to college and they, you know, it, it was frightening and he had, they had guards all around, stationed all around the walls and all. And so when he finished talking, I said, and, and I need to say something and he didn't say I couldn't, and I said, "We don't care anything, we too our, our fight is in the street, and while you have prison rules we are here because we did not accept the rules out there. So now what we, so long as these rules are fair whatever is going on here, we will try to abide but we are not criminals but we are here for a cause and this cause is not gonna stop while we're here in prison." And for some reason it didn't--I don't know what that did to him but he didn't get angry and we were allowed to, I was able to get for, let all the girls get phone calls, you know, they could tell their mamas where they were. And, and make sure that girls were with teachers, you know, they had these little things so we had-- Speaker 2: To make sure that they're protected also? Speaker 1: Yes. And some of the girls, you know, were having health problems and everything so we had to do all of that. So when it was all over and everybody was settled then I still hadn't been assigned anywhere, and they took me way across, it look like the prison grounds out to some little thing that looked almost like a tool shed, nasty, grimy, and the rust on the place was, was peeling off, (laughter) you know, just-- Speaker 2: Crumbling. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, it was, it was awful. And they had some girls in there, they had taken, I can't remember if the girls came with me or were in there when I got, got there. So these were the, I think it was four or six girls or something left over. And so we were out there in this place, (unclear). But by the time I went out there all the other girls were settled with enough--we had enough teachers and adults around, you know, for us to be sure that the girls were with someone. And so I was very glad to be there with those girls. And they still came for us, we must have gone in on a Friday, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] officials and leaders came for the, everybody who had, all the adults late Sunday night so that we could be back on our jobs Monday morning, not because they cared about the jobs that much but if we got fired we wanted to be fired specifically for protesting and not for being derelict in our duties. So when it came for me I remember, it was just so heartbreaking for me to think that I might have to leave those girls in this place 'cause it was across campus, but what we were able to do was to get them brought over, to get them brought over to the big building where the other girls were so they weren't left alone. And, and I did have to go back late that Sunday night, back to the thing-- Story_ID: 373162 Speaker 1: So when I was fired, when I finally, after a whole lot of arrests and all when I was fired-- Speaker 2: And you were working for the school then? Speaker 1: I was teaching (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teaching. Speaker 1: --in the public schools [in Orangeburg, South Carolina], teaching third graders right in the, with the whole, and a whole lot of other teachers were involved, many of them, everybody was in, that little community was so coordinated and supportive. There is an article by Bernice Middleton in some papers that I, I brought for you to see, and she was saying that it seemed as though everybody in our, it's a small town and everybody in the community was really cooperating. Now some were cooking in the school, in the church kitchen (laughter) to have, you know, hot soup and things ready for the pickets when they came over to picket or when they came out of jail, some were furnishing blankets, some were, everybody was doing something. A, a professor was doing that Torch [ph.] paper, (laughter) you know, getting out all the news and all. And later when I was charged with lawlessness and, and came back to, they, well they were getting ready to fire me, they went to my principal and they said, "Now we're here investigating Gloria Rackley [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell], she's down here picketing every day and, and she's wild," and whatever all this stuff that I was supposed to be, "and we wanna know how, how you can have her in the classroom?" He said, "I don't know anything about that. I'm not downtown in the afternoons, I don't see that." "Well, she's down at this place every night, do you hear the speeches that she's making at church?" or whatever. I said--he said, "No, I don't, I don't go to the things." And he really didn't (laughter) he, he just happened to be not, you know, participating in that way. And they asked him one other thing, but then they said, "Well now we're, we're going to have to let her go." And he said, "Well she can't--I can't, you can't let her go on any fault that I have." He said, "She has not, she's one of my best teachers," and he just said all kinds of, and to me that was just such a wonderful, such, just such a wonderful thing. And he, ordinarily they would have fired me through, through the principal but they couldn't. They sent some inspecting supervisory teacher and she couldn't find anything, you know, a white teacher who was really looking for trouble but she couldn't find anything. So they fired, the superintendent fired me for becoming so rabid. I had become, he used the word rabid in my zeal for social change that I had become unfit to be a teacher. On the-- Speaker 2: For now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on the basis of arrests, he named numerous arrests in Orangeburg [South Carolina] and in other places 'cause I was arrested in Charleston [South Carolina], arrested in, you know, (laughter) wherever I happened to be, I was going to jail. Story_ID: 373163 Speaker 1: And so I won the suit because of the wording. South Carolina had already removed all contracts, black teachers didn't have contracts, you just got a letter saying, you can come to work on some kind of date. And there was no, nothing, you know, no terms or anything. So when they let you go you were just done, they didn't have to tell you anything but he, he, he wrote that. It, it is his letter that helped us win that suit because they didn't have any other reason and he, and so I was fired for, for exercising my rights. I told him, I, I had a conference with him before he fired me saying that I, I, I went because I wanted to go to, on, on leave but I hadn't got the contract, the little letter back. And he said, "What," he said, "You know, Miss Rackley [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell], you know, what the problem is." I said, "No, I can't know. Silence while it can't be mis- while it can't be misquoted, can be misunderstood so I have no idea what no letter means." And he said well he was getting letters from people all the time wondering how long this school teacher, I was in the paper, by that time the paper was talking about the movement, the local paper, and this, it was always Negro school teacher or school teacher does this or school teacher does that. And he said, they're asking, he said, they were calling me his girlfriend and saying how long are you going to keep your girlfriend, that jailbird in the schools [in Orangeburg, South Carolina]? So it was supposed to be disgraceful for me to be there. And so I told him that I hadn't got any complaints and if he ever got a complaint from any of the parents of the students that I taught, then I wanted him to let me know but I, as far as I knew, I hadn't offended any of my students and it was their decision that all of my students should be black. If the students were mixed I would try to be sensitive to the sensitivities of all the students I was teaching but I only had the, and they seemed to admire what I was doing. So when he heard from one of them, please let me know. So he gave me the leave that I wanted to attend the meeting and then when we went to the, I think I got arrested then and taken to penitentiary so then he wrote that letter. But the letter was worded so that it not only helped us win that suit and I got back pay but it also helped Matthew Perry and the attorneys strike down that whole thing of teachers not being able to work if they had NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] cards or if they participated in demonstrations or anything. It, it destroyed all of, it just knocked that down. But it had lasted for years, that's how the twenty-some teachers in Elloree [South Carolina] were fired, just because they attended an NAACP meeting or they had NAACP cards. Story_ID: 373164 Speaker 1: What crime did they charge you with when you were taken to the women's prison? Was that the, and how long did you have to stay there? Speaker 2: We, that women's prison in Columbia [South Carolina] was just over that weekend. I think we were arrested on Friday and had that big, those busloads of children. And I was brought out that Sunday night, you know, before day Monday morning so that I could be back in the classroom [in Orangeburg, South Carolina]. The crime was lawlessness, that's the time that the, when they went to court the SLED [South Carolina Law Enforcement Division] officer said it was the most vicious mob he had ever seen on the street, on any street in South Carolina and, of course, we weren't, we were not vicious, we didn't have any, any arms or anything and we weren't, we never made noises, we weren't singing even or anything, we were, (laughter) you know, going with decorum down to this thing but that's what he said. So and I was somewhere at the front of the line and so I was called, you know, leading this group down. But, of course, each of us saw ourselves as, as leaders, you know, we didn't, nobody was really, we did agree to what we were doing but we, you know, any, anybody could walk anywhere in the line you wanted to walk. Story_ID: 373165 Speaker 1: So we're about 1964 now, I guess, right, or '63 [1963] or '64 [1964]-- Speaker 2: We're at '63 [1963] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-three [1963], '63, [1963], okay. Speaker 2: --I think when that letter came, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we had about, I had already, you know, as I said we had a coordinator who was a field secretary. And sometimes we would need a, a rally or, or a demonstration in Charleston [South Carolina] and so he would just call and say anybody (laughter) can go to Charleston, if you could, so I would round up people in Orangeburg [South Carolina] and fill my car and go down to Charleston to join the, maybe we were going to sit-in at lunch counters. And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth director would come, would come down from New York [New York] and we would meet at a church, and he would look over the people, and he might see Lurma [Lurma Rackley] in those pants and he would say, "Now I want you, you, you and you to sit over here," and then he would tell them later, "Now you're to go at a certain place and do what, maybe just go to the park and sit on a park bench and have a drink of water from the fountain," well they'd go to jail for that see 'cause they weren't supposed to be in there. And I had taken a bunch of kids down, young women, all college students and all. My friends' children and but I was a woman and I was dressed, you know, normally the way I would dress, so he had me sit aside and when, after everybody else was assigned I was sent to the Battery [Charleston, South Carolina], do you know Charleston? Speaker 1: Not really but-- Speaker 2: Is it Battery's? Speaker 1: --the Battery's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, on the edge of the water there, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on, on the edge of the water, right. Speaker 2: And you had those great big houses or buildings that later became hotels, had those hotels along there. So he sent us to a hotel where they had fine Charleston foods for lunch so it was customary for people to come and go up on this veranda and then go on in to lunch, so that's where he sent us, Reverend McCollum [Matthew D. McCollum], Reverend Newman [I. DeQuincey Newman], and me. And (laughter) so we went to this place and, and we were dressed appropriately, and they never would let us in, you know, we would, we would, we'd get right up to the door and then somebody else would come and, and go around us and get in and we weren't let in. So we, and, and the newspapers came, cameras were all lined up, you know, taking pictures of us, still we couldn't get in (unclear). So we sat in rocking chairs on the veranda and there's a picture in the state paper somewhere of us sitting there (laughter) just, and they were saying that these people, you know, tried to get in. So then I was taken to the state farm of women's, these men were sent somewhere else. And I was sent to a state farm somewhere out from Charleston, all of us were in a big place, maybe as big as this area, just filled with kids, 'cause you see they had, the gir- the people who had been sent to the dime stores, the people who had been sent to, they were all arrested, and we were all taken out there, so we were back together again. And we stayed there I think maybe just a night, we might have stayed two nights, I don't know but I think it might have been just a night. We were released as soon as the bond money came, you know, and they would, they would take us out and we'd go right home. So but, but it, then it would be in the papers see, and especially school teacher at the Charleston thing so it, it kept escalating and, and growing. Story_ID: 373166 Speaker 1: And Lurma [Lurma Rackley] in the meantime was getting arrested, you know, as I said every day or two and three times at the time but they would come right back out, they didn't have to pay bonds (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now they were picketing in front of the college, right (unclear)? Speaker 1: No, no, I'm saying they had stopped. Speaker 2: Oh, they, they, okay. Speaker 1: They had started (laughter) going-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --downtown. And the, we had filled up all the jails in Orangeburg [South Carolina] and the armory was opened up and college girls were put in the armory and we, and, and teachers and mothers would serve as matrons, people who, who were, who felt they couldn't afford to go to jail and couldn't have records or couldn't afford to lose their jobs, still would come down to the armory and, and stay so that we could be sure the girls would be safe and that none of these police persons would get ideas, you know, while they were there, so the girls were always safe and protected. They were in the big open space, the overflow. I think the boys might have been in more danger. I felt that they were, 'cause like we didn't have as much but I guess they thought they were talking care of themselves. And I'm not aware of any real brutality, some of the boys had to be put in, they would, they would take them straight to the chain gang and so they would have to be, when we did the bond money they were taken off the chain gang and brought back. And these are all, that's not as bad as, you know, Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] and Chaney [James Chaney] and-- Speaker 2: Goodman [Andrew Goodman], yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, that, that wasn't as bad as that. But these are kids whose parents have struggled, you know, to send them to college and they have worked in summers, these are nice kids and they have not-- Speaker 2: A chain gang is not a joke, yeah, (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, and I'm saying they hadn't done anything, and but they were willing and they would go right on back the next day. We had a great, great, great group of kids and we never had any complaint of any lawlessness or any disturbance or anything for the whole time that we were involved in the movement. Story_ID: 373167 Speaker 1: We're still like in '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: So, you know. And this is really intense activity, every week something was going on (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was very, very intense. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We were busy all the time. There were people planning, there were meetings, there were strategists. The, the hospital [Orangeburg Regional Hospital; Regional Medical Center] in Orangeburg [South Carolina] was so bitterly and completely segregated, Orangeburg is a small town as I said with two black colleges [HBCUs], no other college in the town, divided, there was a white section of town and a black section. But the people in the black section were, you know, they lived well, (laughter) they had their own space and, you know, had just been living happily but they didn't want segregation in the town. You couldn't go downtown and get a job, the kids could not get summer jobs downtown and, you know, the schools were segregated and we thought they ought not be segregated so there were things that needed to be done. And the hospital, mostly this was a tri-county hospital, it served three counties. Speaker 1: Hm, it's all rural counties then? Speaker 2: Yes. And most people that I, I don't know if I knew, I, I knew very few people who went to the hospital. People who had any connections with the campus at all would just go to the infirmary (laughter). And then if you were so ill you would go on to your brother in, in New York or someone somewhere because they said the, I, I didn't go to the hospital but they said it was so nasty, if you went in to visit someone, you may be sitting on, I mean, the chair would have dirty gloves and just anything and, and I think the, the-- Speaker 1: The environment was so bad that you, you didn't wanna go in there. Speaker 2: It was, it was unhealthy and, and unsanitary. And I think they might have been in some basement but I really don't know the logistics of the facility, but it was bad. Story_ID: 373168 Speaker 1: Well, at the beginning of our movement when we were just a steering committee trying to decide how we could affect some changes, still at this same church we were sitting around talking about this and writing letters. We wrote the hospital [Orangeburg Regional Hospital; Regional Medical Center, Orangeburg, South Carolina], you know, and asked for things and asked for, and offered, offered to meet and, you know, try to come up with some things that could be more satisfactory. They would always either ignore, we did the same thing for the schools, we did the same thing for all these places that we were concerned about, we never got a decent response, either they were saying things and finding nothing to talk about here or no answer at all or anything. So (laughter) the--we couldn't ask a, the people who knew about the hospital and had to, and had been there were wondering you couldn't ask a person who is going under a surgeon's knife to then (laughter) have a suit going at the same time, right, or right after that. So we, we were having trouble finding a suit. And it happened that my daughter, all these things were happenstance (laughter) my daughter, Jamelle [Jamelle Rackley-Riley] hurt her finger in gym and knocked it out of joint or something, I was in my classroom on the other side of town teaching third graders and my principal came and said, "I'm bringing a sub, I'm placing a sub here, I want you to, you, you're needed over at the hospital, your daughter was hurt and she's, she's not doing well." Well, she didn't react well to the pain medicine, sometimes, you know, it can have an adverse effect and so she was hysterical and in more pain and not quieting down and all. And so I rushed over and she was still in the emergency room. And I was able to hold her and soothe her and get her calmed down. And then they took her upstairs to the, to surgery. And so the, the woman was just as nice, the nurse or attendant then was very, very nice. And so she said, "Oh, oh, well, she was, she was really--." She said something kind, you know, like maybe well, she's so cute or she was kind or just something, she was a white woman but she was saying whatever she was saying. And then she said, "Now, this is, this is the emergency room so you won't be able to wait here while she's in surgery." So she started gathering up Jamelle's things, her books and things to give to me, and, and took me out of the room to the hallway and said there's a waiting room down there. And there was nothing down there, the end of the hall was right down there, a Coke [Coca-Cola] machine and some Coke crates that's all. And that was where black people were to sit and wait, that was the waiting room. And so I said thank you. And I walked to the left down a long hall and then around a little corner to a magnificent waiting room with leather furnishings and beautiful tables with table lamps and everything. And so I sat and thought about Jamelle who was so, in so much pain and wondering about that. And I looked up in a little bit a man was at the door (gesture) calling me, he just did his finger, motioning to me. And I jumped up and went because I was so sure that he was calling me for Jamelle. And he just turned as soon as I got to the door, he turned and started walking down the hall and I rushed right over to him thinking he's taking me to Jamelle. And when he got to the curve in the hall he stopped and said, "You, oh, there's a waiting room for you down there." And I said, "Oh, thank you but I found a waiting room, I'm very comfortable here." And so I turned around and went, and went back to the waiting room. Story_ID: 373169 Speaker 1: And they ultimately to, to collapse this (unclear) they ultimately sent two plainclothes policemen in but they did a whole, a whole lot happened before that, but we knew that it was going to happen, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had already even sent an elderly woman to the hospital [Orangeburg Regional Hospital; Regional Medical Center, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. So when, when these policemen came and, and came in and asked me to go with them, I went out and, and this woman was there, and she pretended to be extremely surprised and I told her that I was concerned about Jamelle [Jamelle Rackley-Riley] so she said she would, you know, look at, we are in a small town, you know, and I knew her and all, so she was gonna look out. And they took me to the, with a great deal of ceremony, did not touch me, were not nasty at all. I said do you need to (laughter) when they, when we got out to the emergency landing, I said, "Do you need to handcuff me?" They said, "Oh, no, oh, no ma'am." And so they took me down to the car and opened the door for me in the back and they did not say a word to each other and the whole time there was a police car behind them, these were plainclothes people with no, the car wasn't, what marked, but a police car was behind, and a police car was in front and they took me to the police station and didn't say a word to me nor to each other. And when we got to the police station they took me to the desk or gate or something where you, they said maybe something like Gloria Blackwell [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell] or whatever, they may have given me something to sign. And so then the man at the desk said, "What's the charge," no, "Who is the arresting, no, who, who is the arresting officer?" And neither one, neither one said anything. And he said, he looked up and said, "Who, who is the arresting officer?" (Shrugs) (unclear) and he shrugged and wouldn't say anything. And they wouldn't say so he waited and they waited and nobody and I'm just standing there. And so finally the chief of police, I don't know if he touched a button or what, but all of them knew, so the chief of police came out and he said, "Put, put my name down there I, I'll be the arresting--." Now he hadn't been anywhere around but they didn't want to be because they were very, very, very afraid, worried about this, they, they felt it was some sort of trick, you know, that we had, they knew, my name was already well known, you know, in the, because of the arrests and everything, so they figured this was some kind of scheme I guess we were doing. But anyway, the NAACP treasurer came right on down, I didn't even have to go to a cell or anything, they came down and, and paid the hundred dollar fine or whatever it was, and he took me home, James Sulton [James Sulton, Sr.], came and took me home. Well, way after a while I asked Matthew Perry as we were going, you know, having other arrests and doing other things, I said, "Wait a minute, when are we going to hear from the hospital?" And he said, "Oh, you know, they dropped that, they, they sent that money back. They, they are not pursuing that." And I said, "Well we can't do that, we cannot let that, I was arrested, and I was taken down and booked, so we can't, we cannot let that go." So he said, "You wanna, wanna make a case out of it?" I said, "Yes." So he said, "We will." So then I said, "Well, Matthew I'm worried about," you know, a little bit later, I said, "I'm worried about our case because I don't have a witness, the, the waiting room was filled with white people, not filled, you know, but the only people there were white, and nobody was around, they can say anything, they could say I was, you know, misbehaving, what, what could they say and what, who will be a witness for me?" He said, "We won't need any witness." I said, "But they, they can say anything." He said, "They won't say anything," and they didn't. (Unclear) it never occurred to them that they should say I was doing something to justify arrest because sitting in the white waiting room was justification enough. I thought that was the funniest thing. They never said the, you know, and so, you know, it did, did nothing and so, of course, we won the suit. Story_ID: 373170 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And you can talk about getting arrested for going in the ladies room at the courthouse. Speaker 2: Yes, and, and then when Lurma [Lurma Rackley], Lurma had as I said been arrested so many times (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's your daughter, it's your second daughter? Speaker 2: That, yeah, and this is Jamelle [Jamelle Rackley-Riley]-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --who was the, and the younger daughter was this little one who kept going and going and going. And then I was fired. And when I was fired the schools had a great big, you know, demonstration on and these children went down, fifty something of them went, and they let all go but one, and that one was Lurma. And they kept Lurma for a while. Well, that worried me to death, she's in a real jail and no children around her. And I was able to, I, I called that same penal somebody who was supposed to be over the state whom I had met in the prison, in the penitentiary, the state penitentiary when we went up to the state. And had Lurma transferred over to the armory where all the college girls were housed. And he did that, he got Lurma out and took her to the armory. Well then she was with college, she was supposed to be in, and they condemned her to isolation, she was (laughter) she was in isolation, thirteen (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Thirteen years old? Speaker 2: Fourteen. Wait, wait, wait-- Speaker 1: Fourteen. Speaker 2: --had you had turned fourteen yet? Unh-uh, no, I think she was thirteen. She was, she was in isolation. And well it was an armory you know how big the armory halls are, so they had to do benches around (laughter) in a little square (laughter)-- Speaker 1: What did they sit on her own bench or something or what? Speaker 2: I'm saying the, yeah, they put her, put benches around to, you know, outline her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) oh, and to, and to, to make a square for (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, and then she could be, (laughter) she could be in there. And I, and the other punishment was I, 'cause this man who was, he was, he had a estate but he was something, something over the penal institutions for South Carolina. I think it was McGraw [ph.] or McDuffy [ph.] or McGrugle [ph.] or something. And (laughter) so I, but I couldn't see her, I wasn't supposed to see her, nor talk to her and she was still a prisoner. So she's in here sitting inside this little box and I am worried to death but still not so bad knowing that one of my neighbors is there, somebody in our little town [Orangeburg, South Carolina] is there all the time and all the college girls are there and everything. And so we'd write letters, you know, I'd, I'd fix a box for her and take it to the armory thing and put a little note in it and she would send me a little note back. And you stayed there? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just one week. Speaker 2: A week. Speaker 1: A week. Speaker 2: That's a long time for a child (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I would think for a thirteen year old, yeah. Speaker 2: That's a long time for a child. Speaker 1: And she was in the armory and had to sit in a, like a box area for a week? Speaker 2: Um-hm. But at least she's surrounded now, I mean, but that's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --our advantage, that's nothing that they (laughter) did for her, you know, (unclear). So at least I wasn't just going completely crazy. Story_ID: 373171 Speaker 1: When she [Blackwell's daughter, Lurma Rackley] got out then we had to, I was fi- had already been fired by that time. And, and we had to go to the juvenile court judge. And so he had had enough of us. She had been, she had a sheet, you know, she's been-- Speaker 2: A rap sheet, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) She had been arrested so many times, you know. Really, probably countless times there were, there were just one or two who had just so many, of these young kids who had so many arrests. And so he called her, he called, she, she was out now and she and I went together, she was sent back at home, you know, and we were going to this juvenile court and Matthew Perry came down. The juvenile court man was old and white and freckled and he had never, evidently, been confronted by people, other than people who were really in juvenile trouble, so he wasn't, you know, they are just like God, they're like God anyway, you know, in juvenile court because their authority is so, so strong but I didn't realize that. So Matthew was there and Lurma and I went into the courthouse and started down to the juvenile judge's--juvenile court judge's office and we passed a sign saying whites ladies. And, you know, we had not even been (laughter), we had not even been up on that floor or anything, we had no reason to be in the courthouse, so we decided that we really needed to go by there-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --before going to the (laughter)-- Speaker 2: So why not there (laughter). Speaker 1: --(laughter) before going there. It was, he was just down the hall a little piece farther, so we went in and oh, I don't guess we had been in there ten seconds or (laughter) it was, we weren't there long. Oh, they were bamming and ramming on the door and two police officers came in and took us to jail. Back down out of the courthouse and over to the same, it, it was called the Pink Palace [Orangeburg County Jail, Orangeburg, South Carolina], a broken down, rotten jail where they had taken those children before, but had released all but Lurma. So they took us there and then the judge called her case and we weren't there so he looked up and the, one of the policemen in the court said, "Judge they over at The Pink Palace" (laughter) and he said, "What are they doing over there?" "They were arrested down here in the white ladies restroom." So, (laughter) so then they had to go and get us and he was so angry, he turned the color of the freckles, you know, he was just, by the time we got there, he was almost apoplectic, he was just angry. And so he right away sentenced her to, you know, I was unfit to be a mother obviously, a child, a child arrested that many times, and then the child and the mother breaking the law right there in the courthouse. So (laughter) he sent her to, set, sentenced her to seven years in reform school. Well, Matthew Perry was there and you would really have to know, it's too bad that if ever history is written you can't really see these people, Matthew had, was so distinguished, his speech was so clear and precise, and he was such a nice, careful, correct person who truly believed in the law and loved jurisprudence. You know, he's really a nice guy and actually believed in it and he already had the appeal ready (laughter) so he just handed the appeal and there was nothing that the man could do so we left. It was, it, she didn't have to do anything but just come on home with me. Story_ID: 373172 Speaker 1: And so but Matthew [Matthew Perry] stopped us and said, "Now, she can't go, she can't picket anymore because if she's arrested this time she's doesn't have to be sentenced to anything, she will just be picked up and taken straight to reform school." And then he could do a writ of habeas corpus but they don't have to do anything about it, you know, it could be on somebody's desk, it might not get any attention, and she could be away for five or seven years before anybody acts on anything but we wouldn't have her, you know, he couldn't. It scared me so I said, "Well surely, surely it doesn't have more weight, what he says can't have more weight than--" 'cause Lurma [Lurma Rackley] was an honor student, you know, and had no record except, of course, all that demonstrating. And he said, Matthew said, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell], where have you been? Do you, you don't know the power of juvenile court?" And I had never thought about that. You know, he said, "It's the strongest, it's the strongest court in the land." They can take (unclear), a mother's word doesn't have any, (laughter) you know, (unclear). It's, what is it, what, you know, they take children from parents. So it was, so that was the, probably the worst period for us, for me when she was over there in the Pink Palace [Orangeburg County Jail, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and then taken to the armory and then when she was under this thing. So we slipped away, I was supposed to be leading, you know, the, I'm there, as soon as I was fired I was full time directing the movement, you know, I'm, but I was so worried that we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) so did, so did Lurma have to stop? Speaker 1: I'm saying I took her away-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --we went just away for maybe that weekend or something and stayed in a little secret, somebody found a motel and I just held her and it was, it was just so scary. And I told her what, that we, she would have stop this now and she said she couldn't stop. And she said, "I won't be able to stop." I said, "But, you know, he said if they pick you up, you will go and then we can't, we won't have any control." And she said, "We say it all the time that everybody can find an excuse for not participating." And she couldn't see that her need to stop was any different from somebody else saying well I can't do it 'cause I might, whatever, so she wouldn't, she said she couldn't promise to stop. So I was able to, I guess, we worked it out at the hotel, at the motel or something but I was able to get her to agree that if I were in jail she wouldn't picket or, or she wouldn't put herself in any situation where she could get arrested. But when she was getting arrested or in danger of getting arrested then I had to be, you know, out so that I could, I guess, I don't know what run around and scream (laughter) or do whatever it was that I could do (laughter). So, so that was the best we could do, that was our compromise. And we went right on back and continued what we were doing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now what did-- Story_ID: 373173 Speaker 1: Now were your parents alive then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what did they think about that there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell], (laughter) mother did a flip and instead of being, "Yes, go right ahead," (laughter) you know, as she might have done, she did not like it at all, she just any, any time, this is all building up to it when I'm in the paper all the time and doing, "Well why does it have to be you?" You know, see she (laughter) had never said that before, (laughter) it was always get up there and make your speech, you know, and do it. I never said, "Why me, why do I have, why do I have to play the piano," you know, but unh-uh, she would say, she said, "Why does it have to be you?" I said, "Well mother it has to be someone, why not?" But she, she was very, very, she was a mother and she was just very, very worried all the time. Daddy [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.], and daddy now is the one you would have thought might have said, here is a barber of a white barbershop, (laughter) you know, in a little segregated southern community [Little Rock, South Carolina], daddy said as much about that as he ever said about his father or anything else he never, he never said, he never said anything, anything at all about it. Somebody said something, someone who was (unclear) said, "What do you think about this girl Mr. Blackwell?" or something, he said, "Well, she's my daughter, you know." You know, just like they were complimenting (laughter) complimenting something, but he, he never. And I don't know what, now these were his customers, I have no idea what, if they, anybody ever dared say anything in the shop, I doubt it, it's his shop, it was his shop, you know. If they didn't like it they didn't have to come, right. So, I guess, I guess, as though he didn't seem to lose any customers or anything and-- Story_ID: 373174 Speaker 1: Well what did your husband [Larney Rackley] think about it, now? Speaker 2: Well, we were, oh, he lost his, he was fired, he lost his, he wasn't fired. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It was a different husband too. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, I had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the first one [Jimmy Becknell] is not (unclear)-- Speaker 1: No he, in the, the-- Speaker 2: That didn't-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So when we got into this movement I married to a professor, a teacher at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we had started going over like all the other people to meetings and things and trying to see what we could do. And we decided that we were going to involve ourselves in the movement and commit ourselves to the movement. So we came back home and talked to the girls, we knew, he's a teacher in the, at the college, a state supported school, not Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's puts you in a vulnerable-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --position, right. Speaker 1: And I'm a teacher in the public school system. So that meant, and we had a, we had a mortgage, you know, and two daughters. And we decided we would do it. And we decided that we would not, that that was our commitment and we weren't going to, and that nothing was going to change that. So we, but we had to talk to the girls about it. We knew they were too young to make any real decision but we felt they needed to know. And so we talked about it and they were oh, yes, you know, yes, this is what we need to do, they were, so the four of us were pledging ourselves to the Orangeburg Movement. And we, they, we explained that we were vulnerable and that people do lose jobs. We had, you know, people had their, we'd already had a house burnt, the people in Elloree [South Carolina], twenty-one teachers were fired and they were dispersed all around trying to find jobs, you know, their children couldn't go to college, you know. So we explained all that. But we felt that it had happened to them, and it just needed to happen more often evidently and something until somebody did something about it. So they were ready--yes, you know, we're gonna do it. And so that's why, that's why she later said, no, I, I'm not going to stop, no, that's, we said we weren't gonna stop (laughter) so we're not gonna stop. So he was getting his degree, he was working toward a Ph.D., my husband. And finally he applied for his last semester, he, he needed just one semester maybe and a summer or something, you know, to finish all of his work. And so his record was, looked good, and he was given the leave, you know, and the money and the assistance and everything he needed to go, and, and he did do that. Now, when you go on leave like that there's no question about your having a job when you come back 'cause that's your job, right. And unless you don't do the work, now you, they can say we have given you all this money and you didn't--but he finished his work, and when he came back with his degree, he had a doctorate in education I think, they, he didn't have a job. No explanation at all. Well, see while he was away, things, this is, this is in '63 [1963], I got, all this had just catapulted and he is, he's Rackley, he's Dr. Rackley and this is Gloria Rackley [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell] who is doing, you know, in the paper every other day (laughter) doing all this stuff even down now to Lurma Rackley. And so, so, so they just, he just didn't have a job. No explanation, he came back looking for his class schedule, you know, for the next semester and he didn't have any classes, he didn't have any, no nothing, he didn't have anything, at a black college. But, of course, they didn't have any control, it was a state supported school, so he didn't have-- Speaker 2: So nobody tried to explain it to him or anything like that? Speaker 1: No, unh-uh, unh-uh. I guess they, they must have said, you've got sense enough to get a degree, a doctorate, you ought to have sense enough to know why, (laughter) why but you are not. So, so he in spite of, you know, our agreement, I do understand his position, he was a man, he had finished, you know, he had, we had been skimping along all that time. And so he went to, he's, he was a Floridian and he went down to FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and was hired, they were glad to have him, they hired him right away (laughter). And so he said he was gonna take that job but I didn't feel that I could go 'cause we had said we, you know, I just could not, I just could not leave because there were too many people, other people who would be able to say I can't do it 'cause I can't go to FAMU, (laughter) you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I'm not gonna have another. Story_ID: 373175 Speaker 1: So Dr. Rackley [Larney Rackley] went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so you were there, now at that time you didn't know the, did you know the marriage was over at that point or (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes, we, it, it seemed, you know, we tried, we didn't, we can't say oh, well, if you go, goodbye. And I went down that summer and, you know, we, we thought we would try, but I, there was just no way that I could go, that I could leave, I just couldn't do it. Speaker 1: This is still '63 [1963], '63, [1963], yeah? Speaker 2: (Nods head) um-hm, um-hm. So, I guess-- Speaker 1: What a year, so many things happened that year, I don't know, it's, it was just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm telling you, it was, that's why when people ask I don't know whether it was '62 [1962], '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: And, and, and Medgar Evers is shot in the spring. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The, the, the March on Washington in the middle of, of summer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Had the March on Washington, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --did you all go? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Jamelle [Jamelle Rackley-Riley] went. Speaker 2: Jamelle went, all of us couldn't-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --go. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I stayed because, you know, I'm running, we sent--we sent a whole pile, a pile of us went and a pile of us had to stay because, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because you had things to do, yeah. Speaker 2: --we were not gonna let up-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --on, on what was going on. So I stayed and Jamelle went, uh-huh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That September the church, the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] was bombed in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And it was like-- Speaker 2: Things were picking up everywhere, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, and hundreds of people arrested in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you can't, you can't stop because-- Speaker 1: They had a-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --school strike. Speaker 2: And in our little place if you stop it, you might have to fire up all over again, (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: That's hard to-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. And, and the momentum of all the other things really had a, quote, positive effect because it's in the paper, you know, things are in, so all of a sudden everyone feels a part of the movement. Speaker 1: You're right, I-- Speaker 2: And people erroneously think it's all one movement but it is individual. You know, people, it's so, I hope they will realize that the movement was truly spontaneous, it might have taken organization and leadership and all of that but I'm saying it came from the spirit and the needs of the people. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] didn't start the movement in Montgomery [Alabama], he was just a wonderful, articulate, beautiful person who could-- Speaker 1: Orchestrate some things and he could (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and, and coordinate-- Speaker 1: --and get the national attention. Speaker 2: --and get a, uh-huh, but they were all there. And, and the movement truly grew out of the individual sacrifices of hundreds and hundreds of people whose names we'll never even know. And losing, losing a job if you are a, a cook or a maid is just as important as losing a job if you are a teacher, if your family depends on this mother's income to help, you know, run the family. Story_ID: 373176 Speaker 1: So in Orangeburg [South Carolina] for instance, I was black, with, with Cecil's [Cecil J. Williams] pictures, had me reading, reading that letter in all the papers, the, the black papers Afro-American [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] and the school teacher fired. The man in New York [New York], oh, what's the man's name who was the union person for the teachers in-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): A. Philip Randolph. Speaker 1: Unh-uh. He, he's white and he was the coordinator-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --of the, Shank [ph.]. Speaker 2: Albert Shanker? Is that-- Speaker 1: Something like that, I think it was he. Speaker 2: I think it was Albert Shanker. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He, he saw it, asked me to come to a big rally they were having. And the whole thing, the big, yeah, they're gonna feature this school teacher in south, in South Carolina, fired teacher, you know. And James Baldwin was gonna be there. So I was so delighted that I was gonna get to be, (laughter) to be on a program with James Baldwin. And we decided, I would not even have gone there, you know, we didn't do anything for pleasure in those days, but we figured it would bring publicity to our movement and it would just help the cause. Some people also had the idea that, oh, they're just looking for whatever, you know, fame or, it was nothing famous about it. But we did seek publicity not because we wanted to be publicized but because we wanted the story publicized, you know, we wanted the movement (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, did, did you get support from some of the entertainers? I know, Harry Belafonte and Lena Horne and others went to-- Speaker 1: (Shakes head). Speaker 2: --to the March on Washington. In, in Dayton [Ohio]-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, they went, um-hm. Speaker 2: --in the story I just investigated-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --in the summer of '63 [1963] when the paper blasted CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] for, for marching in downtown Dayton and sitting in this big department store-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Mahalia Jackson came to town-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and raised money-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --you know, for, for, for CORE. And they-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --I mean, did, did anybody step up-- Speaker 1: This is later, was it? Speaker 2: No, this is '63 [1963], same year-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay, uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 2: --sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 1: Yeah, '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Orangeburg [South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he came but he, he came on a-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: He did, he came on a, on a trip, Martin Luther King came. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we asked him to come 'cause everybody was willing, you know, if they were passing through or near or something, so he came, and came on the Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] campus and, you know, did a speech and a rally and then came to our church [Trinity Methodist Church, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. It was just a, the church couldn't hold, you know, people were all, (laughter) everywhere 'cause he was, so it was just so wonderful to have him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, because his, he was at the, almost at the peak of fame then with the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with the speech at the March on Washington, he was, I mean, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and he was, he was on a trip anyway, I mean, he was, he was coming. See they had to pool their funds and they had to, you know, they had to, everybody had to look out for money and funds and, you know, like that. But he was, he was, that was really gracious of him, you know, to come, not that it was all that far but I can't remember whether he was on his way to, through Columbia [South Carolina] or going on up to North Carolina where but he came and was with us for two different occasions. And, of course, that gave publicity to every- anything that gave publicity and, you know, drew people to the movement and kept us in the, in the attention of the people. So that, and so, so you didn't, when the March on Washington came as I'm saying we, no, everybody was not gonna close shop and go, you know, we were gonna still have pickets and still go to jail and all while they were marching, so we about, you know, a group went but the rest of us stayed too. Story_ID: 373177 Speaker 1: Now we're in the fall now, I guess, of '63 [1963], I guess, right? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: 'Cause we were talking about your husband [Larney Rackley] going to, not being able to start school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went on to school but-- Speaker 1: --and going to FMA [sic. Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 2: --that summer when he went down, that's the summer that I went to that, I remember that he was gone and I went to Charleston [South Carolina] and went to jail that time, I know, went to that prison farm and everything, all that was that summer, so then we still came back and, and I believe when we came that was the big fall, that must have been the big fall when we had the huge demonstration downtown and ended up in the state penitentiary. So that must have happened after that. You know, so I don't (unclear) that was '63 [1963], that might have been in the-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It was probably in '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Yeah, the fall of '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That he, and, and, and that was probably the biggest rally that we had had because we had so many adults in it also, you know. And that was very, very risky and brave of them 'cause sometimes that meant, see preachers weren't so vulnerable because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had a church, yeah. Speaker 2: --they preach at Baptist churches. There were lots of barbers, the black barbers, you know, weren't so vulnerable, they were vulnerable 'cause they could be hurt and all that but if you had, if you're a black businessman, it might not be so bad because you might have your shop or your store or your service station in an area where most of your clients and customers are black. But teachers, there were so many other jobs that were just, you could be picked off and knocked off in, in a minute. And sometimes husbands and wives were teachers, you know, and they were both gone. So it took lots of courage, everybody who, whatever they did they were vulnerable. But, but when we came back then we had that big rally, I think that in '63 [1963]. And shortly after that the thing was passed. What happened, what caused us (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) It was in '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: --in the, but that was the fall wasn't it? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, so then you see it must have been (unclear). Anyway-- Speaker 1: So what, well, well let's, let's go over that in detail. The thing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was passed, what-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: --what are we saying about this? Speaker 2: I'm saying the civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The civil rights bill. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah, '60 [sic. 1964]. Speaker 2: And so now we already had, we already have our list of students signed up to integrate the schools and, and we, I, I, I don't say we stopped the movement but I certainly felt that we were free then, that I was free (laughter) to move on because the civil rights bill was passed and integration was the law of the land-- Speaker 1: Now, how did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and all we had to do-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --is get--um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 2: Now did you feel now, we haven't mentioned Strom Thurmond and I mean did, and I don't know what, I mean, the, the politicians of South Carolina, how do you, I know that they were, you know, spitting out segregation at the time and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Venom, yes, um-hm. Speaker 2: --but how did you feel about the, the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration and, and was, was there any positive interaction with the federal government in terms of-- Speaker 1: Yes, but this was mostly handled by people like Matthew [Matthew Perry] and Reverend Newman, I. DeQuincey Newman, anybody who was going up the political line to make deals or to negotiate or anything. We, we were betting on Matthew before the [U.S.] Supreme Court or Matthew with helping Thurgood Marshall with briefs 'cause they worked, you know, they all worked together. And for whatever, we had hundreds and hundreds of cases, just hundreds of cases. And so (laughter) it was, you know, back to moving these things forward and we knew these kids who were now going to school had to be sure that the people who had signed up two or three years before were still gonna stay on the list. Lurma [Lurma Rackley] for instance, was one of the plaintiffs to integrate the schools now that it's the law of the land. Story_ID: 373178 Speaker 1: But I went then and took a job, you know, our marriage was ending, my husband [Larney Rackley] was down and I had, I'm, he had already then went down there [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College, Tallahassee, Florida], I guess, however many months or a year or whatever it was. So I took a job at Norfolk State College [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], I think, I must have stayed there a year. Speaker 2: In Norfolk, Virginia, so, so-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you, you both moved? Did, did Lurma [Lurma Rackley] move with you? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yes. She and I went to Norfolk much to her, now that was painful for her because she had to leave the opportunity to now go--for which she had given so much. She had paid such a price and now she couldn't get to go to, with the other. No matter, none, nothing that they did in Orangeburg [South Carolina] could have been mean enough to her (laughter) to take away the joy, you know, the triumphant joy of, okay, now we're here 'cause they weren't expecting the people to be syrupy and, you know, nice and all of that. But she had to, when we went to Norfolk, she chose, and we thought she should, to integrate, you know, to go, it was open, it was integrated, you could just go walk in a school, right. And so at Norfolk she went to a white high school there but they didn't want blacks either and where integration was, you know, just hardly visible and she was alone. She didn't have any friends, she, she wasn't sharing it with people she had, you know, picketed and marched with and gone to jail with or anything and she was just alone in this strange town in very, very hostile school situation. And that was hard, that was, that was very hard. Speaker 2: Okay. But, you, you-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --(unclear), okay. Well, go ahead. Speaker 1: I was just gonna say and sometimes she doesn't let me forget that (laughter). Speaker 2: I know, right. Speaker 1: For taking her, taking her out of Orangeburg, she'll say, you know, she doesn't mind, she, our doing what we did but she just didn't want us to leave Orangeburg at that time. Story_ID: 373179 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) I have some historic information here guys that that big march you were talking about, Cecil [Cecil J. Williams] has it listed as August, 1963 when everybody went downtown in this huge-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So that's almost the same time as the March on Washington (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Came right after. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I guess-- Speaker 1: Right after, pretty much (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) I guess right after. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Right. That's when a lot of people made, in Dayton [Ohio] they made that, CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] made it's big move on Rike's [Rike-Kumler Company] the same time, they went down, they all got-- Speaker 2: August '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: They went down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) He's building on (unclear). Speaker 1: --in a rain storm and ended up like, because it rained they couldn't march outside so they took the signs inside the store-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and got arrested, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --I mean it was, really-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --a spur of the moment-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --kind of thing. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But a lot of, yeah, when you read, hear the history of that period, you know, all the, there's a, there is just a, there's definitely a movement going on and the people, individual, acts of individual courage all over the country-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --are just, are just popping up and people are doing things. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It's something. Speaker 2: And there were people who, there, there's an amazing thing that also is going on that I have not yet been able to get my heart able to understand it or be forgiving or whatever that is, and I want to be, but in every town in every situation there were some white people who were not breathing fire-and-brimstone and who even kind of felt that these causes and protests were justifiable but they didn't do anything. And I find it harder to be forgiving of the ones who were not mean and nasty and could easily, who already knew they could go to school and sit their children to go to school and sit beside black children with impunity for not doing anything, for not making any effort. In Orangeburg [South Carolina], there was nobody. I always felt that the superintendent of that school, of our schools was a pretty good man, I used to feel that there was a lot of help just in education. So I, I felt the educated people weren't as foolish as ignorant, snuff spitting or hayseed, you know, rednecks out in the country somewhere. But he always treated me with respect, when I walked into his office he would rise, "Miss Rackley [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell]," so and so and, and our conversation was like just two people probably sitting, I, I told him I, I, I didn't know what the letter meant, I couldn't, couldn't understand silence, couldn't interpret silence and he smiled and said well, you know, so and so and so and so. And, you know, we, he, and when I said, "Well I'm not teaching those people," and he was, he understood that and went on and gave me the pass and it was all over. So I, I could, I felt that he was kindly and I, I may be wrong, he's dead now, I may be wrong but I really think he framed that letter, that letter was very, very cleverly written, it was exactly what we needed, it meant that I was fired for exercising my rights, that's exactly what he said, that's why he was firing me. And but still if, if he, if I'm right in thinking that's what he did in, in wording it that way-- Speaker 1: So you're saying you think he worded it that way on purpose to make sure it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes-- Speaker 1: --in violation of the-- Speaker 2: --yes. Speaker 1: --of the order. Speaker 2: But I still blame him for not, he was in a position where he could have done something, he was the superintendent of the schools, so he could have said something. You see what I'm saying (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Could have taken a courageous stance-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in public? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. And that's the thing that I don't, it couldn't have been any harder for him, I can't see that it could, should have been any harder for him to do something than it was for Lurma [Lurma Rackley] to say I'm not gonna stop picketing even if they send me to reform school for seven years. You know, I, I just can't, I can't, I can't, I can't seem to get that. I wanna get that straight before I die 'cause I don't wanna be (laughter) disliking those people but I just can't, I can't understand the nice ones, I can understand the mean ones they, they were so mixed up and so crazy and so prejudiced and so filled with evil and hatred that's another thing but I'm talking about the people who were sane and educated and calm and all that. Story_ID: 373180 Speaker 1: I don't think, I hope and pray, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] prayed, God, please let us, please let them learn to, to love, he was talking about white people, God, please let them learn to love before we learn to hate because we, in the South had really a movement where people were controlling their anger, you know, and themselves. The, the, the vicious stuff started in the North, you know, after his death. But we, we were, we were really believing that our movement was Christian, was good for everybody, you know, we were not hurting anybody, we didn't. And he said, let, please let them learn to love before we learn to hate. And I hope, I hope that we can return to a sense of love and not feel that we can, you know, kill and fight. And I, I see so much of that in the country today, the, the viciousness. And I don't know how much spirit we have for being willing to sacrifice ourselves. Every time Martin Luther King went out, he was risking his life. Every time I went out I was risking, I, I, I was risking my life maybe and I, because--surely, I guess. But in my heart I was praying every time I had children on a picket line that that I would get killed or hurt and not one of them. I just did not want anybody, you know, any of these kids walking out, they're just kids right out of school, rushing down getting their things and, you know, going down. They could easily have, and they knew that. You know, we talked about all of that before, but, but they were willing to do that. That took, and those children, we have not got all of them together again but I have not found a child who was not a strong adult. There is something in the core (laughter) it seems to me of their character. They, they seem to be generous people, they give to causes, you know, they are mothers and fathers and the, but they are dedicated and they attach themselves still to humanitarian concerns. It's just, it's just something. Anywhere we go, anywhere we meet them, they're in, they're in work that is giving and, and serving. Story_ID: 373181 Speaker 1: And I, I don't want that to change for black people in this country. I really, really hope that we, that we can hold on to the lessons and the courage. I'm so pleased that you're doing this kind of thing. When I was young, I was aware of the state slave narratives and that meant a lot to me as a student to go back (unclear). And I hope now that somehow students will be able to go back and see these efforts that people made who were just common, common people. Nobody was sitting around saying (laughter) this is some glorious thing we're going to do, they were just people, you know, just ordinary people stepping up to the plate to do something that needed to be done in spite of whatever the cost might be. And not even keeping it in mind all the time that I'm gonna die for this, that wasn't even the point, you know, I'm just gonna stick with this until something, something good happens until we win our, our battles. And they, and, and they did not mean to give up and they just were willing to pay the price. I don't know if we have a lot of that, a cause worth, that we, that we can identify and work toward. When I was invited to New York [New York] this Al Shank, Shanker [Albert Shanker] was it, in his, in his introduction said that when he was reading the papers of, of what was happening in Orangeburg [South Carolina] and other places in the South, he was feeling sad that his children and the children in New York didn't have that, an opportunity to dedicate themselves nobly to a concern. It was, it, it was really, it was really a good time. I've gone back to Orangeburg to speak, you know, twenty years later, or thirty years later, and, and we have looked at the children, and they were fine children to start with, I said we were in a little college town and all that but they were, they have all just done well inside, you know, they have, they have, they are doing things that you could be pleased with. And I don't think that the movement hurt, I don't think it hurt any of the children. I can't speak for other towns, I'm talking about the Orangeburg Movement, I think that it was a rich experience for growth, development, and character building and it made them aware of the situations, the political situation and the willingness to do something about it. Story_ID: 373182 Speaker 1: I just want, you know, I know when I, when I read the histories of those days, I, I wonder how people, I mean, there, there is such, you know, power in those moments that I, I just wanted to know how, how did you feel when you went to Norfolk [Virginia] and, and had to leave all that? I mean, did you, I mean, how did you feel (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. I had to go because I had a child already in college, Jamelle [Jamelle Rackley-Riley] went to college at sixteen, she was at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] and Lurma [Lurma Rackley] was coming right up behind her so I went to Norfolk State College [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. And, and a man, G.W.C. Brown actually was one of the founders of Norfolk, it was a new, relatively young college at that time. And Dr. Brown had retired already and had a side, I call it a side hustle, he had already organized something called the tidewater something, something, something, civic, the tidewater civic blip, blip, blop. And what it did was teach people to raise hell against, you know, social conditions and concerns, go up against city hall and all that kind of thing. And when I applied, you know, you have to say were you arrested, do, do, do you have any, whatever they ask on things. And I always had to say yes, all of the rest of my life, I have to say yes because I still don't know whether all my convictions, I don't know whatever happened to them 'cause I never did anything about them, you know, I mean, they were all left and sometimes they were hundreds of people and sometimes it was just me alone. So they'll say it was on (unclear) and I say I don't know, I'll just, but I'm allowed to put out there civil rights, you know, demonstrations. I've never got any comeback but I always say yes, as far as I know, I have been indicted and (laughter) so and so, so I, I don't know what all, I don't know the differences in the terms or anything. But when I went to Norfolk, I, all that was on my record and, and Dr. Brown evidently with his friend who was the president of the college must have said hm, so this lady's coming. So he (laughter) met me practically at the door and hustled me right on in to his thing for civic concern or what Tidewater whatever, whatever. And so the whole time I was there, I was going before the, going to city hall and the board of education. And, and Dr. Brown then must have been about as old as water (laughter) and he had so much spirit and he had a great group and there were all kinds of things. This, this now is at a different level, this is people maybe not getting services that should have been available to them but they don't know, you know, what, how to get this done. And maybe integrating the communities that you can't buy houses in certain areas and all that kind of stuff, so that's what we were doing. And he also had (laughter) me enrolled in, I don't say have me, but he would let me know if this was something to be done. I taught illiterates, there were still, you know, lots of adults who could not read and write and I did things like that. I was not, I did, we did, as I said go to city hall and all but I went as a faculty member with Dr. Brown or representing this Tidewater committee and it was nice and I said I had Lurma there. I married again (laughter) and that took up some time. Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 373183 Speaker 1: So how long were you in Norfolk [Virginia] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: Four years, uh-huh. When I left Norfolk [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], Lurma [Lurma Rackley] had already come to college, she was here at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] in-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Atlanta [Georgia], um-hm. Speaker 1: So where did you go after Norfolk, Virginia? Speaker 2: I came here. Speaker 1: Okay, to Atlanta (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I left, no, no, I went to, I went to-- Speaker 1: So, I think you said-- Speaker 2: --you went to Boston [Massachusetts], right, or, or-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Springfield [Massachusetts] Speaker 2: I went to Springfield, Massachusetts (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Massachusetts, okay. Speaker 2: And stayed there only two years because I came down to Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] and began my studies for the Ph.D. Story_ID: 373184 Speaker 1: Yeah, you had some reflections on the differences in the movement in the North and in the South. Speaker 2: Yes. It's, it's my opinion that there was a thread of, a constant thread that was woven through the movement in the South that might have been different from the influences and the threads that made up the warp of the, of the movement in the North. The students, the children, and the parents were more willing to sacrifice, they were more committed to Christian concerns, whatever people wanna call those concerns, giving, and, and denial, you know, submission. And so we, we were willing to move out on love, it didn't sound silly to us because we (laughter) believed in Christian love. And I, I, I just happened to be steeped in Methodism I said we had that commission on Christian social concerns. And it was, you know, it seemed to me empirical and, and objective, you know, we weren't sitting around clapping hands and getting into any kind of ecstasy over it, we sat down and talked about what the concerns were and then what are you supposed to do, what can you do about them? And you found something you could do and then you did it. Maybe it was just that we needed something at the church where all the kids could come and have recreation or something but whatever it was, that's what you, you found something then you got some more people to work with you and that's what you did. So I was, I was director of the youth program for the Methodist Youth Fellowship [United Methodist Youth Fellowship] at the church for a while and then put it on a state level. You know, you just, you worked that's just kind of what you did. And it was always something for someone else and not for self, I'm not saying you didn't, because people made money and did well in the South too but I, it was easy to find a whole bunch of people who did things, who gave to charitable causes and connected themselves with those causes and worked and, you know, contributed and, it just was kind of the way they lived. And so the children who, and the adults who participated in the movement seemed ideally suited for the kind of movement that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] so beautifully articulated to the, you know, to the world. He didn't make it up. I think he came up in the same kind of home I came up in (laughter) and that's just the way we felt, he was well educated and could articulate it. But I, that wasn't a ploy, you know, he really was not putting on an act. He believed these things and so he could be inspired by Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi] as was I. You know, you read the books and you read the Bible and it was not a matter of going around quoting bible verses, it was seeing Jesus as a model for, an exemplar for your life, you know, you, are you willing to give yourself so that others can be better off, (unclear) you know, you may not have to give your life, you can just give yourself. I think often they're saying something about giving, I would die for something, you know, I wouldn't, I don't think we, it's not dying for something, it's living for something, how much are you willing to live for, that might be much harder than dying for something. And can you give up gain in order to live to help someone just one, just one other person it doesn't have to be, everybody isn't gonna get to be spectacular or well known. Story_ID: 373185 Speaker 1: Bonds, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, Julian Bond, has a little poem, I thought it was so, so funny. He was speaking at our school and he, I introduced him, I thought (unclear) he said much too flowery and he said well he thought he should try to rise to the occasion, he did this poem and this poem was, "See, that girl shake that thing, we can't all be Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]" (Laughter) And I think it's just so wonderful. So maybe your thing is shaking that thing, you know. Whatever it is that you can do (laughter) if you do that well and can do it for the benefit of, of someone (laughter) else for, for, for a cause and I think that we had, I think that that was just a perfect time in the South for us to kind of, the, the message and the need fit the responses and the understandings and the sympathies of the people. And some of us were scared and some of us were tired all but we all understood the need to, you know, just go on and do it. And I think it was a great opportunity in time for, for that. Now, I don't think that we accomplished a whole lot as soon as we sort of, as someone said, you know, as soon we win a battle a, a new war has started, (laughter) it's a new game, all that. New everything, new voting problems, new what, so you, you're always in the dynamics of our culture, given the hate that's endemic and the, the history of suppression and greed, that's the world we live in so we're gonna face us and we can't say, I worry when I hear students, when I say students I'm talking about grown people now who are getting their degrees and are condemning some of the things that went on, to some of the gains of the movement saying they are here going to jail and getting thrown out of buildings to sit at a lunch counter, sitting at a lunch counter doesn't mean it, it meant everything, it means a whole lot when you can't sit at one, you know, (laughter). So, you, you need to be able to sit at the lunch counter and also work at the lunch counter and also whatever, you need to be able to do what every other person has a, a right to do. You can't have, you can't let your rights be taken away from you and say I'm just gonna worry about being a millionaire or whatever, whatever they think would have been the thing to be. So those things were necessary. We needed to, we shouldn't have schools closed against a whole race of people, on the, on the, just because they're a different race. They can't do that. And we have to have a country and a world that's not like that. And so now we have many, many, many, many, many other, other battles to fight but it doesn't, we can't negate that time and that cause and those issues. And I think we should honor the people who, and certainly recognize the efforts they made and the contributions they made to the world that they built up at that point. Now it's a messy world and getting worse it seems all the time Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but that's for somebody else to-- Speaker 2: Now we-- Speaker 1: --fix. Story_ID: 373186 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the Ph.D. and ask you like what, what was your dissertation about and, and why did you decide to get a Ph.D. and-- Speaker 2: I was in, I was in, living then in Springfield, Massachusetts, my husband [Charles DeJournette] at that time had been called there as director of the community action program, in those days you had a community action program. And once again he also, he was a, his father was a doctor so he was the son of a doctor and he was a teacher, he was a teacher, we met in New York [New York] when I went up to the, to speak at this rally (laughter) for, you know, that that that was, as the, as the fired school teacher. Speaker 1: Albert Shanker's, (unclear) yeah-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --national teachers association [United Federation of Teachers]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, so he too was, you know, of that philosophy of giving and that kind of social conscious thing. But anyway he got the job as director of the community action program in Springfield, Massachusetts. And he was teaching and he left New York and came down to Virginia to teach so that we could be together and we married and then he took that job. And I worked at Springfield at American International College [Springfield, Massachusetts] directing the black student house, which was supposed to offer cultural and, and social programs for the students and to anybody else who could benefit. And I became aware of an opportunity to come down and study and applied for a, a fellowship or something that I did not get, I'm trying to think which one it was, one of those, you know, that flies by the desks of professors. This might have, I can't remember which one it was but there might have been twelve being offered or ten being offered in the, that year and I did not get it but in order to apply I had to say where I would like to study and all of that. And I looked at the schools, I wanted to study I thought then in concerns that had to do with black and white literature, of black and European literatures. I wanted to look at black stuff that we weren't even studying when I was in school but I didn't, I wasn't looking for black studies and so I wanted to go to some place like Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or somewhere where there was a black community but a lot of money to support my (laughter) studies and, and books at a library, you know, and all the things that I would need. And I wanted to do it just for myself and I wasn't trying to get a job anywhere or anything. And I didn't get the fellowship but I had already put out my information. And Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] was interested, I came down and interviewed at Emory and they were very interested in me. And when I, they, they kept, you know, calling and I said well I, I finally answered, said well I, I didn't pursue because I don't have, you know, I didn't get the fellowship or grant or whatever it was that I was, for which I was applying. And they said, "Oh, we can help with the, with the grant." And so I was encouraged to come and I did and there was, there were two conditions I wanted at the school, I wanted the school to, maybe it's one (unclear), I wanted the school to be near a vibrant black community, I didn't care what the school was so much but I wanted to have a ground, you know, an, an environment where, so I could have gone to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] because Harlem [New York, New York] would have been right there, and I could have gone to Howard[AB1] [sic. Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] would have been right there. And I could have come to Atlanta [Georgia], I thought Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University] because Atlanta (laughter) would be right there but Atlanta University didn't have the, the doc, the Ph.D. offering in a field that I could, you know, arrange-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for, to, to fit what I wanted. Now I wasn't looking for a job, I was, my, my baby finished college before I came (laughter) to Atlanta, Lurma [Lurma Rackley] was my baby. So I was for the first time in my adult life what could be called a free woman, (laughter) you know. And so I felt that I could do anything I wanted to do. And so when they said, they encouraged me, I accepted the, the fellowship and came down and enjoyed every minute of it. Was able to do all the reading (laughter). Story_ID: 373187 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was your dissertation about? Speaker 2: I did, I chose communications in the black community and I chose Atlanta [Georgia] where we had thriving black newspapers and had had, you know, they, they don't, don't live so long (laughter) but you have a history and of the Daily World, the Atlanta Daily World had lasted all of those years, it was just wonderful. So I, it was black controlled media because I also included the radio station, we had WERD [WERD Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] which seems to be the first black controlled radio station in the world. And these people who had founded these things were right here, you know, walking around (laughter) everyday, it was wide open for research and for interest. I did it mostly in, in oral history, you know, with interviews and got, the data was raw, (laughter) you know. It was a very, very, very interesting and pleasant experience. And as I said I was free, I wasn't trying to meet any kind of deadlines and get back to a job or anything (laughter). Story_ID: 373188 Speaker 1: So did you teach at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] then after you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, you know, you do when you're-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --in school. So I, I was in the ILA which was the Institute of the Liberal Arts [sic. Institute for the Liberal Arts]. A wonderful program at Emory that still exists. And my professor and I became associates. We'd, we would team teach classes, we worked together at, at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and at Emory we offered classes. And then, of course, I had classes of my own. And then a friend, Lurma [Lurma Rackley] had finished at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and a teacher who was very nice to my daughter when she was down here in school, I became friends, I was always grateful to her because she was so nice to Lurma but she came over to tell me that they needed someone at Clark and the president had asked her to come over and see if I could recommend someone, you know, from the students passing through. And he, he said, "Tell Lurma's mother to, (laughter) to look out for us." So he, so I tried to offer someone and when she went back to tell him he said, "Well why can't, why don't we get Lurma's mother" (laughter). And I, I thought that, you know, maybe I shouldn't do that but he told me that with my history I could not stay (laughter) at Emory, I needed to come to Clark where I was needed and he put all that same spiel (laughter) that I have practically just given and, and I fell for it (laughter) and, and came over to Clark and stayed there then for, I guess, twenty years or I have, I finished my degree in '73 [1973] and I retired from Clark in '90 [1990], was it '93 [1993]? I guess, it was '93 [1993]. Story_ID: 373189 Speaker 1: So you took (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For a while I had joint, a joint appoint, I was working at both schools-- Speaker 1: And you taught basically, what, what did, what was taught? Speaker 2: When I got, well it was in American studies, my degree (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) American studies, okay. Speaker 2: --is American studies and really concentrating in literature and history. But when I came to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] it was to the English department that I was assigned. So I, just because of the situation I was more in literature and autobiography and biography and, you know, and that, it was very, a very good field and I enjoyed my work there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did you concentrate on the 20th century or-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: So people that you, some people did you actually know the people that you were-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --(laughter) yes, uh-huh, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the ones, I even knew some as a child, you know, a whole lot of people, like all of this NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] working of, at, at, at Clark and Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] I was fortunate enough to bring five, five Ph.D. students through before I left in the short time that I was, because I stayed, I kept, you know, I had a kind of, what do you call it? Adjunct appointment with the, the students I had started, I brought them through. So one, I'm so proud of one student who is Barbara Woods [Barbara A. Woods] who did her dissertation on a South Carolina woman, Modjeska Simkins [Modjeska Monteith Simkins], from Columbia [South Carolina] who started, who was born, you know, somewhere before the turn of the century and was a young woman, I guess, right at the early 1900s and all of this early efforts to do NAACP in South Carolina and when black people had, when they had tuberculosis drives and black people decided, you know, they needed to be in on it too. But they, those things became health things, or vaccinations things, whatever they did, black people had to have, had to insist on having a role in that, you know, and get those services out to those segregated schools right. And that gave a platform and a forum for meetings and associating so they, they became warriors, you know, for black action (laughter) for action to help the black community, do you see what I'm saying (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So on the pretense, on, on the, well using the health issue they were able to talk politics too and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I'm saying-- Speaker 1: --and, um-hm. Speaker 2: --they were getting together, they were, they weren't even pretending but I'm saying they were getting together and so then they would say well this is not right and this is not right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So all the issues were coming, coming out. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And so Modjeska was, you know, in this women's movement, they like to say that black men were always in the front and, you know, (unclear) but Modjeska was always the, you know, even when this Dr. Brown [G.W.C. Brown] had me, had me right away the secretary of this tidewater thing, you know, in Norfolk [Virginia]. So anyway Modjeska was the-- Speaker 1: What her last name, Modjeska-- Speaker 2: Modjeska Simkins. Speaker 1: Simkins, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 373190 Speaker 1: And she [Modjeska Monteith Simkins] was a secretary and, you know, in our, it's hard to follow organizations and do research on organizations because when the secretary stops being secretary, very often the club may end or it may pick up again later but the records are home in somebody's trunk or, you know, in, if you're doing something in a Catholic church for instance, you can go back as (laughter) long as Catholicism existed and you have records that you can follow. But in things going on in black churches, it's very hard to-- Speaker 2: It is (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, find the, find authentication. And you can't go to newspapers, very often there's no trail. And if you do find a trail, it's not, it's not authentic and it can't be believed, you know, because it's, it's not a black paper in the first place, you know, it's--so anyway-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's hard to tell our story. There's, there's a lot of barriers to it. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But she was the secretary so she had all the raw data. And every organization that came through she was in everything (laughter) all the way up. And this, this student [Barbara A. Woods], this particular student had thought she might want to do something on Ida Wells Barnett [Ida B. Wells] and I said that, you know, Ida Wells Barnett has been done, and done over again and then she started her own autobiography, her daughter finished it, there's, no, her, her, her autobiography and her daughter finished it when she died, so we can just kind of let her rest and go find someone who needs to be investigated. Plus, most of the students are struggling by the time they get at the dissertation level, they need to go back to work and everything. So then she was gonna have to leave and travel up in Chicago [Illinois] and at least to Memphis [Tennessee] and places like that, she was a South Carolina girl. I said why don't go home to your mama and go see Modjeska Simkins (laughter) and knock on her doors (unclear). And she did and, of course, Modjeska who was then maybe as old as I am now, was delighted to have the attention and (unclear). And she said when she walked in that place papers, like in this house, papers and books and, you know, everything, just programs and minutes and (laughter) things were everywhere. It was mind-boggling but she was able to get all that together and did a marvelous dissertation looking at early, we can call them, we could call them if you wanted to, civil rights organizations, you know, but early things that black people were doing that affected the, the state and the well-being of black people. But they were-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --all kinds of funded programs as I'm saying like-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --vaccinations and-- Story_ID: 373191 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this we, we always ask this question as, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently, if you had to do it again? Speaker 2: I guess, I don't know what it is but I don't look back with that in mind anyway because I'm quite well aware (laughter) there's nothing, there's nothing I can do about it and if I did that differently some other thing would have changed over which I would have no control, and so I, I don't, I don't know, I, for instance, you know, I wouldn't say well I would have stayed in Orangeburg [South Carolina] or I would have done, you know, I would have studied something, I don't know how to think like that. Story_ID: 373192 Speaker 1: Another thing we always ask is that at this point what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't know. I, I think if I wanted to advise youth and people who now are looking at their lives and the, if they're free to--I was, I often had occasions when I could decide that this is what I'm going to do. Sometimes we're so embroiled, you can't even make those decisions, you know, you find yourself, you're catapulted into a situation where you have to operate and change and it may be something very nice that you are able to do. But very often I was able to say I can do this or I will do this, I've decided, I could actually decide that I'm gonna do this and do it. But I, I would just tell any and every one the greatest joy in living is giving. And if you can find something that you can do for--I'm not even going to say others--another, if you can find something that you can do that can be meaningful, it can be so small a thing then the other people will never know anything about it, but if you can give, it is just so rewarding. And it doesn't matter how difficult it is or how long it takes to get it, you know, finished, it's just a nice way to spend your time-- Story_ID: 373193 Speaker 1: I'm now, I'll soon be eighty and in my dotage, I adopted a little boy. And then his situation, his mother's situation got worse and I adopted his little baby brother. And so (unclear) over here in my senility practically, I am rearing very young boys (laughter) teenage children. And this had, I think the, some of my understanding and memories of all of that, you know, that's now almost like a finished phase the things that we are talking about because I have been catapulted to concerns with drugs and sex and, you know, all the, I don't mean that they are involved in that but the, the world-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --the world that I'm concerned about now is a world that is frightening to me, much more frightening than, than I was aware that segregation was, you know, 'cause then like I said we didn't have lynchings in my town or anything. But now I am, and I'm wondering about my ability, you know, my awareness, if I'm capable even of giving them the things they need. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, but one is now nineteen already, it may be too late to wonder, and the other is, just turned fourteen yesterday. Story_ID: 373194 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you-- Speaker 2: I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that we need to-- Speaker 2: --one thing I, I just, I think maybe in answer to another question that you asked, I didn't say and I do want to say that I think we should be about the business of doing exactly what you're doing today, we should be about the business of recording and researching all, just so many things that are going to be lost pretty soon if we do not get them somehow recorded and people who have made, they don't have to be earth shattering gains but just a life that has been spent in something. Students who are doing, students who are just doing master's [degree] theses could pick up a person, some local person, and find a worthwhile paper there that would be a part of history, you know, that would add to our store. My daughter, Lurma [Lurma Rackley] and I'll have to use personal references over cause a, is really a graduate in communications and, and print media but she met a man in, in Washington [D.C.] and interviewed him and now has written a book, he, she taped and now she has done a book on him. He was, he was talking for a while, she did a lot of his talking and she put it all together and it is a very, very good thing. His name is Petey Greene and the book is 'Laugh If You Like, Ain't a Damn Thing Funny' ['Laugh If You Like, Ain't a Damn Thing Funny: The Life Story of Ralph "Petey" Greene as told to Lurma Rackley,' Lurma Rackley]. And it chronicles his life from, from really, really, really unlikely beginnings, I guess, almost unsavory beginnings to distinction in and, and respect in Washington, someone who needed to be lifted up. But it's his, it's the courage, you know, and the life and following that alone could be inspiring for, for others. So there are just so, so many instances like that when we could be making a contribution. If you, if you don't wanna march and you don't wanna sing, and you don't wanna shake that thing (laughter) then there are other things that you can do. And for students, just, just I'm just asking that they don't go out and do the same old tired things, which have, which have been well done, you know, some of 'em have been well done. So we don't need, we can't improve on those, we can go on to something else. Story_ID: 373195 Speaker 1: The last question we ask is similar to legacy but a little bit different. And, and that is, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I guess, as a mother. I think that was, I, I guess, that's what I've always been. I think that was the greatest thing that ever happened to me and, and I guess everything in the world that I ever did was because I was, well, first it was what mother [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] did to me (laughter) so a whole lot of that was beyond my control as I said. So we went on and performed as she made us perform. But everything else when, when the children came, when the first baby came that was just a whole, a transforming, it was just so marvelous a thing. And I have lived a full life, I'll be eighty in March, and I have married four times, and moved, I've lived in a whole lot of different places, and I don't, and it never seemed zig-zaggy to me or anything, everything I've done seemed so straight lined to me and clear (laughter) because I was always clear about what I was doing it seemed to me. I don't think it was clear to anybody else but it all seemed, for instance, even the involvement in the, in the movement that I'm sure worried my mother almost to death but--she was worried about me 'cause I'm her daughter. But it seemed to me I had to do that for my children, it just seem, you know, it, so I guess, I guess I think of myself as a mother. And I don't know that I would do anything that I thought was harmful to my children or would, I would, you know, I might would do it and not know that I'm doing it that would make, even now the young boys, the little boys disrespect me or lose faith in me or anything that I would think could hurt them, you know. And I, I wanna think I'm pretty solid with the, with the girls now (laughter) they're, they're grown and that I'm in but I have grandchildren and great-grandchildren and I, I think that that's, that's, you know, enough. I think that family is so, I, I don't know if we can get to society if we haven't got family nailed down, you know. Which might be one of our (unclear) one of our problems. We might-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --have to go back and look at that you know, and some of that firmness. Story_ID: 373196 Speaker 1: You know, 'cause when I talk about mother, some people think that she's just so, what a strange mother and how she made us call her Mrs. Blackwell [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] in school and, you know, all the things we just had to do, you couldn't say, you could not say no, you could not say I can't, you had to do what you were told too and you had to do it well. If you made, my brother sent a report home from school and he had, he was in college, he had gone away to [U.S. military] service out of college, so he came back after he was out of service and (laughter) was at South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] finishing his college degree and they were giving numerical grades, he was brilliant. And so his grades were 100 [percent], 99 [percent], 100 [percent], just, just ridiculously good grades. But mother had been very disappointed that he had stayed out of school so long. And so he wrote to me, I'm at mother's, he wrote to me and said, "I'm enclosing my grades, tell mother I'm sorry they couldn't be better." Now they were really just excellent. So (laughter) mother was, we were in the kitchen, mother was cooking or at the sink or something, and I said, "Mother here are Atree's [ph.] grades, he said tell you he's sorry they couldn't be better." She looked at them, I told you she had kind of gray snapping eyes hm, she said, just glanced at the (unclear), "Tell him I'm sorry they couldn't have been sooner" (laughter). Didn't say, oh, that's marvelous and to tell him I'm sorry they couldn't have been sooner because, of course, he should have been out of college much earlier if he had come out of (unclear). So here he was, whatever age he was, which was not old, you know, but she didn't say, she, and she never ever told us, she never told me if I got a hundred she never said, "That's good," never did my mother say, "Oh, you made a hundred" or, or she never but if you made 98 or even 99 she might not whip you for the 99, if it was a misspelled word she would but, but she would say, "What is it, you know, what, what did you get wrong?" And it really wasn't punishing you but I don't know why I was equipped somehow to kind of understand it, I didn't see it as a put down. See kids now are, "Oh, I--" (makes sounds), you're always complaining but she would say what did, what, what did you get wrong? The point was if you, if you had nine questions, ten questions and you got nine right, we don't need to go over those, you got those right, right. So what she wants to do is talk with you about the one you got wrong so when you come upon that question again, or need that information you'd have that. And I think that's exactly what you should be doing, you know, you don't wanna make the same mistake over and over, sit back and cool your heels over, over what you already know when you're a student and you're cresting, you know. So she would, it was always what did you get wrong and I learned that very, very, very early, all I wanna do, all I wanna do is find out where the X is, you know, where the mistake is so I can, and I'm not gonna make that mistake again. I misspelled one word in my life in elementary school and that was practice, one word in seven years. Mother whipped me, mother, (laughter) mother tore my little hand up but I know how to spell practice, now that's the only word, (laughter) that's the only word that I am sure that I know how to spell, you know. Now maybe that was just, some may think that's overdoing it or anything but she, she did punish for misspelled words and so she had to punish me, she couldn't say, "Well, Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell], you don't need punishing because you always, you know, this is the only word you've ever missed," so she had to punish me accordingly and it just, maybe it hurt so much just because I had never, it had never happened before or since. Story_ID: 373197 Speaker 1: I think that we should encourage our children to do their best, all the time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You think it starts with the family, what you're saying? Speaker 1: I think it starts with the family and I think it has to be, and yet I don't think, I don't think 'cause we're living in a different world, but even if we weren't, and we, and all the time it was like that, I don't think when I say family, I'm not talking about the daddy and the mother have to be there, you know, it can be a grandmother, it can be, you know, we all, all, in all of our history, children have been reared by aunts or grandmothers, or brothers, older brothers, you know, whatever, whatever situation has to be made and adjusted or in this instance with me now, adopted mother, you know, just whatever. If a child needs a home and love and guidance and somebody can give it and then can be consistent in that giving and try to fashion rules and ideals and goals, then I think we are on the road to a better world. And especially if we teach them that by example and precept that love and giving is, is imperative and rewarding. Story_ID: 373198 Speaker 1: All right. On the right is my grandmother, my mother's mother, my maternal grandmother, she is Sarah Estelle McDonald [Sarah McDonald Thomas]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: She married a Thomas. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Please tell us about this photo, please. Speaker 1: All right. This is my maternal great-grandmother. She is Harriet Deschamps [Harriet Deschamps McDonald] who was born a slave. She was born in 1845 and died in 1930-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It looks like '1 [1931]. Speaker 1: It has here '1 [1931] but I think that's incorrect but we'll say around 1931, um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I think we should-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You mentioned the previous photo-- Speaker 2: Yeah. My, my maternal grandmother and my maternal great-grandmother I remember well, I remember both of them very well. My grandmother lived with us for a while. And then suffered and had to be nursed with cancer toward the end of her life, so she lived in our home. Was particularly partial to my big brother, (laughter) her first grandchild, her first, mother's [Lurline Thomas Blackwell] first child. Speaker 1: So what is her name and-- Speaker 2: This-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So now this is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) my paternal grandmother, my father's mother. She, she is Ann Blackwell. I don't know anything about her origins where she came from. We, I think she has some Indian [Native American] heritage but I'm not, I don't have anything. She died in 1927, when I was just a few months old. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay. I'm ready. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother and father [Harrison Blackwell, Sr.]. I think it may have been made before they had children. He was a barber in our little town, tiny town in Little Rock, South Carolina. And she was a teacher in that town. They were married nine years before their children came, before their first child was born. And I think they had a very, very, it looks to me as though they had a very, very happy marriage. They stayed together in, in what seemed to be understanding and harmony and certainly no threat of any kind of disruption all of their lives. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sixty years. Speaker 1: Sixty, sixty years. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And I'm ready. Speaker 1: This is my mother when she was twelve years old. She would amuse us, showing us this picture and telling us how fabulously she was dressed (laughter) and that that was, she was really, really dressed up. She was her parents' youngest child, she had two older brothers. Her father was a preacher and I think she had all of the spunk and whatever else preachers' kids sometimes have. So she was sort of favored and, and indulged. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. I'm ready. Speaker 1: All right. This is a family group picture with my mother who is the baby in this picture sitting on the arm of the chair with her father who is the Reverend LeGrand Lee Thomas [LeGrand Thomas], a Methodist minister, and her older brother who is standing beside his father, Elma Thomas, and her mother, my grandmother who is Sarah Estelle McDonald Thomas. They lived in South Carolina all of their lives. And my grandmother as I said lived with us after her husband died towards the end of her life, um-hm. (Unclear) this will be worthwhile just getting this for the family, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. I'm ready. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: All right. This is a family group picture of my mother seated with her first two children, they had three children. My brother, their first child is Harrison Benjamin Blackwell, Jr. [Harrison Blackwell, Jr.], named for his father, who is standing (laughter) over us. And I am the baby in this picture. I can't remember how old I am, I don't know if I'm five months old or what, I guess, sort of whatever it looks like. Speaker 2: Yeah that's what it looks like. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Uh-huh, uh-huh. So they were married as I may have said, they were married nine years before the first child came. Mother was very dedicated to racial uplift, she thought black people were obligated and must be giving and doing for others. And she didn't think children were necessarily what people ought to be doing (laughter) so-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) okay. I'm ready. Speaker 1: All right. Another family grouping years and years later. This is on the occasion of mother and daddy's fiftieth wedding anniversary really. Mother is here, daddy, my brother, my younger brother who was not in that early family picture is standing over mother, that's LeGrand Lee Blackwell [LeGrand Blackwell] named for her father and the youngest member of our immediate family. I'm in the middle, I'm the only girl in the family, only of the three children. And my brother Harrison Benjamin Blackwell named for our father. And this is on the occasion of their sixtieth wedding anniversary. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: Not sixtieth, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Fiftieth (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Fiftieth. Speaker 2: Fiftieth, uh-huh, um-hm. Speaker 1: She said it right the first time. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You said it right the first time. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. I am ready. Speaker 1: Well, I think everyone has one of these, that's just one of those shots that we made back in those days. Speaker 2: People don't have 'em now-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Um-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah I know Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I guess, this was in, was this in the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): For the portrait? Speaker 2: This was in the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, in the, in the-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Middle. Speaker 1: --early-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): In the middle '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, it was-- Speaker 2: Was that before you got married? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You were about nineteen (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm married, uh-huh and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You were, you were about nineteen there, Mama, and you may have had Ramona [Ramona Becknell] or just getting ready to be (unclear) or something. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right. Well, this is again at the time of the fiftieth wedding anniversary and it's mother and daddy seated, and I'll start with the two small children down front, Vicky [ph.] is my younger brother's youngest child and the little boy kneeling beside my father is Johnny [ph.] who is my younger brother's second son. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Standing left to right is, are Jamelle [Jamelle Rackley-Riley], my daughter, next to her is my niece, my younger brother's daughter, Valerie [ph.]. Standing above Valerie is my brother, LeGrand, my younger brother. His wife [Virginia Blackwell] is standing beside him. And I'm standing beside her. My husband at that time Louis Frayser, is standing beside me. And my brother, Harrison Blackwell, Jr. is standing beside him. Next to Harrison is my daughter, Lurma [Lurma Rackley], who has just finished high school and is on her way down to-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, I was only fifteen. Speaker 2: I thought you were going to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. All right, fifteen then. And next to her is-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Legrand. Speaker 2: --my nephew, LeGrand Blackwell, my younger brother's son. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And Jamelle was at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] (unclear) Jamelle was just at Bennett, I was fifteen when this picture was, we were living in Norfolk [Virginia]. Speaker 2: I thought we were left there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I was fifteen in that picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The bottom one? Speaker 2: Yes, this is my daughter Lurma. She is twelve or thirteen there, um-hm. We were living in Orangeburg [South Carolina] at the time. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: I'm ready. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What's that? It's not a mug shot? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And this is when I was twelve. I'm living in Little Rock, I'm still at home with mother and daddy and twelve years old (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: And daughter, Jamelle, who is finishing high school. We are living in Orangeburg at this time and she entered college at sixteen, she was on her way to Bennett. Speaker 1: In Columbia, South Carolina? Speaker 2: No, not Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Oh, I see, Bennett (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bennett. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: This Bennett is a Methodist school in Greensboro, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Near A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And the middle one? Speaker 2: The middle one is I. Speaker 1: I get them mixed up. Speaker 2: I am, that's taken in Orangeburg and I'm at whatever, maybe, maybe twenty-six at that time, I'm twenty years old; that was sixteen, thirty-six, I'm probably thirty-six at that time. And we're living in Orangeburg and this is Lurma, oh, you weren't-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. (Unclear). Speaker 2: --focusing on it? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I got it. Speaker 2: (Unclear) coming from a very important book, very fortunate publication by Cecil Williams [Cecil J. Williams] a photographer in Orangeburg, South Carolina who was there to capture a great deal of the activity surrounding the Orangeburg Movement and later the Orangeburg massacre. His book is 'Freedom and Justice' ['Freedom and Justice: Four Decades of the Civil Rights Struggle as Seen by a Black Photographer of the Deep South,' Cecil Williams] and it is a great addition for anyone interested in aspects of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: This picture was, is in front of the school when I worked as an elementary school teacher and from which I was fired. In my hand here is the letter and Lurma, my daughter, Lurma is with me as we are evidently, I guess, musing wily over the circumstances. It's-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Speaker 1: This is a picture of another family group. My two sons here are to the left, Harrison, happy. Daniel [ph.] being a man and firm. I'm in red on the right and my husband, Charles DeJournette, is there. So this was taken after I moved to Atlanta, we were living in Atlanta here...