 Story_ID: 531832 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: All right my full name is [HistoryMaker] Henry H. Brown, and it's spelled H-E-N-R-Y, H., Hartford, H-A-R-T-F-O-R-D, Brown, B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My place of birth is Houston, Texas, and I was born November 17th, 1930 I should say era (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, and--okay. And sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is retired, I'm a senior marketing executive, which--retired and I do a lot of volunteer work-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in my retirement. Speaker 1: And you were employed for many years by Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] right? That's-- Speaker 2: Yes I was retired senior vice president with Anheuser-Busch in 1994. Speaker 1: Okay all right and sir what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August the 9th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In my home at 5215 Honey Circle, Houston, Texas. Story_ID: 531833 Speaker 1: Before we get into any depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask as a warm up sort of. The first one of these questions is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I like Italian food, Italian, Sicilian, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, green and or rusk [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The autumn part of the year I think is the most beautiful seasonal change in our seasons. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Caribbean, I enjoy going down to the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think some of my roots are down there as well. Speaker 1: Okay and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Just about all of my favorite sayings are generic, what's up (laughter)? Story_ID: 531834 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John H. Brown, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Willie Mae Valentine Brown [Willie Valentine Brown]. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well her place of birth, Gonzales, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Is there any unusual spelling here with Willie Mae Valentine Brown? Or is it-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --just spelled about the way it sounds? Speaker 2: Yeah, Willie Mae Valentine. Speaker 1: Is Mae M-A-E or M-A-Y? Speaker 2: M-A-E. Speaker 1: Okay, Valentine? Speaker 2: And it's Valentine, V-A-L-E-N-T-I-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in Gonzales, Texas? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what year, what's her birth date? Speaker 2: She was born in August, August 19, and I guess the year, she should be--well I'm not sure of the year. It would only be a guesstimate. My mother died at sixty years old, and so I was, I was born when she was fifteen, so that would make her '18 [1918]? Speaker 1: That's 1915 yeah if you were born 1930 yeah, 1915, yeah. Okay now well what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back first of all can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Well that's a little fuzzy, if you know Gonzales is in the heart of the Padre part of Texas, which is a very arid area of Texas. South of San Antonio [Texas], predominately a Hispanic community. And my mother was African American, but they were unique in, in the area in which they grew up. My mother later traveled to--her family traveled to San Antonio where she was educated in the San Antonio School District [San Antonio Independent School District], and where she met my father. But, my mother spent a considerable amount of time raising a family. So she did not finish her high school education as a young woman, but later, after all eight of us had matured, she went back to school and graduated with her high school diploma at fifty-five years old. Story_ID: 531835 Speaker 1: Are there any stories that your mother [Willie Valentine Brown] or any of the relatives on her side tell about, about the family going back, I mean can they take their memories all the way back to slavery time or--? Speaker 2: No, perhaps I--they may have, but I guess I was too busy doing other things and not listening to many of the stories in which my mother was relating to us. Realizing the fact that--coming from my family, they--my mother was extremely busy trying to tend to the individual needs of each of the kids, so we didn't have too much time to discuss family history. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there--now were they--is Gonzales [Texas]--were they farmers in Gonzales or? Speaker 2: Yeah to farm--Gonzales is primarily a rural area in South Texas, and it's midway between Corpus Christi [Texas] and San Antonio [Texas]. And my father [John H. Brown, Sr.] of course--I guess we'll get to that, my father is a native San Antonian, and that's where they met. Much of my mother's history though I would think, relevant history is in San Antonio. And I had the great fortune of, of being very close to my mother's mother as well as my mother's father. Speaker 1: Okay. What were they like? Speaker 2: Well, much like any grandmother and grandfather, they supported my little habits with pennies for suckers and things of that nature. Many of the values that I still hold today were taught to me by my grandmother and grandfather. And we called, you know back then we called our grandmother and grandfather by their first names, and--but Mama was Mama. And I think that's about all I can say on that subject-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that I can truthfully recall right now. Story_ID: 531836 Speaker 1: Is there any tradition in your family, you know when we talk about a place like Te- Texas there's usually a migration story you know from some other part of the South. And--are, is there any story like that in your family on how the family go to Texas from--? Speaker 2: Yes, we have been doing family reunions for a number of years. And my family was started in Corpus Christi, Texas by a minister who happens to have my name, Reverend Henry H. Brown [sic. Richard E. Brown], and he allegedly is one of the first Caribbean, so-called Caribbean boat people from Montego Bay [Jamaica] to land on Corpus Christi shores. And he established a church [St. Matthew Missionary Baptist Church] there in Corpus Christi. And, and of course we migrated up from Corpus Christi to San Antonio [Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay and this is your father's side of the family (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is the father's side-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of the family, right. Speaker 1: Is your father's name--well, what is your father's full name? Speaker 2: My father's, my father's name is John Henry [sic.] Brown [John H. Brown, Sr.]. And my father had-- Speaker 1: And he was born in San Antonio? Speaker 2: He was born in San Antonio. Speaker 1: And about what year is his--what is his birthdate? Speaker 2: I just looked at it the other day, 18--I think it was 1878 or something like that. Speaker 1: Eighteen seventy-eight [1878], okay. He was considerably older than your mother [Willie Valentine Brown] then? Speaker 2: Yeah. My father was a hod carrier, and very, very enterprising person. In addition to being a hod carrier he contracted a delivery truck. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I wanna going back to your, I guess your grandfather [sic. great-grandfather], Reverend Henry Brown. You said he came from Montego Bay? Speaker 2: Montego Bay. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And at many of the family reunions, we've had a number of family members or Browns to celebrate with us from Montego Bay. Speaker 1: Is there any, is there any story about why he ended up in Texas or? Speaker 2: Well, I guess, I guess opportunity was one of the reasons why there was such a big migration. I understand there was a large migration during that period; better jobs, more money, a better quality of life existed in this country. And of course I guess the same laws that perhaps are on the books today which are preventing a number of immigrants from the Caribbean into our country was even more restricted back there then, during my father's period. And much like the boat people from the Far East, there was a strong contingent of black folks coming up from the Caribbean into Texas, and other areas along the Gulf Coast seeking a better life. And these are the stories that I was told, and grew up realizing. Story_ID: 531837 Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandfather, did you, or you pro- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Did you? Okay. Speaker 2: I knew, I knew my grandpa, I met him on two or three occasions, but mostly as a young boy I was never able to really capture meaningful dialogue with him on, on any subject, you know. He was, not, not, not secretive, but he was just a pleasant person who told a lot of stories and told a lot of jokes. Speaker 1: Okay, did he have a Jamaican accent? Speaker 2: I don't recall, I don't recall anybody in the family having a Jamaican accent, which is sometimes, you know, causes me to ponder the que- the overall question. But the tree has been done and all of the branches, and I'm happy to see my name on the tree. Speaker 1: Okay, so are there any Jam- Caribbean traditions in the family that you know that are passed down? Speaker 2: Yes, we still enjoy the black beans, the peas and rice. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay so your father [John H. Brown, Sr.] you know was born in San Antonio [Texas] and--was your grandfather a reverend in San Antonio then? Did he have a church? Speaker 2: No, no, no. My father was neither a minister nor to my knowledge was my grandfather. I think everything stopped at the very beginning of our genealogy chart. Speaker 1: Okay. All right I'm s- confused, so I thought that Henry Brown [sic. Richard E. Brown] was a reverend? Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was that your great-grandfather or? Speaker 2: He was a great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Great-grandfather okay, so I'm getting--. All right now all right that makes more sense okay, that's your great-grandfather. All right, so you wouldn't have know him 'cause he would've been passed before you came along, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: I think his name was also John Henry [sic. Henry Brown]--John, I'm--I wanna go back, John Henderson, not John Henry. Speaker 1: Okay, John Henderson Brown. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 531838 Speaker 1: So your father was a hod carrier and worked various construction-- Speaker 2: Right, sites. Speaker 1: --related trades in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --San Antonio [Texas]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now is--did he have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: My father finished high school, but that was it. Speaker 1: Now in those days what were--did he talk about what race relations were like then with black people, and you got like, you have the native Hispanic population down here too you know? Speaker 2: Yes, he didn't say too much about racism other than he was always pushing us to get our education because he felt that he didn't want us to follow in his footsteps because he did not have all of the education which he felt he wanted and he needed. My father was a rather enterprising person and that was what drove him, and why he became so successful and--as an independent businessman, going out purchasing trucks back there then and leasing those trucks on the same sites that he was doing construction work. And I remember distinctly as the years went on of course World War II [WWII] came along, and Houston [Texas]--. Oh, well I'm getting ahead of it, so. But we're still in San Antonio? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't wanna get too far-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --off 'cause we have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So anyway that was--you, you gotta remember I was a young boy then, I don't remember as clearly-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as I would like to some of those early, earlier days of my father's life in San Antonio because we moved. I was the sixth child and I was the first born of the family here in Houston once the family moved from San Antonio to Houston. Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Willie Valentine Brown and John H. Brown, Sr.] met? Did they tell the story? Speaker 2: No, I don't--I, I never heard that story, and I'm not sure how they met. The only thing I know is that they met in San Antonio and started the family then. Speaker 1: And you're the sixth? Speaker 2: I'm the sixth. Speaker 1: Sixth boy? Speaker 2: Of eight child- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of eight children; there were five boys and three girls. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was the first born here in Houston once they moved and resettled here in Houston, Texas. Story_ID: 531839 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities and what they were like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My mother [Willie Valentine Brown]. I was a sickly child as I was told and there was something between my mother and I that I was able to establish early on, and I was considered a mother's boy. And, and I would think that from many of the stories my brothers and sisters felt that my mother favored, favored me over them. Obviously I felt that way when I related to my father [John H. Brown, Sr.] 'cause I was, I was never ever in the good favor of my father; I was always doing the wrong thing (laughter). And my mother was there always taking up for me. "You better not touch that boy," (laughter). So, so it was my mother that I looked to and for counsel and all the other educational traits. Story_ID: 531840 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah I have early childhood memories. Grew up in the church [Christian Home Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Is there one particular memory that's your first one that you can think of, first memory? Speaker 2: Yes I--'cause it keeps coming back, keeps playing in my head and that was growing up in the Baptist church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I guess growing up as a young man, ten, eleven, twelve years old, I was extremely impressed by three men in my life what--including my father [John H. Brown, Sr.], but the other two were my minister and-- Speaker 1: What was your reverend's name? Speaker 2: L.B. Tolson. Speaker 1: L.B. Tolson. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: T-O-L? Speaker 2: T-O-L-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And also my early coach, my early high school coach [at Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] and his name was Pat Patterson [Andrew "Pat" Patterson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Pat Patterson was one of the early black athletes who played professional sports, baseball. Played along with Jackie Robinson with the Newark Eagles and several of the other black ball players, and I was constantly following him. And he was also a, a early referee for black college football games, and he would always take me on, on these trips to Grambling [Louisiana] and all of the other places back there during the days of Tank Younger [Paul "Tank" Younger] and all of those guys, and exposed me to a lot, which helped to develop my young, young adulthood. Speaker 1: Now this, this area I gue- I don't want to get too far ahead, but I know this area Houston [Texas] and Beaumont [Texas] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What do they call it the Texas Triangle or something-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with so many great athletes coming out of here. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Buck Buchanan and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Buck Buchanan. Speaker 1: And just-- Speaker 2: Bubba-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Bubba-- Speaker 1: Bubba-- Speaker 2: Bubba Smith-- Speaker 1: Bubba Smith. Speaker 2: --and Tody Smith [Lawrence "Tody" Smith], the kid from Detroit [sic. East Lansing, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Mel Farr [HistoryMaker Mel Farr, Sr.]. Speaker 2: Mel Farr-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --all of those guys. Ollie Matson outta Houston, I grew up with Ollie Matson before his family moved to California. But I mentioned my minister, I was extremely close to Reverend Tolson as a young man. He, he charged me with a lot of responsibilities around the church. I was the first Eagle Scout for, for my church, for the troop that was established at my church. Reverend Tolson perhaps kept me out of a lot of trouble of being on the streets. I was, I was constantly--once I got out of school, I was constantly with him and making trips to various conferences, being responsible for getting his manuscript, his sermons to the pulpit and retrieving them and getting 'em back to the car, back to his study in his home, and this was a weekly, a weekly thing. I was with Reverend Tolson on Sundays and with Coach Patterson on Saturdays, and, and this went on much of my young life. Speaker 1: So, so you had a mentor and a--you had a spiritual mentor and a physical mentor I guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: --in a lot of ways. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 531841 Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you grow up in? Speaker 2: Third Ward neighborhood [Houston, Texas], not too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Third Ward? Speaker 2: --far from where I am now. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's Third--okay. Houston's [Houston, Texas] arranged in wards. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I know the hip hop community's made the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] the--I guess the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --the typical ghetto or something now. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But this the Third Ward you're raised in? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Third Ward is a ghetto too. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: The Third Ward is a ghetto as well. Speaker 1: Okay. What was it like when you--was it all black when you were growing up or? Speaker 2: Yes, it was all black, and of course there was crime everywhere. I saw homicide victims on the street which I lived at a very early age, ten years old. Story_ID: 531842 Speaker 1: You were talking about some of the violence in the Third Ward [Houston, Texas], but what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? And then we'll get to the story of some the-- Speaker 2: Well back then my matur- maturing in the Third Ward and some of the--perhaps the heartbeat of the Third Ward then during my growing up was the Emancipation Park [Houston, Texas]. It was on Dowling [Dowling Street; Emancipation Avenue] and it was the only public swimming pool, public swimming pool in the area. Speaker 1: So this park was named specially for the emancipation of the slaves (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Emancipation Park. Speaker 1: Emancipation Park? Speaker 2: Emancipation Park, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's on Dowling and Elgin [Street], it's about sixteen to twenty acres and it was always well maintained for picnics and it's always been a, a widely celebrated Juneteenth barbecue party, that's when you went there and all of the barbecue was free, it was provided by the corporations in the area, the department stores and the Food Giants [sic. Giant Food], et cetera. But they would provide barbecued ribs et cetera with obviously the watermelon and, and the Red [Big Red] soda water. Speaker 1: So now these, these businesses you named are white businesses, right? Speaker 2: White businesses. Speaker 1: And would supply the black community with the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all the provisions for a big Juneteenth celebration? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: As far as you know how far back does the celebration of Juneteenth go in Houston [Texas]? Speaker 2: As far back as I can remember as, as a little boy because everybody celebrated it, and-- Speaker 1: And Juneteenth for those who are watching this who don't know what we know, what is Juneteenth? Speaker 2: Juneteenth is a celebration of the Emancipation Proclamation where African Americans were freed from slavery. However, the original date was January, and, however the word did not get to Texas until later in the year, later--following the January date. And, and in some cases there's hearsay about the fact that a number of African Americans were working in the fields picking cotton, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, and the, the owners who were white did not want the law to go into effect until the crops were picked. So somehow Juneteenth was delayed January to June 19th. And of course at that time African Americans were told that they have their freedom. Speaker 1: Yeah because there were very few people on the plantation who were black who could read or-- Speaker 2: Read et cetera, et cetera, et cetera (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And there was no CNN or anything to tell 'em. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 531843 Speaker 1: So that has always been a valiant holiday here in, in Houston [Texas]. It remains a big date in the lives of historians even today with the annual celebration. And there is a myriad of activities celebrating Juneteenth, and one of the state representatives, Al Edwards [HistoryMaker Albert Edwards] spearheads much of that celebration schedule. Speaker 2: Yeah I think it's now like a formal holiday-- Speaker 1: It's a formal-- Speaker 2: --a legal holiday, yeah. Speaker 1: It's a legal, formal holiday and-- Speaker 2: In Texas, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Or just in Houston? Speaker 1: Well I think in several areas of the country where there have citizens, African American citizens who have migrated to California and other areas they've carried that tradition into those other areas. I've been in Los Angeles [California], I can't recall the name of the park, but the same type setting occurs there on Juneteenth, and I'm not sure (background noise) but I think that in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the same thing was happening. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a--there are like celebrations of Juneteenth in Chicago and I know in Denver [Colorado] and other places. But I was asking if the--I think I read where the celebration here is legal, it's been-- Speaker 1: It's legal, it's legal. Speaker 2: Is it a Houston holiday or a statewide? Speaker 1: It's a statewide holiday. Speaker 2: Okay, statewide holiday. Speaker 1: And Al Edwards is the guy that got those bills passed and he spearheads a whole calendar of activities, including beauty pageants and oratorical contests, a lot of the other things as well. Story_ID: 531844 Speaker 1: So you, you said when you were growing up on the Third Ward [Houston, Texas] there was a, there was a--. So, well, it was a heavy concentration of black folks I guess-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the city. And I guess when you think about Juneteenth celebrations being sponsored by white businesses that concentration of black people must've been significant enough to--for them to--they could kin- I mean you know that--I mean they felt compelled to make a contribution. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That means that population is important for-- Speaker 2: There was always a catalyst in the white community. Jesse H. Jones has been that white catalyst in the Houston [Texas] community. Speaker 1: Jesse H. Jones? Speaker 2: Yes and, and his empire and many of them perhaps felt that, let's keep the black community (background noise)-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you said Jesse H. Jones was one of the white people who's a catalyst for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Jesse H. Jones has always been a leading philanthropic pi- person here in Houston. And, and he pretty well controlled the private sector as well as the public sector in whatever he said. His influence was such that he would say things like you know, let's be good citizens in the community, and things like that. So I would, I would really credit him with his endorsement of Juneteenth by keeping good relations in the, in the black community. After all the black community was, was a growing and dynamic community and so that was his way of not necessarily making peace but making good will in the black community. Speaker 1: Jesse H. Jones is a contemporary figure right in the community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Story_ID: 531845 Speaker 1: When you look back when you were, when you were growing up, what, what economic role I guess did black people play in Houston [Texas]? I mean there's this--you got a big population. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What do they, what do they do to make 'em that important? Speaker 2: Well you had some very, very enterprising black businessmen in the early days of my development here in Houston. People like Hobart Taylor whose son eventually became a--under the secretary of, in the Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration. Speaker 1: What was his son's name? Speaker 2: Hobart Taylor, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Hobart Taylor, Sr. was an independent businessman who owned a cab line, taxicab line [H.T. Cab Company, Houston, Texas] and was very much involved in, in real estate, real estate development. You had other businessmen like Lewis White [ph.] who established himself in the Fifth Ward area [Houston, Texas] with a hotel, a major hotel and entertainment complex in the Fifth Ward area. As I recall, going back to Hobart Taylor, he was in the Third Ward area [Houston, Texas]. Also in the Third Ward area you had important black businessmen such as--boy, I had his name on the end of my tongue--Dupree [Clarence A. Dupree]. And-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Dupree was the, was an entrepreneur, entertainment entrepreneur; Hobart Brooks [ph.] who also was an entrepreneur. And so there was, there were a large segment of black businessmen in Houston back in the early, early days. When you, when you recall the history of Houston, Houston being divided by wards, Dowling Street [Emancipation Avenue] was the main street of enterprise (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's D-O- D-O-W? Speaker 2: D-O-W-L-I-N-G, which Emancipation Park [Houston, Texas] was located on, but there were all sorts of businesses on Dowling Street from barbershops to beauty shops, cleaners, shoe repair shops, bordellos or mom and pop stores just lined on both sides of the street, movie theaters et cetera, eateries. Similarly, in Fifth Ward and in Fourth Ward [Houston, Texas], we had the same type of set up even though they were segregated. Each of these areas were high concentrations of businesses, and that were black owned. Speaker 1: So you could basically--everything you needed was in the black community I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You wouldn't necessarily have to go out to? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, now the biggest problem though as you compared prices in the grocery stores, grocery staples, obviously the, the larger stores could offer more favorable pricing because of the quantities that they were selling versus limited inventories that were carried in the black stores. So, much of the grocery business was still handled primarily by white businesses. Story_ID: 531846 Speaker 1: You were talking before the tape, the first reel ran out, you were talking about some of the violence in the Third Ward [Houston, Texas], and you said when you were ten you saw someone shot or something, or? Speaker 2: Yes, when I was ten years old living and growing up in the Third Ward area, I, not too far from where I am not today which is the area that is, that's been developed as the University of Houston area [Houston, Texas]--there were several taverns in this area and I recall the shock of seeing dead people, three of them had been shot, and apparently they were waiting for the coroner because they had been pronounced dead and they were out in the middle of the street for several hours before that happened. And that was my first view of something--a homicide so shocking and sad. Also, growing up as a young kid, the same area that I just mentioned was almost a trail, and it was a trail that was used by a lot of--several of the cattlemen who used to drive their cattle from a railroad junction drop where they would deliver the cattle to drive their cattle from this railroad junction to a slaughterhouse, which incidentally passed the house I grew up in. And I can recall seeing my mother [Willie Valentine Brown] running like crazy once the cattle were coming down the street, Napoleon Avenue [sic. Napoleon Street]. Speaker 1: So the cattle would actually come down--they drive 'em right down the street in front of your house (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right in the front of the house, and just hundreds and hundreds of cattle would be herded down the street. So I can recall as I said, my mother hollering, going crazy, "Get in the house, get in the house," (laughter) "get in the house!" And of course there was another way that she used to control us and being that there eight of us. You know Houston [Texas] has always been a center for medical research as it is today, and she had no problem controlling us in the evenings at six and seven o'clock when it got dark because she would tell us these stories, "These men with white coats looking for little kids like you all, so you better come in the house." (Laughter) "I also--I probably would end up having to go look for you and you may be out there in the hospital district." Speaker 1: Now is there any basis in reality for that kind of fear? Speaker 2: Yeah there, there were always rumors amok in the black community that, that there were youngsters missing, and, and it was always stated that the research hospitals were responsible because they could never trace them you know they just disappeared. So, I'm not sure how valid that story is even though the authen- the authenticity. Speaker 1: Authenticity of it? Speaker 2: Authenticity of that story, but nevertheless it was out there and it was a way of controlling us too as youngsters. So we were always in the house at the proper time and proper place. Speaker 1: It's almost like the boogey man or something for other people (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, boogey man right, right, "Man with the white coat's gonna get you if you don't get in the house." Story_ID: 531847 Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? I know we talked about Reverend Tol- Tolson [L.B. Tolson] but-- Speaker 2: Christian Home Baptist Church [Christian Home Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it still exists today. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your school, your first school? Speaker 2: Blackshear Elementary. Speaker 1: Blackshear Elementary School [Houston, Texas], is that named for a local black person? Speaker 2: Yes, he was a black educator, a teacher, but I don't recall any specifics regarding his contributions in the field of education. Speaker 1: Okay, he was named for--it was named for a local black man? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, is he any related, relation to Thomas Blackshear? You don't know do you (laughter) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, he was not, no, he was not. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: W.L.D. [W.L.D. Johnson, Sr.], Blackshear-- Speaker 1: Okay, so di- so you said your father [John H. Brown, Sr.] pushed education so did you like school or did you--were you excited about it? Speaker 2: I guess my priority in school initially I, I didn't take it as seriously perhaps as I took sports, and, and I was always challenged by my coach, Coach Patterson [Andrew "Pat" Patterson]-- Speaker 1: Did you meet him-- Speaker 2: --and he challenged all of the boys. Speaker 1: Did you meet him at Blackshear? Or was he in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a neighbor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was also a neighbor and that's why we developed such a close relationship. He lived two doors from us. And my minister also lived two doors from us on the opposite side, so I was right in the middle. So I guess it, it was a common thing. Speaker 1: Now, what sport did you particularly excel in or did you like all-- Speaker 2: Basketball. Speaker 1: Okay. And those are the days when basketball wasn't as big as it is today, right? Or-- Speaker 2: No, it isn't as big, but I can recall playing as a young man in my backyard and my daddy had erected a goal post, and we used to play back there 'til ten o'clock at night. And I was a youngster and we were playing on just dirt you know sliding into the basket and stuff so. It was popular among a smaller segment of young blacks back there then, but it was in their minds perhaps just as popular as it is in the minds of those who are playing it today 'cause that was something that they could do easily, and nobody was out there you know--and I'm, I'm talking about yard basketball. You don't see yard basketball today it's you know they have their courts. Speaker 1: Right, so you had to play on dirt? Speaker 2: We played on dirt. Speaker 1: It's like flat you know-- Speaker 2: Flat. Speaker 1: --Texas is flat I guess you had a nice flat surface. Speaker 2: Flat, and, and our hoops were made out of--with baskets that we would go to the grocery stores and make a basket from the grocery store that they would use--from fruit. Speaker 1: Now--so it would be like--I know I've seen Ernie Barnes' paintings-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --actual peach basket nailed to a-- Speaker 2: Peach bas- right. --backboard. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean that's like-- Speaker 1: But that's what we did. Story_ID: 531848 Speaker 1: Now did you have any subject matter you were interested in, in school, I mean above any other? Did you like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well in high school I did a lot of things (laughter). I, I was a member of the glee club and I think back to the days when Jack Yates High School [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] was the first African American high school to stage a full scale operetta in the Houston Music Hall [Houston, Texas], and-- Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Jack Yates. Speaker 1: Jack Gates? Speaker 2: Jack Yates. Speaker 1: Jack Yates, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Y-A-T-E-S. And-- Speaker 1: Was that an African American (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, all African American. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were three high schools back during my day, there was Jack Yates High School; there was Phillis Wheatley High School [Houston, Texas]; and Booker T. Washington High School [Houston, Texas]. And they were each in the three different ward, major ward areas: Third Ward, Fourth Ward, and Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fourth Ward today has been gentrified. And Third Ward and Fifth Ward are pretty much the same as they were back in my days. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to Jack Yates High School. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You were in the glee club. Speaker 2: Glee club, I was in the history club, and of course I participated as an athlete. I was a sports editor for the football program, and they called it sports information officer today, but I provided all of the information to the local press. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a local black paper here in Houston [Texas]? Speaker 2: Yes, we've had the Houston Informer; that was the only one that we had then. Since that time it's been two or three that, that are now published. Speaker 1: Now in those days did you--did people read the Informer mostly or did they-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did they get papers like the Defender [Chicago Defender] and the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] down here too? Speaker 2: Yes, they, occasionally they would get a Pittsburgh Courier down here, but never the Defender. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Occasionally the Pittsburgh Courier would come through here, and the Defender--the Houston Informer was, was a well-read paper down here. As you know, the history of the black press has been--it's so important to understand that the black press might be read four or five times by four or five different people because it was passed from person to person by beauty shop--available in the, in the barbershops, and other areas which were frequented by a lot of people. They would read it and leave it and someone else would read it; or they would read it, buy it and read it and pass it on to someone else. So, even today the--there is a significant role that the black press plays in the information gathering in the black community. Story_ID: 531849 Speaker 1: In high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] you were, you took advantage of I guess of being close with the coach and you knew the other athletes in the other sports and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I guess he was a f- you said he was a football referee, Pat Patterson [Andrew "Pat" Patterson], and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and traveled to other cities or? Speaker 2: Yes, Pat, Coach Patterson was not only a referee, but he was a coach and, and an educator as well, and a no-nonsense person who kept a lot of boys out of trouble, and helped a lot of boys to matriculate their lives and to productive lives as adults. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you were a teenager then were you, were you seriously thinking of going to college at all? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes, I don't know where I got it from, but I, I, I knew that I needed a college education. I knew that when I was--used to daydream in high school. I would daydream in some of my algebra courses. How am I gonna get outta this algebra course? How am I gonna go to college and not, not complete this course--coach in al- this course in algebra because I hated math, I hated algebra. I loved English lit [English literature] and history and civics and all of those type, but I just would never take algebra and some of the mathematic courses seriously. I, I guess was too preoccupied with athletics, and, and even the arts, but, but I knew that somehow I, I was gonna go to college. And as I said, I, I daydreamed many a-time in my high school classes about which college you know I had planned to go to. I guess I was, I was impressed by seeing so many white men going to work with white shirts and ties on as a young boy, and I said, that's what I wanna be. Story_ID: 531850 Speaker 1: We didn't get you into detail about this but you mentioned becoming an Eagle Scout, now this is a big deal. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Anytime somebody's an Eagle Scout, tell us about how that happened before we get you out of school? Speaker 2: Well, Christian Home Baptist Church [Christian Home Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] was a very small church, and one of the things Reverend Tolson [L.B. Tolson] wanted in the church was to establish a, a Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] troop, and I'm not sure how we compared against other Baptist churches in the area or not. But Reverend Tolson as I said earlier I was a constant companion with him, and he took me to a Boy Scout retreat. And, and it so impressed me I talked about it and talked about. He says, "Well why don't we establish a troop in the church?" And we did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now in tho- in those days were the Boy Scouts segregated if you went to a-- Speaker 2: They were extremely seg- everything-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was segregated. Speaker 1: So you were--this is a black retreat I guess, Boy Scouts? Speaker 2: No, this was a white-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A white--but it was controlled by I guess the missionary or the Ba- the churches, it was a church arranged meeting of Boy Scout troops in the churches. And so I guess under that umbrella much of, many of the segregated laws et cetera did not, shall I say, control the establishment of the troop. Speaker 1: So--okay. Speaker 2: But the troop was established in our church. Speaker 1: So the overall Boy Scouts was--it was under the same body, but the individual troops were, were segregated? Speaker 2: Were segregated. Speaker 1: In terms of--okay I see. Speaker 2: Right, so this was a, a troop that was relegated, was authorized and relegated to our church. Speaker 1: Oh do you remember the number of your troop? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I really don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But attended camp, and spent many a night out in the woods you know with some of the other Boy Scout troopers, and of course Reverend Tolson was the scoutmaster. And we were able to accomplish a number of levels, and I was one of the first Eagle Scouts in the church, and I don't remember the number (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, about how old were you when you became an Eagle Scout? Speaker 2: I was about fourteen, fourteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 531851 Speaker 1: Now you played basketball right for-- Speaker 2: Jack Yates High School [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: --Ja- Jack Yates. What position did you play? Speaker 2: I was--played all over. I was considered to be a big man even though I'm still short. And-- Speaker 1: How tall are you? Speaker 2: I'm six feet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But in those days that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that gives us some idea of what the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I had very, extremely long arms, gangly arms, so I was an effective player, and I had a desire to win. And my last year in high school I was fortunate enough to play on the state championship team that won the state championship. Speaker 1: Okay, so Jack Yates won the state-- Speaker 2: Yeah that was in 1949. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah so the state champion- did they, now did they have a separate state championship for black people? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: And--okay. Speaker 2: And it was the very last year that that existed, and that was in 1949. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we beat the famous school that Bubba Smith family was a part of, and it was Charlton-Pollard [Charlton-Pollard High School] in Beaumont [Texas]. Bubba Smith graduated; his father [Willie Ray Smith, Sr.] was the coach; and Tody [Lawrence "Tody" Smith]. We beat that school in the finals. Speaker 1: Okay, Bubba Smith wasn't, wasn't in yet? Speaker 2: No, he was not a basketball player; he was football player, but that just so happened to be the school. Speaker 1: Yeah but it seemed like he would play basketball? Speaker 2: Yeah he was tall enough and big enough. Speaker 1: He was taller than almost everybody (laughter) 6'6" I think. All right so--but he wasn't a contemporary of yours in school right? He was a little younger right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right okay. Speaker 2: Yes he came well behind me. Speaker 1: But you said you knew one of the great athletes of the century, Ollie Matson right? Speaker 2: Oh yes, Ollie Matson grew up in the same neighborhood that I did [Third Ward, Houston, Texas], but his parents [Gertrude Matson and Ollie Genoa Matson] divorced, and his mother took him and his sisters. Ollie has a twin sister [Ocie Matson Thompson] and they moved, relocated to I guess Sausalito [California], Oakland [California], somewhere in that area. And, and that's where he finished high school [George Washington High School, San Francisco, California], and went on to USC I think [sic. University of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], USC or UCLA one--USC I think and established himself as you know an exceptional athlete. He was an exceptional athlete here in Houston [Texas] in his junior year. He was a wiry, real skinny kid, as most of us were. And it was so surprising when I began reading about his exploits out of California, you know, but he was always a very strong competitor. And I'm looking to the day that I will be able to meet him again and see him again. I've been in California many times, and once we did talk on the telephone, but I've not seen him since our early days of high school here at Jack Yates. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a great track star. Speaker 2: Was a track star. Speaker 1: And played for the--I think started off with the Cleveland Rams and they moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and became the Los Angeles Rams. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. So, yeah. I remember this, Ollie used to also play in our backyard on the ground basketball, and it was really a basketball 'cause we played up in a basket and not a, not an iron hoop. It was a basket (laughter), I don't know how relevant that is (laughter) but-- Speaker 1: It is, and it is relevant because people don't realize, that's really how the game got started right? With the peach basket. Speaker 2: Yeah, peach basket. Speaker 1: Now in high school though you played on--did you play on a regulation rim in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah we played on-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --an iron rim and of course a hardwood floor. But in the backyards we would you know slide into the (unclear) (laughter). There were many occasions where you would make a crip shot where you would actually have to stop at a certain place on the ground so that you could slide in (laughter) because, you, you started running directly into the basket you wouldn't be able to stop, and you might hurt yourself that way, so. Speaker 1: So, we didn't have Air Jordans in those days or any shoe that would grip the. Speaker 2: No, no, you didn't have the Air Jordan, no, no. But it was really a competitive evening out there, and, and it was a way that we--I guess the good Lord was looking over us and keeping us safe because we stayed out of trouble. We were back there playing basketball at ten, eleven o'clock at night until our mothers would come and pull us off, ta- make us go home. Story_ID: 531852 Speaker 1: Now did you run for class office or anything like that when you were-- Speaker 2: Yeah I was a vice president of my high school class. Speaker 1: And when it came time to--now you had like a--I guess, well you didn't have to worry about having a separate prom or anything, but you did have you know all the schools had those kind of activities and-- Speaker 2: But I was telling you the story about earlier about the music hall here in--. And we were able, Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] with the operetta club, to stage two full scale operettas as a black school at the Houston Music Hall [Houston, Texas]. And both of those operettas I played a lead role. Speaker 1: What part did you sing? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well one of the operettas was called 'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] in which I played the role of Bobby [ph.]. And, and the other one was called 'Bobby' [ph.]. And, but those are my early high school days, I haven't attempted to sing since (laughter). Speaker 1: Really, okay, all right. Well that's something, that's--the Houston Music Hall, okay. So when you were on the--are there any particular high school teachers other than your coach that stand out as-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yeah. I had--one of my high school teachers she, she presently lives today, Ms. Lillian Harrison [Lillian Walker Harrison], and she's written me several notes over the years. And of course Coach Patterson [Andrew "Pat" Patterson]. And the principal and the Principal Holland, William S. Holland, H-O-L-L-A-N-D. Those were the most instrumental persons in high school in my life. Story_ID: 531853 Speaker 1: When did you start seriously trying to zero in on a college and what--which one did you choose? Speaker 2: In my high school days as I indicated earlier I was always impressed watching businessmen going to work dressed in a shirt and tie, and so I would say that was in my junior high school year in the tenth grade, tenth, eleventh grade. I just felt that--and no reflection on my father [John H. Brown, Sr.], but I felt that I wanted to do something other than being a hod carrier, or construction worker, et cetera, et cetera. And so my sights, I wanted to be like my coach [Andrew "Pat" Patterson] but I knew I didn't--I doubted--would whether not--whether or not I had the ability to become a coach, but I knew I wanted to, to be in a leadership role, an influential role and so I knew that I needed a college degree in order to do that. And of course as I--after I graduated from high school, I, I wasn't a good enough athlete to have gone on a scholarship, so, and I didn't want stay, remain in Houston [Texas] to attend college. So I wanted to get away from the family, and family influence of eight, seven siblings, so I, I wrote a letter to Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana], and was accepted there. Of course my family was one of modest means and tuition cost was, was rather exorbitant back in that time, back during those days, and we were not in the parochial family so to speak, so wasn't able to get any parochial support. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause Xavier's a Catholic school there, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. But, so I worked, I continued to work on campus in the cafeteria doing ends and odd jobs. Speaker 1: Now what year did you graduate from Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas]? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we just enjoyed our fiftieth class reunion a couple of years back; I was really impressed with the overall program. But anyway, my initial year at, at Xavier, even though I, I was able to secure an on-campus job became a financial burden. And so when I returned home debated as to whether or not I was gonna return to Xavier, but the--Uncle Sam decided to take the pressure off of me and drafted me-- Speaker 1: So this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) into the [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: Was this 1951 or? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-one [1951]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 531854 Speaker 1: Now let ask you this, I don't think I talked about this, but you grew up during the Depression [Great Depression] basically. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you have to work a lot when you were growing up as a kid? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, did you have a lot of different jobs? Speaker 2: Yeah I had--I began working at age twelve on a milk truck. And it's funny that you would bring that up 'cause that milk company is still down the street, Lone Star [Lone Star Creamery Co.; Oak Farms Dairy, Houston, Texas], and I wasn't really working for the company. I was working for the salesman, and he was giving me fifty cents a day. Speaker 1: Now this is interesting in light of what you did later on in life, 'cause here you are doing beverage distribution. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) As a for- yeah. Speaker 2: But anyway we worked as a milk helpers, milk helpers, on a milk helpers truck and delivering, as you know back during that time the milk companies had delivery men and they went from house, home to home, house to house, door to door, and of course I was one of his boys to, to help him deliver the milk. And so at the end of each day, and this was primarily on weekends because I was going to school during the other time, and every day during the summer, but I got fifty cents, he gave me fifty cents a day and I was happy to get it. And, and then as I grew a little older I began working at a local wine garden store, which is--which at that time was a major food distributor and I was sacking groceries and doing ends and odd jobs for Wine Gardens [Houston, Texas] during summer months for several years. And then later I was then asked to work as a produce person stocking produce shelves. But anyway to be specific every year as a young man from age twelve through age eighteen I had summer jobs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ends and odd jobs. Story_ID: 531855 Speaker 1: So you were drafted in 1951? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: By the [U.S.] Army okay, and--by the Army right in the? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So now this is the beginning of the Korean conflict [Korean War] right? Speaker 2: Yes, the Korean conflict was a very interesting period in my life. I was mixed and confused when I received the draft notice because while I wasn't really prepared and really ready for a [U.S.] military career at that time because I was so targeted to getting a college education, but then I didn't have the wherewithal, the financial support to pursue the college career and go back to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. So in 1951, I was a very, very confused young man when, when I received my greetings from the Army to report August the 13th, 1951. And I, I was angry because I felt that anything could happen to me in Korea 'cause that's where everybody was going, and it was going to prevent my, my desire to gain a college education and a college degree for a future that I had envisioned for myself. Now, when I was drafted in the service, someone had their hand over me, a hand of grace or something 'cause I was very angry. And I went to the--after I was drafted they sent me--inducted me here in Houston [Texas] and sent me to Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio [Texas] for assignment. And I was there for two days when about ten other guys who were with me at the time we were all inducted was transferred to California, and (background noise) my name was-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Okay and so when I was drafted as I said I was angry and because I felt that it was interrupting my, my college pursuits, even though I didn't know how I was going to afford going back, but nevertheless I was still angry. And I went to the administration office of the military at Fort Sam Houston, and inquired why were they holding me there and everyone else was going to California. And they said, "Well, everybody that's going to California we're sending to Korea, and now if you wanna go to Korea we'll send you to California," said, "but we--you made a decent score on, on the battery of tests and we want you to consider going to OCS [Officer Candidate School], which will mean that we want, we want you to forego your entitlement as an enlistee and join the Army for three more years, so it would make total obligation five years." I said, "No. There's no way I wanna do that; I wanna get outta this damn place, and--so I can get back to college." So they said, "Well, we--if you don't wanna go to OCS, then we'll send you to military police [U.S. Army Military Police Corps] training, and train you in the CIC corps [Counter Intelligence Corps]. And we don't know where you will go after that, probably dealing with prisoners or of war of that we'll be sending back from Korea or something of the sort." Story_ID: 531856 Speaker 1: Well anyway I went through the military police [U.S. Army Military Police Corps] training, and this was at a time that Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] was on the armed services committee or something like that [sic. President's Committee on Equality of Treatment and Opportunity in the Armed Forces], and he had gone over to Europe, and he had said that he did not see any black faces in high places. And so the [U.S.] Army--and I found out later that John Sengstacke [John H. Sengstacke], the publisher of the Chicago Tribune et cetera-- Speaker 2: Chicago Defender, yeah. Speaker 1: Defender, had been working with the armed services committee about integrating a number of previously areas within the Army that was not fully integrated. And so I was called in and it was explained to me that they wanted me to go into Germany as the first African American military police officer to deal with problems related to German citizenry and American personnel. So after my training at Augusta--in Augusta, Georgia [Camp Gordon; Fort Gordon, Georgia], I went to the 537th Military Police corps [537th Military Police Company], which was in Heidelberg, Germany, assigned there and with specific assignment in Frankfurt, Germany which is a city the size of Houston [Texas]. Speaker 2: Okay now just to go back a little bit, what was training like for you and--you say you were trained in-- Speaker 1: Augusta, Georgia. Speaker 2: --Augusta, G-A-- Speaker 1: Augusta-- Speaker 2: --where James Brown comes from. Speaker 1: Where James Brown (laughter)--right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, so what was that like, now here you're the first black MP-- Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: --that they're gonna send to Germany and they're training you in Augusta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Were there any other blacks in the training with you? Speaker 1: No there weren't, there were not. Story_ID: 531857 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact I was offended the very first night [at Camp Gordon; Fort Gordon, Georgia] because there was an incident after we had been on a drill, a running drill, and there was a white guy from Fort Worth, Texas also in that group, and we were all tired and sweaty and it was about twelve o'clock in the morning 'cause they were in--we were all in the process of conditioning our bodies and that sort of thing. And that was the first time that I had been offended with the word, the N word. And as we began pulling our gear off. Speaker 2: This is the first time in the [U.S.] military you had been offended (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mil- yeah. Speaker 2: --or in life with the-- Speaker 1: I think in life because I just never experienced it on the street you know, somebody directly saying something like that. But anyway he said, "I'm sweating like a nigger," and, and went on and, "nigger, nigger--." So, little did I know at the time that our instructor was the heavyweight champion's brother, the heavyweight champion's name was Marciano. Speaker 2: Yeah, Rocky Marciano, yeah. Speaker 1: And his brother was my military instructor who was over that group, and I went to him almost immediately, and I said, "Will I have to be victimized by this kind of language?" And he said, "What kind of language?" And I repeated to him what this guy had said, and he said, "Okay, that's it." And he ordered all of us out of the barracks in front of the barracks and--full attention. Everybody was wondering with the exception of me, I know what it's about, and he proceeded to address the whole group about what to do, what not to do, what to say and not to say and that it was not going to be tolerated. And as a result we were all so-called punished by what this guy had done by having to run another twenty laps around the base. (Laughter) And I felt abused a second time because this was something that happened to me, but it brought us together. Story_ID: 531858 Speaker 1: And I, I finished that, my training there [Camp Gordon; Fort Gordon, Georgia], and of course I, I was then transferred to Frankfurt, Germany where I spent the next twenty-one months as a military police [U.S. Army Military Police Corps] officer. Had a very colorful career, military career over there. If you consider what's going on in Iraq--in Iraq today, that was going on in Frankfurt, Germany at the time I was there. Speaker 2: Now what do you mean? Speaker 1: Well, the insurrection on the streets, many of the German citizenry did not take defeat lightly, and, and there was always this tension and fights between military personnel; our people, American soldiers, and German personnel. Speaker 2: Now this is kind of surprising to me 'cause you know what--'cause you hear so much reflection now about the Marshall Plan [European Recovery Program] and-- Speaker 1: That came after. Speaker 2: --how smooth that went, how great that was and how everything went smoothly with the U.S. occupation of Europe after the war [World War II, WWII], but here you're saying it wasn't as smooth as all that? Speaker 1: No not when I was there, there were areas were we had to enforce off limits; there were areas within Frankfurt where American soldiers were not welcome because if they would go there, there would be all kinds of problems, restaurants--some of the restaurants, not all of them, some of the restaurants. Mind you, prostitution was rampant on the streets. There were no jobs for German personnel, German people. There was a lot of crime, there was not all of the bumming and the suicidal stuff that you read about in Afghanistan and other places today, but there were obvious conflict-- Story_ID: 531859 Speaker 1: Yeah, you were getting ready to tell us the story about what it was like there. Speaker 2: Germany, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 2: In Germany, in the '50s [1950s] in Germany, Germany was a state of--in a state of change. There was rubble everywhere, mountains and mountains of rubble. There were no jobs to speak of then, and the only way that they--a German survivor who happened to be primarily female, the only way that they could make a living for themselves were, was on the streets, and they prostituted themselves to American soldiers on the street, behind trees, behind buildings for little or no money. And the few German males who had survived the war [World War II, WWII] were insulted by that, were angered by that, and that brought about a lot of friction between the American soldier, whether he was black or white, and, and the German citizenry primarily because of the state that they were in at the time. The houses were all either totally dilapidated or partially dilapidated. As a result the state of their home life was little or nothing. So the [U.S.] military was prompted to make certain places off limits to American soldiers and the Military Police Corps [U.S. Army Military Police Corps] was, was there to enforce that these soldiers would not go into certain areas where there had been previous problems. Also, the German Polizei had what they called riot squads, this was a cadre of men who carried as a weapon twenty-four inch rubber hose that was maybe three inches in diameter, and they were trained to break up any disturbance first, and ask questions later. So if you were in the area of trouble it would behoove you to get out of that area because once the German Polizei came in, they were whaling you with these rubber hoses like potato sacks, and it would literally knock you off your feet. As a part of that, one military police officer had to be with them on every call. So, this was rotated, we worked in shifts, eight hour shifts and we would have the opportunity of working with the German riot squad when we were not working in tandem with the German police officer. Most times we were working with a German police officer. Story_ID: 531860 Speaker 1: I recall one evening when I was a part of the riot squad, and we were called out in the middle of the night, and--to investigate this American soldier who had been brutalized and beaten to a pulp. His face was not even distinguishable; his face was just like ribbons. And when we arrived on the scene, the--one of the German Polizei asked me he said, "How do you spell Frankfurt in English?" And I said, "Frankfurt in English?" He said, "Yes." I said, "Well, we have a Frankfort, Kentucky, F-R-A-N-K-F-O-R-T," I said. He says, "Well do you--can you identify this ring?" And it was a class ring from Frankfort High School, Frankfort High School in Kentucky [Frankfort, Kentucky]. So that indicated that this American soldier had been beaten up by these German sympathizers from the war [World War II, WWII], had beaten this American soldier so badly and they had taken his ring, and one of them claimed that that was his ring, and he couldn't explain why it was F-O-R-T and not F-U-R-T, which is--. And so I said, "No, that's Kentucky, and that's American, and that's that soldier's ring." And sure enough that's how we identified him because they had taken his tags away, and on the inside of the ring was his name and everything. But that's just one incident of explaining to you that in 1951 things were not as, as they are in Afghanistan today, but there were insurrection on the streets, and that was a part of the function that I played in the military [U.S. Army Military Police Corps]. There were other incidents that I was involved in over there as a military police officer. I had to break up a duel one night. Speaker 2: A--between two Germans? Speaker 1: Between an American captain, a German professor over a female librarian. And they were--. When I was dispatched this particular night, it was on a Sunday night, I was not--I did not have a German police officer with me, and they sent me to stop a duel in action and it was on a Sunday night and I was by myself so I was reluctant involving an American captain. And when I got there these guys were pacing off, and they had weapons in paper bags, and they were getting--they were both extremely loaded, drunk, and they were both after the affections of, of this librarian. And why I was involved was because of the American captain involved, and when I got there and they were pacing, I think they were in about the fifth or sixth pace, the only thing I could think of was to fire my weapon. And sure enough as I pulled out the .45 and pointed it in the air and I fired it two, three times and it shocked them, and I was able to disarm both of them because they, they froze. That was another incident that was written up in the Stars and Stripes, which was the military paper over there. And, oh, there were a number of, of incidents, but anyway that period of time that I spent in the [U.S.] military, and I can recant a lot of stories, provided me with the opportunity to mature from a young man into an adult, and even made it that much more real that I needed a college education. But I'd been highly motivated you know from my high school career [at Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] though the process of the military and back to college, and then entering the corporate world, and, but that two year period in the military was what made my life for me. Story_ID: 531861 Speaker 1: You were discharged [from the U.S. Army Military Police Corps] in what year was it? Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you came right back to Houston [Texas]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's where family was located. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you go back to college immediately? Speaker 2: Yes, I went back to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: -- I didn't go to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], and finished up over at Texas Southern. Speaker 1: Now Texas Southern is a black college [HBCU] here. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: And public supported in Houston, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes it is. Speaker 1: It was a--I mentioned Dr. Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] when we first came in here, I think he, he went to school there I know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But he said it was the Negro university of southern Texas at one time? Or what do they-- Speaker 2: Now what happened, it goes back to Heman Sweatt [Heman Marion Sweatt]. Heman Sweatt was a postal carrier, and Heman Sweatt applied to attend the University of Texas law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], and he was refused, and he, he took it to court and it eventually ended up in the [U.S.] Supreme Court where Thurgood Marshall helped to make that ruling [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950] final. But anyway, in the compromise that was made, they said, "Okay, Heman we're gonna let you in to the University of Texas," and, which they did, but they dedicated one classroom for him, nobody else and he's in this class all by himself. And obviously he flunked and flunked outta that class, but in the meantime the suit wasn't dropped and it was carried through, and as a part of the overall settlement, Texas Southern University was dedicated. Speaker 1: Not that it was a law school (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they dedicated a law school, the Thurgood Marshall law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: Yeah, but the law school was named later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, the law school--his name on the law school came much later than the dedication of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Texas Southern University. And it wasn't Texas Southern, it was Texas State University for Negroes. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: That was the first name [sic.], and then it ended up as Texas Southern University, which it is today. Story_ID: 531862 Speaker 1: But anyway I attended Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, now did you--what was your major in? Speaker 1: Business. Speaker 2: Business, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. I knew that I wanted to work in the business world. There was a young man I read a story about named Moss Kendrix [Moss H. Kendrix] and he was working for Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] at that time and I always saw him in the Houston Informer doing good deeds for the community and while selling Coke and it always impressed me, and that was the kind of future I wanted for myself. So Moss Kendrix and, and other guys who were doing stuff like that, even Jackie Robinson who was doing stuff with Chock full o'Nuts, and I was reading all that stuff in Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] and other place- places--papers. Speaker 2: Yeah, Chock full o'Nuts coffee, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and so all of that impressed me and motivated me to do everything that I could in order to sharpen my abilities and skills to enter the corporate world. So I--Dean Milton Wilson was my dean at Texas Southern. And I--when I did return from the military [U.S. Army Military Police Corps] of course I got--immediately got married [to Mary Lee Brown] and raised a family. So I was going to school, raising a family and holding down a full-time job. And I would go on my job in the evenings at six o'clock and work 'til twelve o'clock, go back to school the next morning at eight, and I did that for three years, three or four years and--to prepare me for the corporate world. Story_ID: 531863 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit more about Dean Wilson, I know you mentioned him when I came in as somebody who went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --and established the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --M.B.A. program. Speaker 2: Yeah, Dean Milton Wilson was-- Speaker 1: Milton Wilson? Speaker 2: Milton, yeah, Dean Milton Wilson was the dean of the School of Business [Jesse H. Jones School of Business] with Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], and he was primarily a mathematician. A graduate of Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana]. And he impressed me first of all because he, he--he impressed me as an educator, number one. I went to him for all of my accounting courses, et cetera. Now, right off the bat my being a military [U.S. Army Military Police Corps] veteran I don't think impressed him that (unclear) but you know because I was already an adult and that sort of thing and I'd already attended another school [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], but somehow he brought me into his office and I was able to sell myself to him. And, and he didn't make things easy, easier for me, and so my days at Texas Southern were challenging days because I was, was trying to raise a family as well and there some--my attendance records were, was not 100 percent, that was one of my biggest problems, and, but nevertheless I did pass all of my grade work. And, but I found myself in his company two or three times too many, and when he found out what my challenges were, I think he understood my state of mind a little better, and my desire to succeed. And he was the first person that said to me: "You are a highly motivated young man, what's making you so highly mo- what's driving you?" And I said, "Well, I wanna be successful, and I wanna be the first boy in my college [sic.] to graduate it--there were five of us--from a college, and I just want to make a name for myself, you know," et cetera. Speaker 1: So you were the first boy in the family to-- Speaker 2: To graduate from college-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yes. And so anyway he then began to understand me a little more and little more and of course he admitted to me later in life that he had underestimated me and underesti- he knew I was highly motivated, but he didn't know just how, how aggressive perhaps my career allowed me to be. And it was that function, and maybe a couple of others that--he introduced me to the faculty at Howard with the same sort of, not reverence but how we had first met, how he first came in contact with me, what some of my challenges had been, and the fact that he felt that I was highly motivated and that I determined as a high school person that I was gonna succeed. And he wasn't sure if I was sold on that when he first met me, but obviously today you know he, he says, "Obviously today here he is," you know. But anyway I, I credit a lot of my success to him as well. Story_ID: 531864 Speaker 1: So there've been a number of--and I don't wanna say for, for a lack of a better term mentors, male influences in my life over the years, but I had to internalize what they were trying to tell me. I had to make the commitment to believe what they were trying to tell me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I think that even in today's society there's a lot of talk about mentoring, but it's a two way street. The mentoring, yes it's very, very important, but there has to be an acceptance somewhere and there has to be a push also somewhere from the family to the young kid in the middle. So the family has to push, he has to be receptive, the mentoring has to be voluntary, and so it's a coordinated thing, it's not a one way thing, and I think there's too much emphasis on just the mentoring part. And, and I could be wrong, but I would like to see equal pressure coming from families and not people just always finding fault. You know it's, you watch television and watch sometimes in the evening news where some kid has been killed and the mother is there and she's interviewed and the first thing she says, "Oh my child didn't do that." And not all of 'em but then for the most part, and we understand the mother has her head in a certain place, and no mother's ever gonna say something negative about their child. There are exceptions, yeah, but for the most part. So anyway, I'm gonna stop rambling on that. Story_ID: 531865 Speaker 1: You finished your course in--was it '54 [1954] you're saying? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954]? Okay. And then you told me when I came in that you were motivated and tried to get involved in, in the distribution business with-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So tell us that story how you got involved with Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies]. Speaker 2: Well, first of all let me say prior to my pursuing a career with Anheuser-Busch in the latter days of my college career I worked as a captain at Lakeside Country Club [Houston, Texas], and I did that for like three years. And working for the elitist in Houston [Texas] and their oil business, et cetera. And there had been some guys who had also attended college that were employees also at this Lakeside Country Club and over the course of the years they would always tell me, ask me, "What are you gonna do once you get your college degree?" And I said, "I'm gonna pursue a career in (unclear)." Well, their advice to me was, if you're gonna do it, you have to make a clean break; just walk away from it because this job will consume you. The money will consume you, and you'll find yourself stuck. So it was-- Speaker 1: So you're saying the money is pretty good at the country club. Speaker 2: The money was good. Speaker 1: Because you're--you had a lot of wealthy patrons there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah the money was good and I was a captain. So my wife [Mary Lee Brown] was pregnant at the time and as I would take a break one day, that morning, this is two weeks after having received my B.B.A. degree from Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], I went to work, and that morning there was a statement made in my company by one of the members of the club that was racist in tone, and it was the right statement at the right time for me to make the move that I made. And so at 2:30 the club would close down and reopen at six, and I got in my car, and I would always drive home. Well on this particular Saturday, by the time I got home, my wife was eight hours--I mean eight months pregnant, and in the route of taking myself home I had quit my job in my mind, and so I had not told my wife that I was coming home. So when I got there, she says, "What are you doing here so early?" And then I told her in my gabardine brown captain suit, "I've just quit my job." She says, "You what?" I said, "I've just quit my job." (Gesture) She says, "But what am I going to do? I'm pregnant, what are we gonna do?" I said, "I don't know but I can't, I can't work there any longer, and if I don't do it this way I'll never do it, you know, for those few extra dollars I'll never do it." So after that all hell broke loose. Story_ID: 531866 Speaker 1: I was very popular with the manager who had kind of been a grandfather, a godfather I mean of mine while I was at the club [Lakeside Country Club, Houston, Texas], and he called practically for the next two weeks trying to convince me to come back and that sort of thing, but I had quit. So I didn't have a job, just quit cold turkey. And then I made my decision to approach Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] because Anheuser-Busch was about to introduce a new product in this area called Busch Bavarian. So I looked in the telephone directory for the distributorship, and, and found the one that distributed Anheuser-Busch products. It was called Glispin Distributing Company [Houston, Texas], G-L-I-S-P-I-N. And so early that Monday morning I made an appearance down there and met the secretary and asked to speak to the distributor, Mr. Glispin [Frank Glispin, Jr.]. And she asked me if I had an appointment and I said, no, but that I was wanting to apply for an employment job in sales. And so she says, "Well he's in, but I'm not sure if he'll be able to see you since you don't have an appointment." And I said, "Well can I wait?" And she says, "Yes." So I sat there, and his door to his office was open slightly, and as I sat there he was on the telephone talking to some person, and as he began to talk the N word continually came outta his mouth: N this, N that, N this, N that, N this. So I began to doubt my decision as to whether or not I was in the right place and whether or not I had made a mistake, even though this was the only job that I really, really sought after. So I, I eventually sat there for maybe forty minutes, forty-five minutes, and he eventually came out. And he came out, he asked me why was I there? I told him I was interested in employment working for Anheuser-Busch, working. So he says, "Well I'm the Anheuser-Busch distributor, come on in." So we sat there and he says, "Well what can you do?" And so I said, "Well I don't know, I have a degree in business administration from Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], and I just graduated two weeks ago." And he says, "Well what make you, what makes you think that you can help me?" So I said, "Well I notice you have a lot of beer boxes back there, and there are five hundred thousand black people in this town, and I can help you sell some of those boxes." Story_ID: 531867 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Glispin Distributing [Glispin Distributing Company, Houston, Texas], and of course he [Frank Glispin, Jr.], he had indicated to me that he didn't have a position for me there, but that--he says, "Why don't get in the car, and I'll take you for a ride." Speaker 2: Now did that surprise you? Speaker 1: It did 'cause I didn't know--at that time he didn't tell me where. So we ended up at the regional office for Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] and a guy name of Bill Whatley [ph.] was the regional manager. And he told Bill that I had applied, that I had approached him about a job, but that you know I don't--he says, "You know I don't have a position for a black man in my company at this time." And so he says, "Perhaps you might have an interest in--." Bill said, told me that he would--if I filled out an application, he would immediately send it to St. Louis [Missouri] and then it would be in St. Louis' hands after that. And my response was, "Well there are lot of black people in St.--in Houston, Texas, and I think I could do a good job for your product." I said it in my own highly motivated words, but I was extremely pointed in my remarks. Nevertheless, I-- Speaker 2: So you basically made him a business analysis kind of a pitch. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: You analyzed there were fifty--five hundred thousand black-- Speaker 1: Five hundred thousand black--yeah--right. Speaker 2: --people in Houston. Speaker 1: Yes. And, and that I could personally help them sell their product. Well, end result is, maybe about six weeks after that I got a call for an interview that they were sending down a person from St. Louis to talk with me. Story_ID: 531868 Speaker 1: To my surprise the person they sent down found out that they were getting ready to make some changes in the Houston [Texas] area, and he had a certain person in mind who already lived in Houston that he already knew. So, he came down, and we walked through the, the process of being interviewed, and I'd rather not name the person, but then he said to me he says, "Well I think you are too young for this position, and we do need somebody of color, but that you are too young." And this was a brother out of Chicago [Illinois] who had recently been promoted to St. Louis [Missouri]. And he said, "But we're not sure if we're gonna make the wholesaler hire this guy and we reimburse the wholesaler or we're gonna hire the guy." But he left me with little or no hope that my efforts in pursing employment for Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] was--were not make it--make the grade. Well he told the wholesaler the same thing that he told me, that he had another guy in mind, and that he should hire this other guy he was gonna recommend, that he knew already here, and that the brewery would pick up the charges. Well, the wholesaler said, "Well, sight unseen, I don't, I don't know your man, but I'm impressed with the guts that this young man who's already made an appearance, and I've already met, if I'm gonna have to be--if I have to hire somebody then I'm gonna hire him." So it became a matter of who's gonna--the horse or the buggy, which one was gonna go first? And obviously I won that battle, but my relations with (laughter) with the person who had been sent down from St. Louis to interview me caused a problem for several years after that because you know apparently we just didn't make it. So I guess the lesson in that is that you're gonna be confronted with situations that's not always be favorable, but it all turned out well for me. Story_ID: 531869 Speaker 1: Since my earlier days with Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] I've gone through eleven different positions, and in 1980 I was made an officer of the company which was unheard of. Speaker 2: Now before we go further I just wanted you to tell us something about those days in wholesale distribution, and what was--was the black community committed to a particular product then? Was there--you know 'cause today I know they used to--well in Chicago [Illinois] there was a time when they said all black people drink Old Style beer-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and smoke Kool cigarettes and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Well-- Speaker 2: Did--I mean there certain brands that people are committed to? Speaker 1: Yeah from my earlier days with, with the company, wholesaler days we used to market--had a number of products, beer products, and they were all equally shall I say, popular. Budweiser, however was considered a premium beer so it was priced over, above the regular beers like Jax, Pearl, and Lone Star and those--. A chief competitor back there then was Schlitz [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company], and so I had to somehow work out my own strategies as to how best I could help them to move more of our Budweiser products over Schlitz 'cause Schlitz was a formidable competitor. So back then I was able to make a lot of friends, making relationships and helping to sell the, the company as a, as a friend to the community, first of all, and then hopefully, by selling the company as a friend to the community, the community would then accept the company's products, provided you know we did all the other good things like merchandising the product, and pricing the product competitively and doing all of those marketing components in moving the product. So the earlier years I, as I, as I continued to progress as, as a wholesaler person, wholesaler salesperson, and also during that time it was very, very difficult because race played a role in that too. They--you were not necessarily welcome in the places other than African American places in the earlier days. But I was a young, eager go-getter, and I was able to sell myself in many of the grocery stores and many of the other areas, and I found that some of my biggest friends became white retailers, white businessmen because they believed in what I said and they believed that I would follow up on all of the promises that I made. And so as a result that highly motivated stance and posture that Dr. Milton Wilson allegedly saw in me came out because I was, I guess I was programmed to succeed at a very early age, and, and I worked diligently while no one was around. I'm out there sixteen hours a day, seventeen hours a day working a plan and then implementing that plan, putting the plan together. I took great pride in winning many, many contests over the years for the company and as a result of winning these local contests my name became popular in St. Louis [Missouri]. And I was then asked many times to move to places like Gary [Indiana] and Cleveland [Ohio] and Indianapolis [Indiana], but I didn't wanna leave Houston [Texas]. And then when they said, "We, we want you in St. Louis," then of course I made my move to St. Louis, and history followed after that. Speaker 2: So when did you move to St. Louis? Speaker 1: Nineteen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now you started in '59 [1959], right f- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and here. Speaker 1: Yeah and I-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And I moved to St. Louis in 1975, even though prior to that I had been traveling in and out of St. Louis working in the St. Louis area working in other what we call branch operation, those cities. Story_ID: 531870 Speaker 1: Was there a particular person at Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] that you know served as a mentor or tried to help guide your career? Speaker 2: Yeah, two. The man who was responsible for pushing me to St. Louis [Missouri], he's passed now. His name Jay Rideout [Jay R. Rideout], and it's ironic that his last name is spelled R-I-D-E-O-U-T, you would think he's someone (laughter) who's gonna fire you, but his name was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rideout (laughter). Speaker 2: --Jay Rideout. And then once I was promoted to St. Louis my immediate employer whose name was Mike LaMonica [Michael J. LaMonica, Sr.], and I got a good story to tell about him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, now over the years I, while working in Houston [Texas] I had the opportunity of getting a lot of exposure with St. Louis executives in one way or another, either working on, on crews where they would send you to different places across the country, and had the opportunity of working with August Busch III, and et cetera. And what I found out is that your biggest ally is the people that you work with, not necessarily your boss, but the people that you work with, and that's because many of these people will--if they're impressed with your work and impressed with what they see you do, they will voluntarily offer that information and that advice to your superiors. "Oh, this guy, Henry Brown [HistoryMaker Henry H. Brown], oh, he's, he's really doing his job out there, he's really doing something." And, and that type of information is more relevant coming from your coworker or coming from some person who works with you or has worked with you is more relevant than your immediate supervisor. But nevertheless, Jay Rideout was our regional manager, and I have a book here somewhere, but anyway as I said I used to work sixteen, eighteen hours a day, and I used to take my family on trips during the, during the summer months. And we would be in a hotel and, and I would have my kids in one room and I would be in another room. Kids and my wife [Mary Lee Brown] in one room and I'd be in another room and--typing up my reports, henpeck you know, finger peck you know, but anyway I'd type real good reports. And Jay Rideout would always give me feedbacks, write feedbacks on all of my reports, and it inspired me because I knew somebody was reading the reports. So I was particularly careful with spelling, with my verbiage and with factual information, making sure that if there was numerical and statistical information it was all correct, and it all added to a point, and that the theory in the essay part made sense. And as a result, he was always writing letters, and he taught me a lesson, by simply saying to me, "Henry when you write your reports, always remember that I'm not the only person that's gonna be reading these reports, and you may never see those persons, you may never know who's reading your reports. August Busch will probably read your reports as you're making those reports. So make sure that when you write everything down, make sure it's authentic, and make sure it's correct." Anyway I learned that lesson a long time earlier and then Jay Rideout was the one who recommended me to St. Louis. Story_ID: 531871 Speaker 1: Now when I went to into St. Louis [Missouri], Mike LaMonica [Michael J. LaMonica, Sr.] was my immediate superior, and I had visions of becoming an officer in 1975. Well, I think it was in 19- 1978 when I thought I had done some pretty decent work. I had worked with the Great King campaign [Great Kings and Queens of Africa]. I had worked with the Living Legends campaign [Budweiser's Living Legends]. I had worked with the Community Health Mobile campaign [Budweiser Community Health Mobile], and a number of campaigns which were instrumental in the growth of Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies]. Speaker 2: You know we've gotta go back to all those things and talk about 'em in detail (laughter), but go-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, okay I didn't-- Speaker 2: After you finish this story here, uh-huh. Speaker 1: I wasn't sure is we were running out of tape. Speaker 2: Well, we're not--no, we're not yet. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: But we wanna cover everything in detail though, so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well go ahead. Well, so far as my--I was telling you about my progression, and in that progression, before I was accepted into St. Louis, I was in Beaumont, Texas working as a district manager. And I got, received a call from Jay Rideout [Jay R. Rideout]. He said, "Henry [HistoryMaker Henry H. Brown], what are you doing?" I said, "I'm, I'm writing a report." "Where are you?" I said, "Well you know where I am, you called me, you know (laughter), come on, I'm in Beaumont, Texas." He said, "Well, St. Louis wants to talk to you." And I said, "Okay." I said, "When? Next Monday or what?" You know so he says, "They wanna talk to you tomorrow, tomorrow at nine o'clock." I said, "I'm in Beaumont, Texas how--I don't know if I can get outta here or get into St. Louis and be there at nine o'clock in the morning." He says, "Well I've told you, you have to be in St. Louis at nine o'clock in the morning." So obviously I made a lot of changes, ran for planes and I got to St. Louis. I go into the office of the vice president of sales, this gentleman, Mike LaMonica was his name. So I reported to his office and the secretary said, "Well, Mr. Brown, Mr. LaMonica is busy right now, and he says for you to go and to the stables and he'll see you at eleven." And I said, okay, fine, I'll go and look at the Clydesdales (laughter), and not that I haven't seen 'em before you know so I went down to the stables and I came back at eleven. And so she said, "Well let me tell him that you're back." So he comes out and he says, "Hello Henry, how are you?" And blah, blah, blah. And so he said, "What time are you going back to Houston [Texas]?" I said, "Well going back to Houston, you asked me to come here for an interview." He says, "Yes, but I'm kind busy right now." And (laughter) he says, "Well what are you doing for lunch?" And I said, "Whatever, you know whatever you want me to be doing," you know? So, so anyway he says, "Well one of the guys is having a birthday, and we're gonna celebrate his birthday at Tony's downtown [St. Louis, Missouri]. You know where Tony's is?" I said, "I can find it." So he says, "Well meet us there at 12:30." So I go to Tony's, and I'm sitting there and I'm waiting for them and finally they came and we all sat at the table. Now, I'm sitting directly across from Mike LaMonica, vice president of sales and the table is filled with corporate execs [executives] from the company. Nobody's saying a word to me, and I don't know anybody at this table, and they're all talking about the guy who's having a birthday, and I'm saying--I'm scratching my head saying, why am I here? I don't know any of these people here, and they're talking about this and just laughing and talking. So about 1:30 Mike LaMonica, who I was sitting directly across from, gets up, and he says, "Let's all raise our glasses for bringing in Henry Brown to St. Louis." (Laughter) You know just like that with--and I'm saying, "What?" (Laughter) You know, "What?" So, and he says, "Welcome to St. Louis; when can you move?" That was my introduction to St. Louis, and I was brought in as a director. Story_ID: 531872 Speaker 1: A number of things happened after that: strike, labor problems, oh, you name it that affected our office [in St. Louis, Missouri], his office and my office et cetera. By that I mean it divided the country into two parts, you know east and west that sort of thing. But I remained under him all that time, and we just named a counterpart for each of the positions. Well in nineteen hundred and I think it was '79 [1979] you know I decided again outta that high mo- highly motivated mentality that I was gonna push the envelope. So I wrote a position paper to the company [Anheuser-Busch Companies], and I said what all I had done and that I thought that I was material for an officer's position. And it was a special letter that was addressed to August Busch [August Busch III], and to the chairman of the board and to my boss. Now it takes a lot of guts to do that but when you meet that crossroad sometimes you do funny things. So I had addressed three letters; I didn't even allow my secretary to write the letter because I figured if she wrote it then it would be all over the company. So I took it outside the company and had it written with proper documentation. I walked it into my boss and I said, "Mike [Michael J. LaMonica, Sr.], this is something I think you should read." It was about a four page document with a lot of back up. And he says, "Henry [HistoryMaker Henry H. Brown], was it? Is it that important?" I said, "Yes it is." So he looked at it and he saw August's name, he saw Fred Kuhlmann's [Fred L. Kuhlmann] name on it, and he says, "Well I guess it is." So then he sketched it a little more and I walked back to my office and in five minutes he showed up in the doorway and he says, "Are you sure you wanna take this route and force the issue?" And I said, "I've made up my mind, either that's gonna happen or I'm going back to Texas." And you know I didn't know, I, I really didn't, I really didn't what the reaction was going to be and he said, "What if they say no?" And I said, "Well I'll have to cross that bridge when I get there." So he says, "Well I guess you are, you are at that crossroad, aren't you?" I didn't get a reply for eleven months to that letter to the point that after five months he came to my office, my boss, and he said, "Have you heard anything yet?" And I said, "No." So then he began getting bothered by it. Well, I knew then that there was something else amiss. Well, for every week thereafter he would come to me and he would ask that question: "Have you heard anything?" So he called me in the office and in his office, and he says, "I wanna show you something." He pulled my folder out and he showed me a letter that he had written long before I had written my letter suggesting the certain--same thing and tears began rolling outta my eyes and outta his eyes. He says, "I think you should know this, that you've had my support long before you wrote that letter." Well, eventually you know the company was going through a change. August was making a parent company and the beer company was gonna be the subsidiary. So they were making a change, and they were trying to establish a lot of things; that's what brought Wayman [HistoryMaker Wayman Smith] in and brought the hold up in you know, so anyway that's the story behind that, that's why I wanted to get out while I had it at the top of head. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay so how long was it after that that they actually brought you into the-- Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As an officer? Speaker 1: Yeah, 1980. Speaker 2: Okay, 1980, okay. Speaker 1: And I was made senior in 1990. Story_ID: 531873 Speaker 1: And you went to St. Louis [Missouri] in what year, I mean what-- Speaker 2: Went to St. Louis in '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975], okay. That's the same year as Great Kings [Great Kings and Queens of Africa] I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went there with the program, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: With the thought of doing something spectacular. Speaker 1: Okay, well, now when you were in Houston [Texas] with Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies], did you--you got involved in doing a lot of civic activities and--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's everywhere I guess that you've been, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. One of the things you know that you, that you have to program yourself. You know how can you help the corporation and I always knew that was key, and in my own mind I knew that I had to build partnerships, relationships. If you sell the company then you can pretty much sell whatever the company's products are, and, and you do that in a number of ways, you do that in ways in which the community is in need of that type of a support system. The Community Health Mobile program [Budweiser Community Health Mobile], which was a program that I developed that reached out to many citizens or indigents that couldn't afford to get a mere blood screening or pressure--blood pressure screening or diabetes screening and just general health condition screening like vision, weight, stuff like that, and taking that program into the community. The company is ravaged with all of these ailments, and when you say, "Anheuser-Busch presents--," you know that sort of thing and that makes an impression on the community. I had another program called Living Legends [Budweiser's Living Legends] where you saluted icons in the community in different industries and different areas, educators, artists, musicians, businessmen; you name it, there were a myriad of these type people. And Ann Marshall, one of my principal artists in the Great Kings of Africa, I used her initially in this program, I think in Chicago [Illinois]. I made my first presentation of my Living Legends program to [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt on stage when she did 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis] there, and I walked on stage and gave her a big charcoal painting the size of Ann Marshall's painting over there. And I had her to do at least twenty of those programs. And then working very closely with organizations like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and the Urban League [National Urban League] and the Shriners and the Masons and the Pan-Hellenic organizations of all sorts you know, and then the various--sickle cell anemia and other, other groups like that; supporting them in their meetings and supporting them in their other endeavors. Story_ID: 531874 Speaker 1: Back in the days when you were working for Budweiser [Anheuser-Busch Companies] here, what was the political lay of the land in Houston [Texas] as far as black people were concerned? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Did you have any (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You had your black activists, your black political activists, but they were--you only had one or two of these guys, and they were primarily either preachers, or--. Hobart Taylor [Hobart Taylor, Sr.] was a black activist, political activist, and I, I don't say that he was--you could compare him to the activists of today 'cause he wasn't out there raising hell or challenging issues as he was trying to develop business issues within the black community. And that was climate back there then, that the black leaders were more into developing black economic opportunities, either for themselves or for their constituents. Speaker 1: Now had there been riots in Houston back in the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Yes that was, yeah there were, there were--real famous riot going back to the 19--early 1900s when a black soldier detail out in the Fourth Ward area [Houston, Texas], which proved to be a tragedy. Some white lady was allegedly, alleged to have been raped, and it was later proved false, but in the process a couple of black soldiers were beaten up by the police officers when the allegation was made, and word got back to the post where this black infan- infantry group was stationed. Speaker 1: That was the 25th Infantry [sic. 24th Infantry Division] right? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Back in 1917? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I think right? Speaker 2: Right, right and they, they marched on Houston and killed up certain--several people and the tragedy followed thereafter because many of them were killed later, and then the detail was moved out of Houston somewhere else in Alabama or someplace like that. Speaker 1: Now I think there were attempts to get them a pardon posthumously (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --you know over the years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 531875 Speaker 1: I mean back during the Civil Rights Movement days what was the climate here in Houston [Texas] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it was a very, very bad climate. We had a--back there then we had a, a real tragic situation to take place at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]. There was a very active Black Panther Party here in Houston and that followed the sit-in movement. And a situation occurred on Dowling Street [Emancipation Avenue] near the Emancipation Park [Houston, Texas], and it erupted later on in other parts of the community. Speaker 1: Is this is the '70s [1970s] I guess? Speaker 2: This is in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Early '70s [sic]. And a, a white male at that time drove out Wheeler, Wheeler Avenue was a thoroughfare through the campus at Texas Southern University that was used by everybody. And it was alleged that a white male drove through there and rocks were thrown at him from the dormitory, male dormitory. And later on that night--and he was shot at, I think, he was shot at and rocks were thrown at him and he was shot at. And later on that night the police, a police cadre went there and in order to find the gun, and made all of the students strip out in the dark down to nothing while they searched the dorm. But before that happened they stormed the dorm with gunfire, and they fired, oh, they said something like three hundred rounds, and a policeman was shot and killed, and they claimed that the shot came from the dorm, but they never found a gun. And the autopsy revealed that it was a gun worn by one of the police officers. So what happened, one of the bullet ricocheted that was fired into the building. Speaker 1: So you had a kind of a police riot? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sort of a police frenzy-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --where they even, they shoot one of their own-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --men. Speaker 2: And they shot, and it ricocheted, it shot back and killed a man. So that was one of the major, major occurrences that happened during the so-called '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Now that's in the '70s [1970s] though, right? You said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventies [1970] yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 531876 Speaker 1: You said there's a Black Pan- Panther group [Black Panther Party] here in town too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Black Panther--yes, uh-huh. I'm trying to think of the guy's name, he's dead now. He was the head guy, but they had a very active Black Panther group that was really, really active, and they had a very active student nonviolent group here as well. Speaker 1: Oh, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Speaker 2: SNCC, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they had both. Speaker 1: So in the--when you started at Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] were the-- Speaker 2: All that was going on. Speaker 1: Okay, well was the--in fif- '59 [1959] when you started was downtown segregated here? Speaker 2: Yeah, but they were segregated--everything was extremely segregated here in this city when I first started. Let's see we had, I'm trying to think now we were--I think our streetcars, yes, streetcars was--buses and all of that was still segregated. You must realize when I started with the company Jim Crow laws were rampant. And (laughter) I wanted to say something that one of my--I had white drivers that I was responsible for, and I remember one day I said something to one of the white drivers, he went and got his pistol. And (laughter) one of the--one of my coworkers saw it and stopped him from coming back on the--. I don't know what he would've done, I don't even know if I would've been here, but stopped him, had a fight with him, you know a wrestler. He name was Connors [ph.] and I thought he was my friend. And later on this guy said, "You know, Henry [HistoryMaker Henry H. Brown], you know you just can't trust guys like that." But, things weren't well, and, and they manifested themselves, they played themselves out, so I don't look back at stuff like that other than to say I was fortunate enough to get through it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was--you were in the days of pre-affirmative action, and I used to try to say we're trying to do plans for progress; plans for progress is another forward for affirmative action. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, oh, I look back on some of those days and I frighten myself on how I got through them. Speaker 1: Now did you, some of the Texas politicians in those days did they--I don't know how much interaction you had with somebody like LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] or John Connally and I--who's, the mayor of Houston [Texas] in-- Speaker 2: He's a very, very liberal guy and his name is White [Bill White], and we had one prior to him named Lanier [Bob Lanier]. We haven't really had a racist mayor that I can recall. We've had racist police chiefs and sheriffs, but we haven't had a downright racist mayor. And I don't think that--you know because the sheer number of blacks who have been citizens in this community over the years, but the police department's [Houston Police Department] (unclear)--. Well we've had problems, and even today even though we have a black police chief [Harold Hurtt], he has a constituency that is still mostly racist. And he has to survive that, so he does what he can to circumvent it with policies. But they have their own union 'cause every once in a while I'm sure you read about the fraternal order of police officers [Fraternal Order of Police] and all the carrying-ons that they have at their functions, you know some of those same guys that's there are members of our police department, so we have that. Story_ID: 531877 Speaker 1: By 1975--so when you move to St. Louis [Missouri] in '75 [1975] were you, were you glad to be leaving Houston [Texas] (laughter) at that time or were you--I don't know. Speaker 2: Oh, I was elated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was elated to move to St. Louis because I was, knew I was on the right track to do what I wanted to do. I didn't know anything about the City of St. Louis, the climate of St. Louis. I was shocked, but not altogether shocked because I had experienced some of that when I went to New Orleans [Louisiana], and St. Louis is just a cousin of New Orleans in a lot of ways. Speaker 1: So it wasn't, it wasn't substantially different from? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, yeah. So anyway I knew that you got that antebellum, and then--. But what shocked me more than anything else when I went into St. Louis is, is, is the outside, outsider syndrome. I was, I was an outsider, and, and St. Louis is a city that doesn't accept outsiders easily, whether they're white or black. It's, it's--that's just the way it is; they believe in their own. And I had to overcome that, and I overcame that by--excuse me--working with the Urban League [National Urban League] as a trustee, working with NACCP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as a trustee and working with other organizations in the city selling myself to the influentials in the city. And I was able to overcome a lot of the, those obstacles, and when they felt, then they saw that I was truly interested in enhancing the quality of life for the community as well as selling Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] products I was accepted. Story_ID: 531878 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned, I think we were, we were just discussing, just talking when I came in, you mentioned Barbara Jordan and Mickey Leland. You wanna--now you're-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: You're-- Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you knew them both, and so. Speaker 2: I knew them both, I, I had no significant dealings with either one other than supporting their fundraisers, and I worked with a couple of Barbara Jordan's organizations, but that was it. As I indicated to you, my brother-in-law had closer relations than I would ever have with either one. He was in a class with one of them, and served as campaign manager for the other. Speaker 1: Okay, did--I know Mickey Leland was very much interested in Africa you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I know-- Speaker 2: And I had the opportunity of presenting Mickey with one of the lithographs of one of my Great King [Great Kings and Queens of Africa] portraits, but we never did do anything substantive in support of that program together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never had the opportunity to pre- make a presentation to Barbara, but with Mickey I did, and on that occasion he was in St. Louis [Missouri] making a keynote address to some group. I'm not sure what that group is now, I can't remember, but I was very pleased to do that though. We spent--it was during the St. Patrick's Day celebration because I remember Mickey making an observation to me that I hadn't realized. We spent a social evening together after the program, and as I was driving him back to the hotel, there were some revelers on the street enjoying St. Patrick's Day, and Mickey says, "Now that's your problem." And I didn't get him right off the bat but, and he said it again, he said, "That's your problem." He said, "You guys gotta do something about those, about those guys the way they carry themselves when they're full of your product." And they were, they were, they were having a good time out there, and I'll always remember that every time I see that 'cause he saw it, and I, you know, I had just accepted that sort of conduct. But he was right and continues to this day to be a major source of concern for the industry, not just for Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] but for the industry, and that is the social climates in which alcoholic products are consumed and marketed and sold. And I think he said to me, and I, and I'm, I'm not sure about this, but I think he said to me, he says, "Now I'll never be that problem because I'm a teetotaler." I think he was a teetotaler, but he recognized that. Story_ID: 531879 Speaker 1: And when you talk about Mickey Leland I, you know I think of working with the Congressional Black Caucus, and I, I've worked with that organization since its beginning when Barbara Skinner [HistoryMaker Barbara Williams-Skinner] was the executive director. And I continue to serve to this day on their advisory board. I, I, I realize the tremendous role that they have to play in order to raise the quality of life for their constituents. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that early--those early days in the '70s [1970s] was the first time that black people got like-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --enough congressman to actually make a decent caucus, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So we, we had, what, about twelve or (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, you had people like Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you had Diggs [Charles Diggs]; and Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] out of St. Louis [Missouri] who really got me involved; and the congressman from New York, Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel]; and a few others. But I've seen that organization grow. To this day, I, I--there is still a lot of work that's out there for them, but I just find it very difficult to see them making a major, major difference when they are but forty-one, forty-two from four hundred people. And as you know in Washington [D.C.] everything is coalition politics; you can't do anything by yourself. And they are in the very miniscule number of minority as it relates to the whole, but at least they're making their voices heard. And I, I've always enjoyed supporting the caucus weekend. I used to sponsor several major activities that week, including the congressional brunch which many people use to say was more popular than the weekend in itself. People would come up just for the brunch, 'cause we would offer 'em major entertainment and that sort of thing. But I've always been impressed with the individual members as being men and women who are extremely talented, informed and carry a keen sense of political strategy in getting things done, just not enough of 'em. Story_ID: 531880 Speaker 1: Throughout your career [at Anheuser-Busch Companies] you've tried to balance or tried to figure out ways to promote the product and also help the community at the same time? Speaker 2: And my family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my family, I can't--I couldn't have done any of this without my family, but if you don't promote the company's products then you know, the company has no real benefit, beneficial value and you're doing what you do. But it's always been promoting relationships, promoting partnering--partnerships. In doing those things uniquely marketing oriented, whether they are subtle or just out there to sell the product, that's where the money comes from. Story_ID: 531881 Speaker 1: In '75 [1975] you moved to St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you also had the idea for the Great Kings and Queens of Africa-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --project. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How did that--how did you initially start thinking about that? Was this--I didn't ask you before, but did you have black history in school at all when you were coming along? Speaker 2: No, I don't recall, I mean I--there were always the, the stories, I don't think there was ever any program, but there were always stories about the Pullman car-- Speaker 1: The porters. Speaker 2: --porters, there were always stories about sports heroes, and these profiles were always used throughout the year and when black history became prominent throughout Black History Month. Several companies, black businesses would use the same profiles and put their name on it, just like Jackie Robinson, Brown's Shoe Store [Houston, Texas], and that same image would appear on, on many other businesses as their Black History Month celebration program. And we were all sitting in a marketing meeting and said, "What can we do?" And Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] wanted distinctive, to be informative and to be responsive where we market our products, and not to be a me too, putting our name on a similar calendar with the same subject, Marian Anderson, and so many of the others, not that they were not worthy, but it was just a repetition of the same subjects. So we first decided, well let's look at things that are indigenous to African Americans and of course we were not called African Americans at that time, we were called Negroes or people of color, or something of that nature. So we said, let's do a focus group on six subjects, African Americans with lineage, heritage relating to Africa. Oh, that's not gonna work. Well let's take it to focus groups, let's take it to college campuses like Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], let's take it to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and let's take it out west at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] or one of those places out there. So we took this focus group, and we had a guy who is a clinical psychologist named Coverdale [ph.], Cloverdale [ph.], or something like that. Speaker 1: Coverdale I think, yeah. Speaker 2: And he took these images that we had, D'Arcy advertising agency [D'Arcy MacManus and Masius; D'Arcy MacManus Masius Worldwide], to sketch for us. Took these images to these college campuses and asked the students: "Is this something you would like to see?" And they made it into a program with a major corporation. Now, of course he could not identify with us--could not identify to them that we were interested, but that he had a client that was interested. And they all came back negative: "No, we're not interested anything like that." They--you know it really doesn't matter whether you use that or continue to use what's being used now. And as a result, the company says, "Well we don't know if this is gonna work." And we all came together in this room, in this setting, and we said everybody said, "No, it's not gonna work." And I was one of the few guys who held my hand up and says, "Let me take a stab at it. Because if it doesn't work as an advertising tool, it certainly works as a cultural program saluting a major portion of our business, and the ancient heritage of African Americans." Story_ID: 531882 Speaker 1: And so we decided to go ahead with the unveiling [of the Great Kings of Africa; Great Kings and Queens of Africa] at Johnson publication [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] in 1975, with Collins [Paul Collins] and the other four guys. Speaker 2: So did you start with like four images? Speaker 1: Four images. Speaker 2: Four images, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and then of course we did not expand it for two years 'cause we wanted to get a good reading on what was happening with the four. The amazing thing that happened was that we began to get a number of letters requesting reprints of the program from school districts. So this-- Speaker 2: Now how did the program basically work? You said you selected black artists, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 2: To render a painting of? Speaker 1: Illustration, yeah. Speaker 2: An illustration of an African king? Speaker 1: Of this image-- Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: --as, as researched by John Henrik Clarke. Speaker 2: Okay, John Henrik Clarke, the late historian-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --from New York [New York]? Speaker 1: And I was critiquing it, and, and John Henrik gave them as many factual evidences as he could about this particular person. They too did their own research; the artist, okay? And then they were, "How did you come with that nose on that man?" you know. Well, we say this is what? An illustration, is it not? Which is that person's interpretation. Speaker 2: Well to be--some of the-- Speaker 1: Based on, based on. Speaker 2: Some of the individuals-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We did, we do have illustrations of them, I mean pictures of 'em-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --then some people we, we--there's no idea. Speaker 1: There's no idea, but, but you, but you do have certain relevant points that you can relate to in history as to the facial features of that type of a tribe, or that type of a people that existed in that area, Mali or wherever. And, and so a lot of it, a lot of those illustrations was truly based on what information could be gleaned out of John Henrik and the artist. And we gave the artist a little freedom in this, but at the same time we said, "You have to illustrate within these parameters, and if you don't we can't use it because we want to use it this for further merchandising, as a further merchandising tool." Speaker 2: And the parameters were, was this-- Speaker 1: Forty-two inches by something-- Speaker 2: --size? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, all of that. And some of the guys were very good at it and some of the guys we were a little doubtful about. The kid Pinkney [HistoryMaker Jerry Pinkney] for example, he's a watercolor specialist, and so we had to work very closely with that because we didn't want him mixing the colors in a way that we couldn't duplicate the end result. And so a lot of this--. And then too, the program promoted itself. The artists got into a competitive nature in doing their thing. Many of them started looking, "How do you do that, how do you do this?" And they began incorporating that into their work and then they began to take extreme, extreme pride of artist-ship. Story_ID: 531883 Speaker 1: We were talking about the development of the Great Kings and Queens of Africa project, and I think you were explaining to me the last time before we stopped that it was developed out of focus groups-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that's how, that's how you approached it first. Speaker 2: Yes, as I stated to you earlier, Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] had charged the advertising agency, D'Arcy [D'Arcy MacManus and Masius; D'Arcy MacManus Masius Worldwide], to come back with a program by which we could use saluting Black History Month as you know Black History Month became quite popular during the '70s [1970s]. And as a result of that charge, D'Arcy did some sketches on the African continent, bringing in Dr. Coverdale [ph.] who's a clinical psychologist, and asked Dr. Coverdale to take the concept, which D'Arcy had created. Speaker 1: Now--I'm sorry is D'Arcy a black ad agency in St. Louis [Missouri] or are they--? Speaker 2: No, it is--at that time, it's no longer an agency, they went out of business, but at that time they were the top agency, and it was the agency of record for Anheuser-Busch's advertising program, and--overall advertising program. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were a component of Anheuser-Busch? Speaker 2: They were--no, they were a separate company. Speaker 1: Okay all right Speaker 2: Separate company. Speaker 1: In St. Louis? Speaker 2: In St. Louis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the corporate office was in St. Louis, they had offices in Chicago [Illinois] and in New York [New York] as well, but their corporate office was St. Louis. So, in this initial charge, they sketched several African so-called villages and some of the native people, et cetera, and asked Coverdale, who worked with D'Arcy, to do focus groups and to take it to Atlanta [Georgia] and some of the other areas where black colleges [HBCUs] were situated. And his report back was that the program, overall program was, was a negative one, and that the students all stated that they would prefer to see more contemporary types of subjects. A great deal of money had already been invested, and so it was decided in a group meeting, in a group meeting with D'Arcy people, myself and others from Anheuser-Busch to look at the concept and to discuss it. The meeting proved very, very negative. There were those on our side of the table who felt that we needed something to use as a Black History Month advertising vehicle for the national publications. Then there were others that said, well, let's continue to do some other things. I took the position right off the very beginning, at the very beginning that what we needed was this program that we were working on at that but not necessarily as an advertising program as something they wanted to use in an advertising execution. But what we needed was to develop a cultural heritage program saluting a very important segment of our customer base, and of course the African American market at that time was significant. And I based that approach on the fact that the company was presently spending tremendous sums of money on saluting the Irish American with their Irish American salute during St. Patrick's Day. They were spending money saluting the Hispanic area with the Cinco de Mayo promotions et cetera. Monies were spent on German festive heritage festivals. Speaker 1: Yeah, Oktoberfest is big, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oktoberfest, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And my point, and the point that I argued was, we need a program similar to those programs, but distinctively different in addressing our invitation to the African American market. Story_ID: 531884 Speaker 1: So, we won that particular argument, we went forward with the program, and had a major unveiling at Johnson publication building [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]. And of course I discussed with you earlier that Shaka was one of our original subjects, and we had four subjects and Shaka was the most shall I say noteworthy of the other three. And I don't recall--yes, the other three--two of the other three was Akhenaton and Nefertiti [sic.], and the fourth one escapes me. But we went forward with that program. The response of the community response and the marketplace response to the program was lukewarm. It wasn't overwhelming at first, and so it provided those who were in opposition to the program an opportunity to slam it. Well an amazing thing happened, the production of 'Roots' was--proved to be a savior for that program because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Alex Haley's book was coming out-- Speaker 1: Alex Haley's 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family']. Speaker 2: --around the same time. Speaker 1: And the notoriety and the acceptance of that program gave new life to the Great Kings and Queens of Africa [Great Kings of Africa; Great Kings and Queens of Africa] because of the tremendous interest that 'Roots' inspired in African Americans. And all of a sudden there were I think three parts, or four parts to 'Roots.' Well after the first showing we decided that we would make a commercial, a TV commercial using the four great kings that we had unveiled as a backdrop in these commercials, and supported the production of 'Roots' with this one commercial. It immediately generated a number of fan letters and great comments from the marketplace. Speaker 2: Now what was initially the com- what was the commercial like? Speaker 1: Well the commercial was, it was a general corporate commercial stating Anheuser's [Anheuser-Busch Companies] position in supporting the African American marketplace, and that in our efforts to do that we had developed this Great Kings and Queens of Africa approach, and that we were hopeful that we could do more but we wanted to just settle it with that initial concept, and that we would be using this, the African American [sic.] kings, to place an advertisement in black publications such as Ebony, such as Jet, and many of the African American newspapers at that time. So anyway, that gave tremendous life to the program and we also began product- a production of reprints of the Great Kings and so that they could be used during African American Black History Month. Story_ID: 531885 Speaker 1: As I remember the first episode of 'Roots' starts in Africa, in an African (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --village. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it's sort of a--it's a--I think it was the first time a lot of people had seen representation of African life that was not in a 'Tarzan' movie with all the negative stereotypes of that, people (unclear) cook pot and all that sort of thing. So this was the first time you saw like family life, there was a rites of passage ceremony and other things. Did those image like boost the idea (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was real life images, and, and we were able to encourage Alex Haley, Roscoe Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne], the great voice, to do radio commercials supporting what we were trying to do which was in the same vein as, as 'Roots,' giving credibility to the overall story of 'Roots' that African Americans have a past in Africa. And that we felt that young African American children deserved to know more about their past. If our history books was shall I say portraying the lives of the czars of the Russia, the emperors of the great empires in the Far East, the kings of England and France and other countries, then surely we could do our best in developing history, African American history in this form. And I was asked I think during this process by a noted educator, why a beer company is interested in developing history for the African American marketplace. And my response was, "Why not?" Since no one else was doing it. Speaker 1: But I would, I would think though that the story--and what intrigues me about your story is that I think if you were not there, this would not take place. So the reason--I asked the same question when I saw the posters in the '70s [1970s]: why would a beer company be interested in this? But I didn't think about Henry Brown [HistoryMaker Henry H. Brown] being at Budweiser [Anheuser-Busch Companies]. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's the difference I think, and so what, what motivated you to want to do that? Speaker 2: I just wanted to know more and more about my past. And just like all of us when we saw 'Roots' we were inspired to learn more, and during my time and my tenure at the opportunity that I had at that particular time, I felt that I could exploit that, and not only help the company, the company's overall approach in marketing its products, but could also enlightened those who wanted to be enlightened by presenting as best as we knew how, in a professional way, the, (background noise) the history of an important people, and that's the African American marketplace. Story_ID: 531886 Speaker 1: Following our expanded efforts in, with the program by adding certain dimensions to it, by getting and asking Roscoe Browne [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] and Alex Haley to cut tapes, to cut radio commercials on the program, also including Lou Rawls to also involve his voice in the program, the program overnight became extremely, extremely successful. We began getting letters from teachers, educators from around the country asking us to send them reprints of the Great Kings and Queens of Africa [Great Kings of Africa; Great Kings and Queens of Africa] because they wanted to use the material that we had developed in their classrooms as an exercise in African American history. So then it became a problem with the budget because the overall budget that I had at that time could not sustain the requests that were being made for additional reprints, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. But thank god I had people that I could go to and say, "Look, we've got a program that is being widely accepted in the black community, and I need support." And so I was able to convince corporate management [of Anheuser-Busch Companies] to provide additional funds for the program, and the way this was done I was able to take all of the requests, the numbers that were being generated for reprint requests and compared those numbers to other programs that people were writing the company asking them about. And one of those programs was the Clydesdales. And we found that we were getting many, many more requests for Great Kings of Africa reprints than we were getting for reprints of the Clydesdale calendars. So it opened up a lot of eyes right away, and it also provided for me the additional dollars to expand the program. So we had subsequent unveilings. As I said initially we made the first unveiling at the Johnson publication [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]. We then went to Dr. Margaret Burroughs [HistoryMaker Margaret Burroughs] at the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History] in Chicago [Illinois], and she quickly supported our efforts with the program and allowed us to utilize the DuSable Museum as the second site for unveiling Great Kings. We then went to Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] the next year and made a third unveiling. So then that was the, the basic foundation for the program growing. Story_ID: 531887 Speaker 1: As we continued to develop the program, we received a number of reprints and a number of--pardon me, a number of requests from various persons saying, "Why don't you do something with the African American [sic.] queens?" So we took that up seriously and we went into Chicago [Illinois]--not Chicago but Detroit [Michigan], I'm sorry, and solicited the support of Dr. Arthur Johnson [Arthur L. Johnson], who is a museum type in that area, as well as Judge Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith], and asked if they would not assist us with the unveiling of an expanded version of the Great Kings [Great Kings of Africa] because we wanted to change the title from the Great Kings to Great Queens, or to Great Kings and Great Queens [Great Kings and Queens of Africa]. And they quickly agreed and they approached Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] for me, and provided for me that venue to unveil the expanded version, which included the queens. And so we solicited Dorothy Carter from Chicago and commissioned her to do Nzingha, and Ann Marshall who was a native Detroit person to illustrate a, a drawing of Queen Cleopatra. Again, another major boost to the overall program. Now once we had the kings and queens together, then we made a major push with exhibiting and building an exhibit showcase of all the kings and the queens that we had developed at that time. And we made a conscientious effort in showcasing the kings and queens that we had commissioned at major conventions such as the National Urban League conference; the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] at that time was a major convention, and they all had these industry and commerce exhibit areas. So we had a special opportunity to showcase the kings and the queens there, in addition to the advertising schedules that we had commissioned with the various newspapers and magazines. At these conventions, which included also the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] and the Shriners and et cetera, the fraternal groups, we provided thousands of reprints free to the various delegates and that was from one end of this country to the other. The booths then went on tours throughout the country to all of the major and significant markets. Wherever there was a museum we made the kings available. Wherever there were requests made from the universities or, or schools of interest, we made the kings and queens available, at our cost; no one had to pay one dime for either a reprint or a viewing of the kings. Many of these viewings we made the artist available as well, and they were able to discuss their inspiration with the illustration of these particular subjects. So it has been a most satisfying and rewarding project that I've had the opportunity to work on during my tenure with Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies]. Story_ID: 531888 Speaker 1: We were able to take the kings into--on the, on their tenth anniversary we celebrated the kings in Washington, D.C., and as part of that celebration, the Department of Interior [U.S. Department of the Interior] partnered with us. As part of the overall program we allowed the artist who had made contributions to the overall program to do a workshop at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and--with the students, particularly those who were interested either in art or either in the history of the program or the African continent to participate. Since that time we've had major unveilings at--in New Orleans [Louisiana] during the World's Fair [1984 Louisiana World Exposition] when we had the World's Fair down there, and there was a pavilion, African American pavilion called Three Rivers [sic. I've Known Rivers], and we asked Thomas Blackshear to unveil his painting there along with some other artists that I--whose name escapes me now. But we utilized the New Orleans world trade fair; we utilized the Knoxville world trade fair [1982 Knoxville International Energy Exposition, Knoxville, Tennessee]; we utilized a couple of other sites. Let's see here, Black Enterprise, that's a good example. As you know Black Enterprise celebrates their one hundred top black businesses every year where they award the top prize. Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] asked me to use that program also as a site for the unveiling of Great Kings and Queens of Africa. Well we did that and it was a great program because it, it was like a magnet for all of the influentials in the New York area, the Jersey [New Jersey] area, the East Coast area, and a number of artists in those areas. They all attended and we had a great, great unveiling. But the granddaddy of all of the unveilings I think was with the United- at the United Nations [UN]. Speaker 2: Now what year was that? Speaker 1: This is in '89 [1989], '89 [1989], 1989. And because it provided the authenticity that we wanted for the program, by that I'm saying that many of the African diplomats who were part of the United Nation body supported the overall event, and this was the first time that the United Nation has allowed their building to be used by a major corporation for any type of an affair, and, and obviously it, it became a blue ribbon event for us. We had the hierarchy of the United Nations there, we had at least sixty top level diplomats, ambassadors there. We had African entertainment. It was a whole African evening and, and the entire club room for the United Nations building [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York] was utilized for that event. And I'd been told by a number of UN dignitaries that this is the absolute first time that any major corporation had been allowed such a privilege, and so we were very proud of that. And there were subsequent unveilings at the NACCP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] conference, annual conference and the Urban League [National Urban League] conference, as well as the congressional, the annual Congressional Black Caucus meeting. Story_ID: 531889 Speaker 1: So overall our efforts were telling the story of the African American history, cultural history, history dealing with our foundation as a people. It's not complete, but at least we've tried to make a start. And it has been rewarding to me to know that the program [Great Kings and Queens of Africa] still remains strong. It has other opportunities that I wanted to develop later on in life. I wanted to change the name of the program at one point to include a wider scope of people of color, not necessarily from the African continent. And by that I mean in the Caribbean area there are a number of histories that need to be told, need to be showcased in such a way as we've showcased the history of African kings and queens. In South America there is a, a very large African American community--not African American, but South American community in Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil], in the Bahia area, and there were--there are noted you might say noted (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --legends in those areas. That is exempt-- Speaker 2: Ganga Zumba, Zumbi-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and all those--Palmares, yeah. Speaker 1: Pele is considered king of the sports world, you know and I'm thinking of people in the Caribbean like Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier], and in Egypt the king that--Haile Selassie is considered the lion. So I wanted to expand this program and, and perhaps there still remains that opportunity. Story_ID: 531890 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you some questions about the Great Kings and Queens [Great Kings and Queens of Africa], and one was how much support did you have within Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] for this project? Did you have others you know you must've had some-- Speaker 2: Well we, I did have some support but as you know that any corporate make up at the top it gets lonely because everybody has a different project, and, and they're so busy fighting for their project. But obviously my boss, Michael Roarty, Michael J. Roarty was my major, major supporter. I had other guys over the years, if you recall this effort started in '75 [1975], and through the chronological years there were different people at different points. I think of Victor Julien, when he came along in 1980 he was able to assist me with the--with some of the leg work that was necessary. I had people, like Bob Murphy [Robert E. Murphy] who was the artistic director for the advertising agency [D'Arcy MacManus and Masius; D'Arcy MacManus Masius Worldwide] who would submit to me over the years some of the renderings, the initial renderings of the work and he was--he and I worked very closely on detailing. For example when we were working on Hannibal, obviously we didn't want the program to be militaristic. We wanted it to be palatable to the entire public, and not necessary using the program to conjure up negative feelings from other people, and our artist had submitted his first sketch with some weapons in Hannibal's hand and we didn't think we're--took away from the painting. And it was Bob Murphy and I was able to come to a decision that made the painting that much more palatable. And of course [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith gave me his support. No one person--I guess what I'm trying to say is no one person can absolutely take responsibility for anything in the corporate setting; it takes a team to put the program together and to move the program forward. However, somebody has to be ultimately responsible for the program's success because if it fails you can't fire the whole company (laughter) you gotta go for that one person who inspired the idea, who nurtured it and who moved it along. Story_ID: 531891 Speaker 1: But I'm extremely, extremely satisfied with the body of work, with the acceptance that we received over the years. From the several hundred people, wholesalers, other field people for Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] that either broke down an exhibit, or built an exhibit or distributed reprints. And when I say reprints, distributing reprints I'm saying reprints in the millions. Speaker 2: Right 'cause the public schools were-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I mean school teachers are very much--they coveted those reprints. Speaker 1: Right, right and, and as you said the school teachers, the school teachers were just as important in the success of this overall program because it provided them a tool, an instructional tool, informational tool. Speaker 2: In that regard, I know some teachers that had a dilemma when they would display the posters because they had a Budweiser you know (unclear) on 'em. They would like actually cut 'em out or try to cover 'em up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: But were there ever posters issued that didn't have the Budweiser logo on them? Speaker 1: Yeah we had a number of requests from several churches, but as you know--and, and we provided non-logo reprints. However, as you know the company is, is about promoting its name, trying to be a good citizen. And, and Anheuser-Busch is a responsible company and obviously we downplay the logo of the company--on all of the materials where we did use a logo it's in a subliminal way and generally on the last page. And, but, but we were very sensitive to not exploit the program with the brand name. I can recall many times where others in the company wanted to use the program as a billboard advertisement that I personally nixed right off the bat. Many of them wanted to put it on matches and other trinkets that I didn't think was appropriate for the program. And that's because as I said the company has many different departments, and others would look at it as a--to use it as an opportunity to further the things that they were interested in. But I was able to control all of that in my position with the company, and I'm happy about that and I think that the program was handled in a very responsible way and that's the reason why it has prospered all these years and even today. This is the year 2007 and we're still getting requests for reprints for the program. I was just recently in St. Louis [Missouri] for the 2007 National Urban League conference, and I was amazed to see that the demand still remains. The young man and woman who worked in the Anheuser-Busch booth were extremely busy just handling and distributing Great Kings and Queens of Africa reprints. Story_ID: 531892 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, so they're still being distributed today. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But does the program still exist as an ongoing--are new images still being generated (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: I didn't think so, so I was--what happened to cause the end of the program? Speaker 2: Well I really can't say other than the fact that I retired in 1994, and nothing has happened with the program since that time. Speaker 1: So the last, last-- Speaker 2: The last unveiling was in 1991. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there has not been an unveiling since that time. Of course you know one of the great leaders and shall I say scholars with the program, was the fact that we initially hired Dr. John Henrik Clarke. Dr. John Henrik Clarke was professor at Hunter College in New York [New York], and he was the historian of record. And obviously what happened was once an illustration was put together based on the information provided from Dr. John Henrik Clarke, he made his notes and his notes came directly to me as to whether or not the rendition or the illustration was on target. And following that discussion with Dr. Clarke, we would go forward with it. Oftentimes it would take maybe two or three illustrations before the final illustration was selected. At that time then we would finish the product, frame it, lithograph it and then utilize it in whatever form we wanted to use it at that time, either with an advertising agency to make advertising executions, all of the photography that was involved there, or we would provide our merchandising department to make up the reprints and to make photocopies. And oftentimes we would have the artist to sign the--his painting and then we would make photographs, black and white photographs and would also make that a part of our giveaway program. Speaker 1: Okay. I wanted to ask you like how was John Henrik Clarke selected in the first place to-- Speaker 2: All right. John Henrik Clarke, Dr. Clarke was already on the payroll as a consultant for D'Arcy advertising agency [D'Arcy MacManus and Masius; D'Arcy MacManus Masius Worldwide], and he critiqued a number of the ads that the agency was providing for the brewery [Anheuser-Busch Companies], as well as other radio messages and messages that we used in our ad campaign, in our newspapers and in our magazines. Speaker 1: Okay, so the, the a- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he was already on staff. Speaker 1: The ads that were targeted towards the black community-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --he was already-- Speaker 2: He was already a part-- Speaker 1: --in consultation with D'Arcy? Speaker 2: Right. He was already a part of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he became a natural resource for everything, but he became even more invaluable to me, to my office and to the agency when we began developing the Great Kings and Queens of Africa. Story_ID: 531893 Speaker 1: I was amazed also at the fact that many of the artists took it upon themselves also to do research on many of the paintings or the illustrations that they produced. So we had a number of, of key research, shall I say, checks and balances. Speaker 2: Yeah I know in '75 [1975] when John Henrik Clarke was--republished 'Worlds Great Men of Color' by J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers], Volume I and Volume II with new introductions, Macmillan [Macmillan Publishing Company] published them and they were, they were right off the press then. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And which includes a lot of the biographies of the Great Kings and Queens [Great Kings and Queens of Africa]. Speaker 1: Well there's so much more material that's out there that has not been produced, has not been researched and produced, and Dr. Clarke and I used to talk about it often because as I indicated to you earlier the last image that we produced was back in '91 [1991] and '92 [1992] and I think during our many discussions over the phone and in person and Dr. Clarke told me, "Henry [HistoryMaker Henry H. Brown], we have enough material to go up another ten years." You know and I said, "Well perhaps we can utilize some of that material, but my overall, long range goal is to expand it a third time." Maybe change the name to include other people like I said Haile Selassie and some of the--Sadat, Anwar Sadat, and some of these other world leaders-- Speaker 2: Now I remember-- Speaker 1: --of color. Speaker 2: --Coors [Molson Coors Brewing Company] had a series of African American heroes. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: Very much, I mean almost a clone of Great Kings and Queens. Speaker 1: Yeah and they-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they promoted the African American cowboy. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Thomas Blackshear was one of the artists, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. They used some of the same artists that were in our program; Blackshear and I think Dean Mitchell was also a part of, of that program. Speaker 2: I think [HistoryMaker] Jerry Pinkney. Speaker 1: I don't think any of the women artists were in their program, but, and I think that they did a decent job with that, with that program. And they weren't the only ones to try and clone the African American--Great Kings and Queens of Africa program. There were others badly shall I say glimpses of what we were trying to do. And, but we always kept quality in the program as we do in everything that we do. Speaker 2: Now how were the artists selected? Speaker 1: Well as you know-- Speaker 2: Because these are African American artists, and there are a lot of good artists-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the key. Speaker 2: --represented. Speaker 1: That's the key to the overall, the overall success of the program and that is that there are two stories of the Great Kings and Queens. The story of the king and queen is legendary, but equally as important is the story of the artists. These too are African American men and women, so we really were telling two stories. One of a contemporary nature, the artist who created the work, and the king or queen, which was legendary history. Story_ID: 531894 Speaker 1: And our artists were selected by working with the various art schools throughout the country and through word of mouth among the artist community. And when an artist either had heard of the program [Great Kings and Queens of Africa] either through his art instructor or one of art schools and they would make an inquiry, then we would ask that they would send some of their work to either to my office [with Anheuser-Busch Companies] or to D'Arcy [D'Arcy MacManus and Masius; D'Arcy MacManus Masius Worldwide] and we would look at their work. And then D'Arcy had been instructed to send to them two or three sketches for them to illustrate within a certain param- within certain parameters because we wanted to reproduce their work, and so we wanted to keep everything the same; we wanted it in uniform numbers. I think most of the paintings were like forty-two by thirty-four inches, and we wanted 'em all to conform to that standard. Speaker 2: Now were they all oil paintings, or where they different media? Speaker 1: Yeah, they were different mediums, oil and watercolor. And of course I, I'm very, very pleased to say that [HistoryMaker] Jerry Pinkney was an expert in watercolors, and obviously we had to do certain things once his paintings were done in order to preserve the chist- the history of the work. And but Jerry Pinkney and I think there was another that were basic watercolor drawings or illustrations. The others were all oil base and different compositions of oil. Now I don't know that much about the technicality of the oils and that sort of thing, but basically watercolor and oil. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, and they had to be certain dimensions to (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Certain dimensions, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. And was there, I guess some would think, well, why didn't you have the same artist do all of 'em? You know, just one good artist doing all the paintings instead of having so many different artists. Speaker 1: Well, yeah. We wanted as many people as we could get into the program. We thought that by getting a number of artists involved would add to the credit- the overall credibility of the program and would take out the, the ugliness of being a strictly a commercial vehicle. We wanted this--a project that a number of artists could participate in and we found in with this approach it became a tool of competition. The artists began to study one another's work, and the new artists that would come into the program worked digi- diligently in trying to one-upsman the original painting that they had observed. So the work improved as we went along. In other words some of the original paintings were all very, very fine work, but some of the subsequent paintings the artists were, took advantage of some of the original work and avoided some mistakes that maybe some of the earlier artists had made. So from that standpoint we, we were extremely happy to have as many African American artists involved in the program. Speaker 2: I suppose that the program from the photos I've seen of the gathering at the United Nations [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York] and the gathering in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] that some of the--it created a collegial feeling among the artists too-- Speaker 1: They did. Speaker 2: --where they--where it didn't exist before, a lot of 'em didn't know each other right? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. And I, I would like to say that we tried to add to that feeling of congeniality among the artists by having certain social functions for them, inviting influentials in the various communities where we were hosting this activity. And so the art lovers, historian buffs et cetera all came together, and it provided an evening of congeniality and good will between the artist that we had either brought in, or was a resident of that community to rub shoulders with those in the museum world, or in the arts world. Speaker 2: So we're talking about a tremendous ripple effect of this one idea (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes. Speaker 2: The artists, the historians, the venues where they're presented, all these-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --things are coming together. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 531895 Speaker 1: Did you ever get any serious criticism from historians or? Speaker 2: Yes, we--over the years we received criticism, some racist in nature. As we talked about earlier, "Why a beer company?" And our response, "Why not?" Educational (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're suggesting the criticism was coming from--you got like racist people, whites that don't like the images-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --perhaps on one hand. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then you've got black people that say, what is a beer company doing putting-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --these images up? Speaker 2: And then you had people that challenged the image of Cleopatra, and we would respond to the many letters we got along that line. Cleopatra was an Egyptian, and this is Great Kings and Queens of Africa, and where is Egypt? So not trying to be flip or anything, but for those historian, consider themselves historians, couldn't get away from that. Then there were those who say, who said things like, "Hannibal? I never knew that Hannibal was a Negro." I said, "We don't even use the word Negro in the program anywhere. And Hannibal, Northern Africa, you know we don't know you know where (laughter) where you're coming from because you know his roots are in Africa. The Alps, although in Switzerland that's just part of the--his route." But nevertheless everything that we do was subject to criticism. There were people even today that would state negative comments about the way we handled the Clydesdales. And so we have a certain segment or our population that are targeted for we consider to be unfair criticism of any and everything that we do basically because we are a beer company [Anheuser-Busch Companies], and, but we're trying to be a responsive and responsible company as a good corporate citizen. And we felt programs like the Great Kings and Queens of Africa and programs like that, the Clydesdales and many others puts our badge out front. Story_ID: 531896 Speaker 1: Now did you ever have any--much interaction with the Clydesdales and? Speaker 2: Yes I used the Clydesdales in many of my programs, like the Shriners for example are, is an organization that likes to parade in the streets, in the major areas where they have their national conferences, and so they've often requested of me the use of the Clydesdales. And one year I was up there on the wagon driving the Clydesdales, don't wanna do that again, but nevertheless had that opportunity maybe twice and have used them many times around the country, very pleasant experience for me. Story_ID: 531897 Speaker 1: Oh, there's one other observation. I think I shared this with you before we even started the interview. Is that I was in Chicago [Illinois] in a parking garage that was owned by the Assyrians-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and on the wall was a great kings of Assyria with Shalmaneser and Tiglath-Pileser and Esarhaddon and all of them. And just so, so this idea has spread to other ethnic communities too-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know within the context of Budweiser [Anheuser-Busch Companies]? Speaker 2: Yes it has as you might realize or you may not. We have some 450 some odd distributors of our products around the country, and many of them have strong minority concentrations in their particular areas. And many of them have taken it on themselves to pattern certain programs dealing with the demographics in the area, and so we bless their efforts but we do oftentimes ask them to submit it whatever they're gonna do to us before final-final so that it projects the proper image that we want out there. Story_ID: 531898 Speaker 1: Let, let me ask you about the 'Lou Rawls Parade of Stars.' Now that's another big project-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that you were involved with. Speaker 2: The 'Lou Rawls Parade of Stars' was a program that initially I was involved with as a result of a conversation I held with Chris Edley [Christopher Edley, Sr.] and later with Virgil Ecton [Virgil E. Ecton]. At that time these were the two top people in the United Negro College Fund [UNCF]. And what had happened was they had attempted a telethon similar to the present form in Houston, Texas, and they did not get the mock results that they were looking for so far as reaching their goals, their financial goals. As part of that initial telethon effort was [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson and Clifton Davis, and they tried the telethon program in Houston as I said for two years, and it didn't yield the kinds of results that they were looking for. So I happened to have been on a plane with Virgil Ecton, and they knew of my position with Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] at that, and they also knew that Lou Rawls had just recently signed a personal service contract with, with Budweiser. So they approached me and asked that--if we would be considerate of their sending in a proposal to have Budweiser take over the telethon portion. This would've been for the--in the third year of that program. And they wanted to make it, not a local forum, but into a national forum, and they had an excellent action plan for it. And, but they wanted me to give them some advice as to whether or not Anheuser-Busch would be receptive to such a plan. Well I looked at it, and when I looked at the financial portion of that plan, I knew right away that it was gonna require some additional work. And one of the things that whenever you present a plan to any major corporation, corporations don't like financial surprises. In other words, if you say you can do this for a thousand dollars then don't run into trouble and go back and say, "Well we need more money, we need more money; we need to finish the project." You have to be upfront and almost as exact as you possibly can. So that conversation was held, and finally they were able to put together a budget, and I think that original budget was something like two and--$250,000 to produce the telethon program utilizing the personal services contract of Lou Rawls, but that there were some other things that was gonna have to go into the mix as to where was the telethon going to be produced, et cetera. And we all settled on the fact that that initial area would be out in Las Vegas [Nevada] since all of the talent was out there they wanted to use. So all of those decisions were made, and I initially kicked that program off. Story_ID: 531899 Speaker 1: The following year, [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith's office took over the program ['Lou Rawls Parade of Stars'], along with Victor Julien. Victor Julien was a special services contract person, and, and he was the so-called coordinator for the program between Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] and the United Negro College Fund [UNCF]. There are a lot of other details that went into that overall process, but following Wayman and Victor Julien's involvement, my effort deceased, and I went into other things in other areas. So, all of the success that the United Negro College Fund telethon experienced we owed to the great work of Wayman Smith and Victor Julien. And in that regard, that program generated--and of course, Lou Rawls. And during the course of that program, the program generated somewhere in the neighborhood of I think $15 million each year for some twelve years, so it was a significant boost for the forty-one or forty-two UNCF college schools. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 531900 Speaker 1: Now tell me about Chief I and Chief II, those programs (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Oh yeah, Chief I and Chief II and I have this, those brochures over there, I'm going to give them to you. Speaker 1: This is about 1984-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or so? Okay. Speaker 2: Chief I was an attempt to salute the African American police chiefs around the country. There is an organization called NOBLE [National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives], and through that organization I was able to obtain the materials for all of the black chiefs in the major centers of America. We commissioned an artist in Chicago [Illinois], Dr. Neel- I'm sorry, Dr. Neely [ph.], and--who's an artist and had him to do renditions of a folder that illustrated each of these chiefs, and the whole idea was to salute the top law executives in our country. And in the major metropolitan areas of, of the city that they represent. And I--Chief I was the first effort. And after the first effort there were others who had recently come into that position and they wanted to be included. There were other law executives that were in the Federal Bureau of Investigation [FBI], [U.S.] Secret Service, et cetera, and they too wanted to be included. So after the initial production of Chiefs I, all of the initial requests for addition and inclusion in the program made it possible for me to develop a second, second copy, and this too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so, so some of the chiefs I guess would include [HistoryMaker] Lee P. Brown here [Houston, Texas]? Speaker 2: Lee Pree- Lee P. Brown and there were several others. Speaker 1: Tyree Broomfield, I guess that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I've got the brochure for you and with, with all of the relevant names. Some of the guys today are not in those positions as you know that time has changed and they have either moved on, been promoted to other areas, et cetera. But it was in the overall umbrella of our efforts to recognize the important pillars in the African American community. Story_ID: 531901 Speaker 1: We had another program called Living Legends [Budweiser's Living Legends] as--and it too was a component to that overall umbrella, all coming under the Great Kings and Queens of Africa, and our effort of recognizing the cultural heritage of our people, which I said earlier, represented a major demographic segment of the Afri- the marketplace for Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] products. Speaker 2: Now Living Legends, about what year was that launched? Speaker 1: They were all about the same period of time. There were times when I would do both at the same time. Living Legends was another program that we paid tribute to important pillars in the African American community, and people like Dr. Dorothy Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height], some of your African American organization leaders, et cetera. The civil rights mother, Mrs. Rosa Parks, she was one of my first illustrations and presentations. Some of the persons in the entertainment industry, Lou Rawls and others; we had some of the publishers and some of the newspapers was a part of that, and, and other trade organizations. Congressman Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] was one of the first persons that we made such a presentation to. And these were all charcoal drawings that were produced by one of the artists in our Great King series, Ann Marshall of Detroit [Michigan], and these were charcoal sketch drawings that were something like thirty-six inches wide and forty-eight inches long. Story_ID: 531902 Speaker 1: Now you, you participated in a, or were key in a program honoring Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] too when that-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when his holiday became a-- Speaker 2: Right, and-- Speaker 1: --national-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We had developed a schedule of special salutes to Dr. Martin Luther King in various cities, namely our corporate market in St. Louis [Missouri] where our corporate headquarters [for Anheuser-Busch Companies] are located; Houston [Texas]; Dallas [Texas]; and a couple of other sites where we would honor outstanding local leaders for their contribution and the betterment of the community place. And we did not do this alone. We would unite and ally ourselves with either a member of the Pan-Hellenic society such as Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], or one of the sororities, AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], and in some cases all of them, the entire Pan-Hellenic Council [National Pan-Hellenic Council]. And these programs were highly successful because they, they showcased community leaders who worked in the ideals of Dr. Martin Luther King. And the organizations such as the Pan-Hellenic society were the ones who actually executed the program. Our efforts were more or less in funding and overall showcasing our community responsibility, by being socially active with the support of that program. Now, the granddaddy of all of those programs is one that we even today as a retired person I still chair, and that program is in Washington, D.C., and it's now in its sixteenth year, and it is an international salute to the memory of Dr. Martin Luther King. It involves though the diplomatic community, all your African, Caribbean ambassadors and many of the ambassadors from the Baltic countries, and some of the Mediterranean countries as well. And, but it takes the form of two minute prayers by each of the participants, each of the--in their native tongues, each of the native--the diplomats would give a two minute prayer in the native tongue of the language, the country that they represented. And that pro- excuse me, that program continues today. Last year I think General Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] who at that time was secretary of state was honored. There are some four awards that are annually presented, and it is carried on C-SPAN each year. Story_ID: 531903 Speaker 1: You received it seems as though hundreds of awards. Now I don't know if that's accurate but I--looking around here (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --there are lots of awards from all kinds of organizations, including you've got awards from all the major civil rights organizations; fraternities and sororities; there's awards from the association for--. Okay, just lots of awards. It seems as though it says something about what you're doing, you're reaching a lot of people who have organizations, organizations with lots of, thousands and millions of individuals involved. Did you--I mean when you plan a program are you consciously thinking about what--how many people I can reach through these, or how many--how it's gonna ripple out I guess? Speaker 2: No, I guess, I guess the overall thought process is that I was challenged with was how can I impart to those communities the, the message of our company [Anheuser-Busch Companies]? And at that time that message was being corporately responsible to the needs of community and tailoring all of my marketing actions to the marketplace which I was responsible for to my company. I tried to develop programs that would enhance the quality of life in those communities, as well as support so many of the able organizations. It's targeting their actions to enhance the quality of life in those communities. So I call myself partnering with those groups. Story_ID: 531904 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess what I'm really trying to say is that--do you see--I think some people may not see a position like yours as the way you see it in terms of being able to--. It seems as though you see yourself as someone who could be a catalyst for a lot of economic opportunity, recognition and other things for the black community, in the--by being in the business you're in. I don't think everybody else, I mean in--well every black person in a position in a major corporation necessarily gets as much I guess community involvement and activity out of their position as you get out--of course you were in a promotional kind of position, but, gee you seem like you've really taken it seriously and think about it. Speaker 2: Well, I, I recall my college professor [Milton Wilson] calling me a highly motivated person. I, I considered myself to really, really truthfully be concerned about the, the wellbeing of, of the members, not only my family, but others in the community. I have always dedicated myself to take the right message that the corporation [Anheuser-Busch Companies] needed to target its resources, its efforts to the betterment of the community, because if you don't support the needs of the community, then you don't have a marketplace to market your products. But at the same time you're also helping, and I keep using this word, enhancing the quality of life, and I'm a very proud person who was born in the black community. I was educated in the black community and those two factors leads me to be responsible. That the black community con- considers and continues to grow for the benefit of other young black men, boys and girls like myself. I'm truly gratified by the recognition that I've received over the years from so many of the organizations as you've stated, but this is something that I feel I was called to do. This is something that I feel every black man and woman in a similar position should be doing, and really, and truthfully if they do the job that they are allowed to do and challenge the corporation to be more active, to provide more resources, if they don't do those things the corporation is gonna dry up its resources and as a result the black community is gonna go without the resources of Corporate America and things are gonna even get worse. And to the extent that the corporation may not even have a marketplace to market its products in future years. So it's a charge that I took seriously to do what I could in the space that I was in during the time that I was there and as I said I'm truly grateful for having that opportunity and gratified with the results that followed. Story_ID: 531905 Speaker 1: Now are you satisfied with the people who are coming behind you, and or-- Speaker 2: More can be done, more can be done, there are more of us out there now; more can be done. The challenges are even greater today than they were when I came along because there are more of us, but more can be done. And I challenge all those who follow me and all those that are gonna follow those persons, the job is not done. The plight of the black community is very dire today, and I can't say whether it's any more dire or worse off today than it was twenty-five years ago, but when I look around and I see the many businesses that existed, black businesses in the black community are drying up and going out of business today, you know you wonder how long will this continue? Gentrification is a big thing in the black community today. I remember growing up in Houston, Texas when streets like Dowling [Dowling Street; Emancipation Avenue], Lyons Avenue, West Dallas [Street] were blustering with black businesses, shoe businesses, cleaners, grocery stores, shoe repair places, it's just a number--photography studios, et cetera. And in many instances they were across the street from each other, if not next door to one another. That's no longer the case. I'm not saying that even though those businesses were segregated that, that was a bad thing, nor do I say that we need to go back to that. But at least we had black, prosperous black businesses, hotels, taxicab businesses, all of these things existed back there then that no longer today. But the job isn't complete, it's just taken on a new form. Every corporation should try and develop strong actions toward a stronger community action oriented program. In saying to the African American community: "We appreciate your business and this is our way of showing our appreciation." And that's one of the things that I was always able to do with the Great Kings and Queens of Africa: "This is our way of expressing our appreciation to you." Story_ID: 531906 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: Do more even though I think I wore out my request for doing more with a corporate body. Speaker 1: Is there any story? Speaker 2: Yeah, "Here he comes, here he comes again, now what do you want this time?" You know, I'm just asking for my share to do what I think needs to be done, and not out of sympathy but out of good business practices and not feel ashamed to ask for those additional things. And Larry [Larry Crowe], I'm so grateful at my age to sit back and marvel over the little young kid that I was when I first started in this business, and having contributed thirty-eight, thirty-nine years in this area, and realize that not only was I appreciated by what you initially said, the many citations and recognitions that I received, but more importantly that the corporation, Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] recognized that, and, and that's why I was elected to become an officer in the year of 1980, and ten years later become a senior officer, and it was in that position that I retired as senior vice president of marketing and development at Anheuser-Busch. That in itself makes a statement about the body of work that I was responsible for and the-- Speaker 1: Now that was in 1994 when you retired? Speaker 2: That was in 1994, and the many accolades that I received from the various communities throughout America. As you know I, I traveled throughout the country as well as the Caribbean working on behalf of Anheuser-Busch, and I was very proud to do that. And Anheuser-Busch is not a perfect company, nor is it today, but at least I made 'em a- to be as responsive more so than they had been in the past. Story_ID: 531907 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hope is that someday our young daughters and our young boys will not be considered in the same, in the same light as perhaps I was when I came along, and as strictly a person of color, but that they would be considered as Americans with the same ability as any other American, and should be offered every opportunity based on that consideration. Not subject to certain jobs or certain positions as they are on the football field and basketball arena, coaching ranks and all of these positions, whatever position that they apply for, would be totally accepted based on their qualification and not on the color of their skin. Story_ID: 531908 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything that you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Obviously the Great Kings and Queens of Africa, the production and development of that overall program. I'm sure it'll be with us for many, many more years. And the fact that I worked for a corporate 500 [sic. Fortune 500] corporation, the world's largest brewery, and I was the first African American to be promoted to an executive senior level position in that company; I consider that as one of my legacies. Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] is well respected in the world of brewing, but just not necessarily a brewing company, there are thirteen companies involved in the conglomerate of Anheuser-Busch, brewing is just one. And as I said I am extremely gratified in having been recognized by that board and elevated to a senior level position, having started at the lowest position in marketing and gravitating through thirteen different promotions. Story_ID: 531909 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family, we haven't talked about your family in detail, just give us a little update on your family. Speaker 2: Well, I consider my family as being the source of a lot of the strength that I do have. As I indicated to you maybe earlier, I was born during the Depression [Great Depression] period and there were three girls and five boys, including myself. And so you can imagine my father [John H. Brown, Sr.] and mother [Willie Valentine Brown] having the responsibility of raising eight kids during the years of the Depression. So everything was extremely limited and void on so many different occasions. I can remember the days that one watermelon was our supper for the entire family. I can remember days where we ate crackers and water. I can remember when there was no milk to eat cereal with, and I can remember when days when our staple was rice, just rice, so--excuse me. So, I don't like to recall those, those, those days. We lived in a three room home, rented a three room home and, but we all were supportive of each other. I'm extremely grateful that neither of my brothers or my sister ever went foul of the law or was ever handled by law enforcement officers. We all were educated in the Houston Independent School District. All but one I think graduated from high school, and four of us graduated from college. Two of my sisters went on to graduate with graduate degrees and have professional educational careers following that. My oldest brother [John H. Brown, Jr.] was an orthographer with a major newspaper here in the city [Houston, Texas]. I had another brother who--Richard [Richard Brown], who is an engineer. So we were the product of the Depression period, but we did not allow the Depression period to stall our growth and professional development. Story_ID: 531910 Speaker 1: What about your children? Let's-- Speaker 2: I am very, very, very proud of the fact that I have three daughters and one son [Harold Brown]. Three of my daughters all have business backgrounds. One of them [Vicki Brown-Hamilton] works as an educator though in the continuing education department at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], and the other two [Deidre Brown-Hamilton and Beverly Caesar] are corporate executives with Tracinda Corporation and Bell West [ph.]. My son is a television repair person, has his own shop. And of course I'm just so grateful that they too have led model lives to this date. My wife [Mary Lee Brown] who passed in 1994 was an educator in City of Houston [Texas] and worked in the system, the Houston Independent School District for some thirty-four years. And of course my career started in the business world. Story_ID: 531911 Speaker 1: Tell me about your involvement with the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity]? Speaker 2: Well that too has been a gratifying experience of mine. Initially I, I felt that by becoming an Alpha, a member of the Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity was probably enough involvement on a social level for me because I belonged to so many other professional groups and social groups, until I found out about the Boule. And of course the thing that separates the Boule from the other Greek letter organizations is that the other Greek letter organizations are more or less collegiate oriented that's where they're founded on college campuses et cetera, and they are targeted to the collegiate world, whereas the Boule is another type of organization, but professionally oriented. And it's an organization that was started by--it started in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] one hundred years ago, and it only--the organization attracts top professional men in whatever their profession--persuasions are. You do not apply to the Boule, the Boule is an organization that you are invited in by the membership, and it has again been a gratifying experience for me. Currently I serve as the sire of the Houston [Texas] chapter, what we call member Boule, and it is patterned after the Greek word Boule because that was a form that was given to an organization that governed similar to a city council or a state capitol organization. Story_ID: 531912 Speaker 1: Just say this also about the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity]. For many years the Boule was a secretive organization, and, and today they--we call ourselves coming out of the closet, becoming more proactive. The Boule did not want to duplicate what was already being done in the community by doing the same things that the Urban League [National Urban League] was attempting to do and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other professional groups are doing. And so it prides itself on supporting these organizations in a major way, and its, its overall thrust has been to bring out the best in each other, and in more or less building the, the professional strength of a fellow member of the Boule, providing an opportunity to discuss common problems in one's profession. For so many years we had guys to ascend to positions within their community such as mayors, chiefs of police, school superintendents and as they ascended to these high levels of authority they found themselves in areas where they could- they didn't have allies to talk to about common problems, and the Boule provided that forum to talk with other people around the country who were experiencing some of the same challenges and pressures of their new positions which they had attained. Speaker 2: Okay so you're saying the corporate world can isolate you in a lot of ways. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you need to--need that kind of camaraderie-- Speaker 1: Support. Speaker 2: --or support-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --from someone who's experiencing the same thing. Speaker 1: Right. So that, that is the overall strategy and purpose. And then little by little there was the need to get more socially active--not to duplicate, but to provide other arenas that where--perhaps were void or we needed to support and/or lead. Speaker 2: Now at what stage in your own corporate development were you invited to join the Boule? I mean what--how long did it take? Speaker 1: I was pro- I was invited in 1990. Speaker 2: So you were pretty far along? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You were a senior vice president level, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, 1990. Now I had been asked earlier, but I was a rather busy person at that time, and as I said earlier I presently belonged to so many groups I didn't need another group to join and I didn't understand the overall relevance of the Boule at the time, nor did I take the time. But now that I'm so intricately involved in the day to day activities, there's a local officer and a national officer, I'm thoroughly enjoying my work. Story_ID: 531913 Speaker 1: Is there anything else before, you can think of to-- Speaker 2: I can't, I can't think of anything, I wanna personally thank you, Larry [Larry Crowe], and your assistant [Scott Stearns] for giving me this opportunity to at least provide some glimpse into the showcase of my past and something that I'm truly proud of and I try to pass that pride over to my kids. For the many nights and days that were, experienced a house with no father because I was off somewhere doing deeds on behalf of Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies]. But they tru- they truly understood my efforts then because in the earlier days of my work with the company I used to take them with me during the summer vacation months, and, so they experienced the rituals that I use to go through writing reports 'til the wee-wee hours of the morning when my wife [Mary Lee Brown] was calling me to come go to bed and stuff like that, so that's basically all I have to say there. Story_ID: 531914 Speaker 1: Now our last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: A person who truly cared for the future prosperity of his people, his fellow people, his fellow man. A man who truly loved his family, and a man who to this day is extremely thankful for having been given the opportunity to work, and, and in some way produced a legacy for his people as in the time and the space that I was given. That's it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay, Larry [Larry Crowe], good. I enjoyed it. Story_ID: 531915 Speaker 1: This is [HistoryMaker] Henry H. Brown, and it was taken upon entering Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in the year 1950. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next? All right. Tell us about this one? Speaker 1: This picture was taken in the hills of Heidelberg, Germany while a member of the military police [U.S. Army Military Police Corps] on a bivouac in the year 1951, of course following World War II [WWII]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 1: This picture is one taken at the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York] in New York [New York] which was a part of an annual unveiling by Black Enterprise of their annual calendar, and it showcases the Great Kings and Queens [Great Kings and Queens of Africa] and the persons in this picture are-- Speaker 2: From left to right. Speaker 1: Left to right, Bill Cosby; [HistoryMaker] Reverend Benjamin Hooks who at time was executive director for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; entertainer Bobby Short; and of course myself. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next photo. Speaker 1: This picture was taken in St. Louis [Missouri] during the annual Shriners Day parade at the beginning of that parade, and it was one that I was given the opportunity of driving the Clydesdale wagon with the Clydesdale horses. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my official picture of my [U.S.] military career. It was taken in Frankfurt, Germany as a part of the forty- 537th Military Police attachment [537th Military Police Company]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This picture was taken at the annual NAACP convention in Houston, Texas when the NAACP honored General Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] with the Spingarn award [Spingarn Medal]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This picture--if I use that one I got to use another one with my other daughter in it because she'd be extremely upset. I think I have another one. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let's get this one-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --and then we can address that. Speaker 2: This picture is taken at one of the annual Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] functions, the Christmas celebration, and it featured, right to left, my dear friend Walter Criner [Walter Criner, Sr.] and his, his wife; in the middle, Acusa Mercedes Terri [ph.]; my daughter, Vicki [Vicki Brown-Hamilton]; and of course myself. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of the Brown boys, left to right then speaker of the state legislature of California, the Honorable Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown]; myself; and the Honorable Brown [Ron Brown] who at that time was secretary of interior, I think it was. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wasn't it commerce? Speaker 1: Commerce. Speaker 2: Commerce, secretary of commerce, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Very good, next? Speaker 2: This picture of then Mayor Marion Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry]; your South African ambassador, I can't think of his name; and Dr. Dorothy Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height] during a presentation of the Dorothy Height Leadership Award [Dr. Dorothy I. Height Leadership Award] to me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: I've a got a nice picture back on the wall, I wanna show that to you. This is a, this is a picture of song stylist Anita Baker and Judge Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] during one of my activities with the Detroit [Michigan] Urban- Detroit NAACP. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay all right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. This is a picture of Floyd Cooper and Queen Amina and his, his unveiling of Queen Amina. Next to Floyd is Dr. John Henrik Clarke; then myself; and then Leonard Jenkins and his picture of Tiye, the Nubian queen of Egypt. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: About what year is that? Speaker 2: That was, that was the tenth anniversary picture. Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985]? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: It was a picture that was taken at the Black Enterprise celebration of top black businesses. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, okay. Next. All right. Speaker 1: This is a celebration of the United Nations [UN] celebration, unveiling. And it features--let me get these guy's names right here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is Rahsaan Fort [Rahsaan Fort II], the artist for Nandi, Queen of Zuzuland [sic. Zululand]; and myself; and a United Nation ambassador welcoming the children of Zuzuland to the annual, the unveiling at the United Nations. Story_ID: 531916 Speaker 1: Left to right on this picture is myself; then mayor, the mayor, former mayor, [HistoryMaker] Lee P. Brown; Mrs. Deidre Brown [Deidre Brown-Hamilton]; Mrs. Vicki Brown-Hamilton; and State Representative Rodney Ellis. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yes. A description of my mother going to church on Sunday morning, Mrs. Willie Mae Valentine Brown [Willie Valentine Brown]. Speaker 2: About what year is that? Speaker 1: This picture was taken in our original home [in Houston, Texas], I would say 1945...