 Story_ID: 380199 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, and I'm the interviewer. And Neculai Burghelea is the videographer. And we're doing an interview for The HistoryMakers. Can you state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Yosef ben-Jochannan. It's spelled, Y-O-S-E-F, that means Yosef, Alfredo, A-L-F-R-E-D-O, Alfredo, Antonio is A-N-T-O-N-I-O, ben Jochannan, B--a small B, E-N, dash, capital J-O-C-H-A-N-N-A-N, is ben-Jochannan. That's my name. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: December 31, 1918. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: I, according to my parents [Julia Matta and Kriston ben-Jochannan] because I didn't know, I was born in Ethiopia. Speaker 1: In Ethiopia? Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1918, December the 31st, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me, what is your occupation or what was your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation was as an anthropologist and a historian at, last place was at Cornell, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. Speaker 1: All right, and today's date is? Speaker 2: Today's October the 4th, 1906, 5th (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The 5th. Speaker 2: Nineteen o'six [1906]. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: I mean 2006 [sic. November 5, 2006]. Speaker 1: And where are we? What is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: This is 40 West 125th- 35th Street [135th Street], Apartment 2P [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 380200 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you a couple of People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Okay, so we can get warmed up here. What is your favorite food? What do you like to eat? Speaker 2: My favorite food are foods in the Caribbean. I lived in the Caribbean much of my youth (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So Caribbean. Speaker 2: --until a grown man. So that I have favorite foods: Spanish foods and what is called Caribbean food. They got a misnomer. They say, West Indian. There is no West Indian. That's a misnomer. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: They are African people living in the West Indies. West Indians, they were not Indians. Speaker 1: Okay, so you like Caribbean food? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What time of the year do you like the best? Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in hot weather so I love the summer. Speaker 1: Summer. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Not particularly. I like--my suits are dark suits. For instance, I use dark clothes. Most of the suits I have are dark. Speaker 1: Okay, and where do you like to go on vacation? Speaker 2: Africa. To India, or to Africa. Speaker 1: Africa. Speaker 2: I stay there. If I wasn't sick, I'd be there. Speaker 1: Okay, what is--do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: It would have to do with Egypt (unclear), oh, oh. One in my book, (cough)--oh--excuse me (unclear). Speaker 1: Well, if you can't think of it now, it's okay. It's fine. Story_ID: 380201 Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start by talking about your parents. Tell me your mother's name. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Matta. Speaker 1: How do you spell it, please? Speaker 2: M-A-T-T-A, Julia Matta, J-U-L-I-A, Matta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's a, she was a Puerto Rican. Speaker 1: She's what? Speaker 2: She was a Puerto Rican. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in Puerto Rico. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, did she tell you anything about her childhood, growing up? Speaker 2: Well, no, not too much. I don't remember much. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I know she had a father and a mother, a mother who never worked. She was kept by my grandfather. Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Huh? My grandfather would have been a hundred. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What is his name? Speaker 2: Good question, not--it's not spelled. It's spelled K-R-I-S-T-I-A-N or C-R-I-S-T-I-A-N would be his name. Speaker 1: Kristian Matta [ph.]? Speaker 2: Kristian, no. You see, in Spanish, you, your mother's name is a dash, then the name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the end of the father's name. If they are married, mother name is put there with a dash, then a dash. So my mother's last name was Matta, and it will always be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my mother's name would have to be--and my people, all of them, dash-Matta. And there was Jochannan-Matta, Jochannan--if you're of a Spanish culture, you would know that's his father's name and that was his mother's name. Speaker 1: Okay, what was your grandfather's last name? Speaker 2: Ben-Jochannan, my father is ben-Jochannan [Kriston ben-Jochannan]. Speaker 1: No, no, your mother's father, your grandfather. Speaker 2: Oh, that's Matta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: M-A-T-T-A. Speaker 1: Okay, so, did your mother tell you any stories about her going to school? Did she go to school? Speaker 2: She, in Spain, she went to university in Spain. That's how they met too. See, my mother was going to school there, and my father was working for the Ethiopian government and come from Germany to come to the Straits of Gibraltar to catch a boat to go (unclear) had to go through the Suez Canal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the phaeton was running fast, it was the phaeton then, the horses were going very fast. And my mother went to the store to get candy. Story_ID: 380202 Speaker 1: Your mother [Julia Matta], she went to Spain to go to the university. Speaker 2: To go to school. Speaker 1: School, to the university. But her primary years was in Puerto Rico? Her young years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's a Puerto Rican. Speaker 1: Right, so she lived in Puerto Rico until it was time to go to-- Speaker 2: To go to school. Speaker 1: --college, okay. Speaker 2: Then that time, my father [Kriston ben-Jochannan] was sent to Germany (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Ethiopia has coffee, the world's oldest coffee, and the best coffee. So he's sent there to represent the coffee trade. And when he was going to Ethiopia on vacation, my mother was at school, my father was much older than my mother. So he tried to save her from being damaged by the horse, and he fell on her. If you fall, if you, you don't touch a woman because at the time, if you touched a woman, most women at that time, my mother thought she would get pregnant. And so she couldn't go back upstairs to the school. So she told him he has to marry her-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: --'cause he was gonna make her pregnant. And he, my father was married already, and it wound up that he had to carry her to the boat. And she wouldn't sleep in the room. He had to marry her. So he took her to the Suez Canal and married her there. Story_ID: 380203 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your father since we've already introduced him. Tell me your father's name, your father's name? Speaker 2: Father, Kriston. Speaker 1: I thought that was her father. I thought it was your mother's [Julia Matta], grandfather (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Kriston is my, Kriston is my father's name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Spell K-R-I-S-T-O-N, T-O-N. Speaker 1: So it's Kriston ben-Jochannan? Speaker 2: Yeah. Ben means son of. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know anything about your father's father or mother? Speaker 2: I know my father's mother. Speaker 1: What is her name? Speaker 2: And I lived with my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew them in Ethiopia. But I-- Speaker 1: Okay, where was your father born? Speaker 2: Ethiopia. Speaker 1: He was born in Ethiopia. Do you know what year? Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: Did he tell you any stories about growing up in Ethiopia? Speaker 2: Well, that he was a boy, and it was strict between boys and girls. They didn't mix, and my father was brought up to respect my grandmother, and very strong rules for men, very simple. My mother--my grandfather married my grandmother. They didn't know each other. She, they didn't, they didn't--one day they're married, and they courted. They would go--he didn't come, go to her, can't hold her hand. They didn't meet. They met at grandmother. It wasn't like you know a girl could go on her own and shack up, oh, no. He was, he said he would marry her, and they said that they--and they had to marry that day. Speaker 1: Okay, so your father, he went--how far did he go in school? Speaker 2: My father is a lawyer. Speaker 1: He's a lawyer? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Where did he go to school? Speaker 2: In Ethiopia. Speaker 1: Okay, and what university did he graduate from? Speaker 2: University of Ethiopia [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: University of Ethiopia. They've got a school there in Addis Ababa [Ethiopia]. Speaker 1: Okay. So he--so your mother and father met, and the horses were going fast, and he fell on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and jumped-- Speaker 1: --your mother. Speaker 2: --jumped out to save her. Speaker 1: Save her, and they wind up getting married. Speaker 2: And he fell upon her, and my father and her--yeah, girls weren't intelligent in those days. So she believed she's gonna get pregnant and demands that he marry her. She couldn't walk upstairs. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said something about your father already being married? Speaker 2: Yeah, his first wife had died. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And he had a son by the first wife named, I can't remember. He had a son, had died. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so your mother and father were living in--after they got married, where did they live? Speaker 2: They, about a year. She didn't stay long in Ethiopia. She was sent to Brazil. She and I. I was a little baby, and he came to Brazil to--he was sent to Ethiopia to trade in Brazil. And then soon after come the overthrow, and my father lost everything. But he went to Puerto Rico by way of Cuba. He, dad had to go to Cuba through Puerto Rico to live, but they had to go through Cuba because she was an American citizen. I was. Speaker 1: Your mother? Speaker 2: I--yeah. Story_ID: 380204 Speaker 1: So, now, you're a little baby in Brazil, and you'll stay there for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I grew up there. Speaker 1: You grew up in Brazil? Speaker 2: Puerto Rico, no, no. I grew up in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 1: St. Croix, okay, so in Puerto Rico, you were an infant? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, how long did you live in Puerto Rico? 'Til what age? Speaker 2: Long, I was twenty-nine years. Speaker 1: Oh, you stayed in--okay. Speaker 2: I grew up there. Speaker 1: So tell me about your growing up years? What was your first memory of growing up? Speaker 2: I went to the public school, the Christian state public school in St. Croix. Speaker 1: What's the--okay-- Speaker 2: Christian study. Speaker 1: When you, okay, when you went to kindergarten, you were in Puerto Rico? Speaker 2: No, I was in the U.S. Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: You were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The island of St. Croix. Speaker 1: You were in St. Croix-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when you went to kindergarten. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: Then high school, I was in the Virgin Islands, and then I go to Puerto Rico. I was in the Puerto Rican high school. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about yourself as a young child, as, say in kindergarten, maybe five or six years old. What is your earliest memory of your childhood? What can you remember? Speaker 2: Well, I went to school in-- Speaker 1: Did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah. I couldn't, I couldn't play. I was restricted. You know, I had to read books, and it isn't like now, I had to, I will--I go to school. I come home. I did my homework. Then I did work for my father [Kriston ben-Jochannan]. Speaker 1: What kind of work did you do for your father? Speaker 2: Take care of his books. Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about when you were a young kid, you know, a child of-- Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: You don't remember, seven or eight? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm eighty-eight years. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, well, then what is your earliest memory? Is it when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 380205 Speaker 1: So, tell me about high school. Who, what were your teachers like? You, now you went to high school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mr., Mr., a man, the man that strikes me most is Mr. Thurland, was my manual training teacher. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Thurland, T-H-U-R-L-A-N-D, Thurland. Speaker 1: And he was your? Speaker 2: Manual training teacher, manual training teacher. Speaker 1: Um-hm, and what did you remember about him? Speaker 2: He was very strict. And I would go to him when I went to school to learn trade, making furniture, polish furnitures, desk chairs and tables, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had, Robert [ph.], Robert--last name. I can't remember but Robert, and Rafael [ph.], and his two sons were all working in the place and making the chairs, and I-- Speaker 1: And this was in high school? Speaker 2: That's when I was in high school. Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Christiansted, Virgin Islands high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The high school teacher was Mr. Rivera, Daniel, I think it was Daniel. I'm not sure, but I think it was Daniel Rivera [ph.]. I know his name was Rivera. Speaker 1: Rivera. Speaker 2: But I think it was Daniel. Speaker 1: What do you remember about him? Speaker 2: He drank a lot. And he, he was a very proficient man. He was from Puerto Rico. He was stationed in St. Croix, but he was from Puerto Rico. I know, his name was Juan Rivera. Speaker 1: Juan? Speaker 2: Juan Rivera, J-U-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay, so while you were in high school, were there any teachers that you went to for advice or gave your encouragement? Speaker 2: Madora Jackson [ph.]. Speaker 1: Dora Jackson? Speaker 2: Madora. Speaker 1: Madora. Speaker 2: Jackson, she was known. Speaker 1: Tell me what you talked to her about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was a woman-- Speaker 1: --and how she encouraged you? Speaker 2: She was a woman who, a lonely woman. You know, she didn't have a husband or people that actually was there. And Ms. Jackson was very, very strict, very strict. Speaker 1: So did you play sports or-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --or music or-- Speaker 2: --we played, we played in the yard, but it was the kids in your class. You go down, when they let out school, you go to play. You finish playing, you go back in the classroom. You went to school, a full pen. You got (unclear) in the road, and you go to school it's gonna--I had to stay the whole day. So I went to school with my food and a pen, in the school. Yeah, and then when, in the afternoon, when the bell rings for school, you march and go home. And if you, if you learn that trade, you step up by the trade. You go straight from school to the trade, and you stay there until after the training is over. You go home. I was going to make furniture. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I will go straight from school to Mr.--what's the man, I can't remember his name--Thurland, I go to Mr. Thurland for the trade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I went home and the next day I-- Story_ID: 380206 Speaker 1: What was home life like? Where did you live? What was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lived in-- Speaker 1: --the neighborhood like? Where did you live? Speaker 2: Well, I lived in a upper-class housing project. Speaker 1: And who were some of the people in your--you said upper-class. What were some of-- Speaker 2: The, it was a housing project, but it was owned by a woman, (unclear). They had estates, and owned chap- something. This was the upper class. The people--there were people who could afford where they lived. Speaker 1: So tell me about your neighbors? Who were your neighbors? Were they all black? Were they Puerto Rican? Speaker 2: Yeah, black, black. Speaker 1: Where they--all black? Speaker 2: In St. Croix, they were black, and in Puerto Rico, they were--we were called Puerto Ricans. But they--you could have been black and you could have been white and still you are Puerto Rican. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You see, we didn't have a problem like in the states. We didn't go, we didn't go to a school because you were dark skinned. You went to a school, you were Puerto Rican. Speaker 1: So there wasn't very much distinguishing in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you couldn't tell a child, "Sit down there because you are dark." No, you couldn't do that. You were sent to a school for Puerto Rican kids. They are kids. They, we didn't have that. We, you could--we couldn't, I couldn't tell that my teacher thought of me differently than the neighbors. Here's my mother [Julia Matta]. Speaker 1: Well, you got to sit down. Speaker 2: I was gonna show you a picture of my mother. Speaker 1: I'll look at it later. Okay, so tell me the types of games that you played at home or did you read a lot or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We played-- Speaker 1: What did your family do? Speaker 2: We played cricket, English cricket. Speaker 1: Okay, you played cricket? Speaker 2: Yeah. And we played cricket. That was the favorite sport, and then as I got more advanced in school, we played baseball and, baseball, football. But, and then we did a lot of running. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: So, you're about-- Speaker 2: Things that high school students will do. But then, as I get older, my responsibilities got stronger. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The more, I had to do more things that my father [Kriston ben-Jochannan] would want. Speaker 1: Right. What (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't like here. You had to do things with your father. For instance, my father knew I would be a lawyer because he's a lawyer. And (cough), but then when I got bigger, my father gave up law and became a property owner. He owned fifty acres of land, and that's how he made his living. The land had everything, and cane was the basic thing the land produced. But it had all, everything that grew in food or plant, food. And he would sell the food and the sugarcane, sugarcane to the factory. And the food was sold in the market where ladies sold the things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he had a higher income. Speaker 1: So he had higher income? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 380207 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Julia Matta] work at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother was a seamstress. She was a--not a seamstress, when the woman got a baby and the women took care of that? Speaker 1: The midwife? Speaker 2: The midwife. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me, did you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: No bro- I have brothers and sisters, but they died. I had--my mother gave birth to seven children. But of the seven children, I'm the only one that survived, all died before three years. Speaker 1: What did they die of? Speaker 2: Crib death. They knew something was wrong, but they couldn't pinpoint what was wrong. So they said, I didn't have no brother or sister that I could--that I played with. I come up alone. Speaker 1: Did you have any cousins? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had cousins. Speaker 1: Okay, that lived in your same community [in St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands]? Speaker 2: Same community, in my neighborhood. I'd go to them on weekend, yeah. Speaker 1: What were the holidays like at your house? Did you all celebrate holidays? Speaker 2: Well, they celebrated holidays. They made nothing big on holiday. No big fuss about holidays, no. Speaker 1: Okay, so you said, while you were in high school, you worked for your father [Kriston ben-Jochannan]? And-- Speaker 2: When I come home, my pleasure was working with my father. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me again what you did for him? Speaker 2: Books, took care of his books. I went to my aunt who used to be in charge of--her husband was a fisherman with his own boats. And she would try to see--Ms. Eunice Crews [ph.] was my aunt. And she was my mother's aunt. So she was my great aunt. And I used to go down to the wharf to help her with anything she wants help with. Story_ID: 380292 Speaker 1: So, we were talking about your high school years where you would work for your grand aunt [Eunice Crews (ph.)] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She-- Speaker 1: --with her shipping business, right? Speaker 2: My father's [Kriston ben-Jochannan] sisters, all of them had independent business. My Aunt Sophia [ph.], agriculture. She had married a man and she, they produced agriculture. That's Aunt Sophia, then my Aunt Jane [ph.], her husband, he had a estate with food. He sold food, yeah, he sold mangos, yams, potatoes, pumpkins, something, all in a productive stage. They, they never worked for people. They worked for themselves. Speaker 1: And they owned their own land? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so while you were in high school, did you begin to think about what type of job you would have or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --or whether you would-- Speaker 2: No, I, you see-- Speaker 1: --also own land? Speaker 2: You see, you were brought up to be independent. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And always you would think of starting your own project, and you'd be--you were gonna be big, you were gonna make it. Speaker 1: So what was your project that you began to-- Speaker 2: Nothing, just I'm going to be--I'm going to go to college, and I'm gonna come back from college. I was going to be a lawyer, but I started to study engineering without my father's knowledge. And one, for instance, when my father was invited to my graduation, he was happy. And when I was graduating, he was happy. But then when he came and found that I took anthropology, and then that even though I was graduated, he was very unhappy because the boy always do as the father does. You're gonna be like your father. Story_ID: 380293 Speaker 1: You graduated from high school. What year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: Senior high school? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: In 19--I was sixteen years. Speaker 1: So, 1934. Speaker 2: Yeah, sixteen, plus my date of birth. I was born in 1918, and I was sixteen when I graduated. Speaker 1: And after graduation, you went? Speaker 2: I went to Puerto Rico. I had to go to Puerto Rico to go to school because they had no college in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands. College was in Puerto Rico. Speaker 1: What college did you go to in Puerto Rico? Speaker 2: The Puerto Rican--the University of Puerto Rico [San Juan, Puerto Rico]. Speaker 1: And there you studied? Speaker 2: I studied anthropology and history. Speaker 1: So tell me about your college days in Puerto Rico. Speaker 2: Well, it was a college that everybody went to. It was a public college. Speaker 1: Tell me about those days, those years that you were there? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Anything particular come to mind? Speaker 2: No, I had to--I studied like people in my school did. I was just an ordinary school student, and I had to study what was required of me. Speaker 1: Were you a good student? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Were you a good student? Speaker 2: I was an A student. Speaker 1: Okay, so you did very well. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that you can remember that might have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mrs., oh, yeah, one was special, Miss, Miss Rey, R-E-Y, Rey. I used to know her name, I know, I always know her-- Speaker 1: Why was she so special? Speaker 2: She was very good. Speaker 1: What subject did she-- Speaker 2: --with languages and things, and very good. Speaker 1: What languages did you learn to speak? Speaker 2: Spanish and English. In Puerto Rico what--although it was American territory. I still needed Spanish. Speaker 1: So did you speak Spanish at home? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did your father [Kriston ben-Jochannan] speak Spanish also? Speaker 2: No. In St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], the language is English and in Puerto Rico, it was Spanish. Speaker 1: Okay. So you graduated from college in what year? Nineteen thirty-eight [1938]? Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: And you have a degree in? Speaker 2: In anthropology and history. I got a degree, anthropology and history, and then I got four honorary degrees as a doctor in this, doctor in that. I, I got-- Speaker 1: Okay, you have a number of honorary doctorate degrees, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 380294 Speaker 1: So when you finished college [University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico], what were your thoughts then about life? Speaker 2: Well, my thought was to start a business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had an argument with my father [Kriston ben-Jochannan]. I represented a client, and things were going my way, and my father told me that I was getting too smart for both of us. And one of us had to leave. So that means I got to leave. There was no question. Your father--you can't dominate things. If your father tells you, you got to leave, and he thinks it's getting too big for both of you, you know you got to leave. Speaker 1: So where did you go? Speaker 2: Come here. Speaker 1: To the United States? Speaker 2: When Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] was the president in 1940, I came, I had an uncle was head of the number system for numbers in New York [New York], not nowadays. It's, when the numbers was controlled by the system, Casper Holstein was my uncle. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Casper Holstein. Speaker 1: Casper (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) C-A-S-P-E-R, Casper, and Holstein is H-O-L-S-T-E-I-N. He was a personal friend of, Mr. Campeau [ph.], the man for the Schomburg collection [Schomburg Collection of Negro Literature, History and Prints; Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would visit, I visit Arthur Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg], Arthur Schomburg was born in Puerto Rico. Speaker 1: Arthur Schomburg. Speaker 2: That (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, he was born in Puerto Rico. Speaker 2: Of a Virgin Island mother. His mother was from the Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: Okay, so you came to the United States in 1940. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what did you do? How did--what did you do? Speaker 2: I came here, and I went to Jersey [New Jersey], straight to Jersey, and my uncle came for me. Speaker 1: Your uncle came for you? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, my uncle, at the time was the only man that had built a, from the ground up, a big house on 143rd Street and Convent Avenue, I think it was. He had the only black-owned property. Speaker 1: And what was your uncle's name? Speaker 2: Casper Holstein. Speaker 1: Okay, Holstein. Now, how was he your uncle? Was he your mother [Julia Matta] or your father's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's--he was my mother's uncle. Speaker 1: Your mother's uncle. Speaker 2: Yeah. Holstein, you see, Casper Holstein, Holstein, his father was a Danish man, from Denmark. And Casper come up here, and he was with Alex Pompez. Alex Pompez and Casper owned the Cuban All-Stars [Cuban Stars and New York Cubans], black, the black team, the Cuban All-Stars. They had a black league. And that league, Casper was there, plus Casper was involved with a person in the [U.S.] Senate from Chicago [Illinois]. So that Casper was like Madame Morca [ph.], and Madame Morca got her money from Casper to start her business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so they were (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, so your uncle came to get you and brought you to New York City? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then what did you do then? Speaker 2: Started to live with him. And I got a job. Speaker 1: Doing what? Speaker 2: Doing architecture. Speaker 1: Tell me some of the projects that you worked on? Speaker 2: I worked with Edward Durell Stone. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Edward Durell Stone. That was the big architect, and I mean, I had trouble. For a year I worked in New York and couldn't get a job. They won't hire black people, until Mr. Miller [ph.], who was an architect. And I went there, and I told him the trouble I was having finding a job. Nobody hired a black person. So he said, "All right, I lived in the Virgin Islands for a long time." And Miller said, "I'll give you a job." So I said, "Okay." He says, "But I have to put you behind a column." You know, how to mix a combination. And so I worked with him. Then I went with Roth [Emery Roth and Sons], R-O-T-H, R-O-T-H. And he had this office where they, you know where the St. Patrick's Church [St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York, New York] is? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Right in the block down Madison Avenue. And I got a job there. Speaker 1: What did you do there? Speaker 2: I was a senior draftsman. Story_ID: 380295 Speaker 1: You were working at Roth as a senior draftsman-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then what happened after that? Speaker 2: Then I went to work to Lake Success [New York]. The United Nations [UN] was then at Lake Success. Speaker 1: Lake Success. Speaker 2: Was the first place, United Nations. All--and then they bought Rockefeller land, gave the United States land where it is now, and they built the United Nations there. Then the government of Zanzibar came. And I used to do a lot for the Zanzibari government. And the Zanzibar government joined with the Tanzania government for protection. And Tanzania was joined with Zanzibar until--then the Arab governments and then some other governments didn't like the idea. So Tanzania split out and it went on its own. And Zanzibar and Tanzania had a government of its own and that created a big argument between Tanzania (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what did you do to work for them? What were you doing? What type of work were you doing for them? Speaker 2: I did diplomatic work, and I did work in Egypt. I did studies, some studies. And I did a report on Egypt, and I wrote it in Medu Neter. Speaker 1: You wrote it where? Speaker 2: Medu Neter. That's the language, ancient language of Egypt. And I did the work, a study that was considered unique. And-- Speaker 1: What year was this that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, God. Speaker 1: --did this study? You wrote a study. Speaker 2: I can't remember the time. Speaker 1: Okay, we're talking about Zanz- Tanzania and you working for them, and you wrote this study. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But we should be somewhere around 1943 or so? Speaker 2: No, we're gonna be in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Oh, we jumped, okay. Story_ID: 380296 Speaker 1: Let's finish up the '40s [1940s] and going into the '50s [1950s]. What were you doing around that time? You--after working for Roth and being a diplomat, you know, were-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --we're ending up the '40s [1940s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I started, then I started teaching in college here. Speaker 1: And what year was that? Speaker 2: I can't remember age, time period. I'm, you see, I got problems with my memory. Speaker 1: Okay, well, do you have any idea of whether it was in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: No, I know that I worked at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]. I worked for Jeffries [Leonard Jeffries, Jr.] at City College. I worked for, at Columbia University [New York, New York]. That was from (unclear). Speaker 1: What did you teach? Speaker 2: Anthropology. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Cultural anthropology. I taught the--I taught at Malcolm-King College [Malcolm-King: Harvard College Extension, New York, New York], with, not--Mattie something [Mattie Cook] was her name, when they had the (unclear) project there. And then I taught at Malcolm-King College, in the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York] building. I used to teach there. And finally, I wound up teaching at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. I got the paper on me. It's Cornell University. And then I resigned. Speaker 1: Okay, so you wrote your first paper, and then what prompted you to write your first book? Speaker 2: I just wrote. Speaker 1: Do you remember your first, very first book? Speaker 2: The, yeah, 'Black Man of the Nile'--'The Black Man'--it's a number of books. I can't remember. Speaker 1: The 'Black Man of the Nile and His Family' [Yosef ben-Jochannan], was that your first book? Speaker 2: No, my first book was, 'We the Black Jews' ['We the Black Jews: Witness to the "White Jewish Race" Myth,' Yosef ben-Jochannan]. Speaker 1: 'We the Black Jews.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what prompted you to write that book? Speaker 2: There were arguments all over that there are no black Jews, and that was nonsense here because I grew up, me seeing black Jews in Ethiopia. We were called, and they call up to now in Israel, we're called Falassa, Falassa, F-A-L-A-S-S-A. And the people here didn't know, never (laughter), up to now they didn't know there're black Jews. And I'm surprised. I didn't know that you are, were a Jew because of your color. But that's the thing about color, I don't understand how they got there. For instance, when I was in England, in Ireland, there were many Africans married to Irish girls. And that's the thing that I couldn't understand and didn't understand then, and don't understand it now. Story_ID: 380297 Speaker 1: During your years between graduating from college [University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto Rico] and coming to New York [New York] and working, when was the first time you went to Ethiopia? Speaker 2: I went with Jews all the time. My father [Kriston ben-Jochannan] one day told me, "You got to go to Ethiopia to see your grandparents, your grand--my father and my mother." And I went in a boat to visit them, and my grand- I went and I met some women who came to meet me. And they told me that they were my grandmother. And I wanted to know which one give birth to me. And they said, "We all." They wouldn't tell me which one I come out of. They said, "We all." Speaker 1: So the days that you spent in Ethiopia, tell me about the times. Speaker 2: Well, I lived among my people, the Falassa. Speaker 1: Falassa. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you do? What was, what age were you the first time that you went to Ethiopia? Speaker 2: I was about in my very, very early twenties. Speaker 1: Very early twenties. And so what impressed you in Ethiopia? Speaker 2: Well, the way that, the biggest thing that they had, I see buildings were built of cut stones, mostly without concrete--without mortar, will put the stone on top of stone. Then the pyramids in Sudan, and there are forty-four pyramids in Sudan. The pyramids in Egypt, I say pyramids 'cause done with stone, no brick, no brick, not one single brick. There were some with bricks, and some without bricks, all kinds of structures that I see there, that are still there now. And these are things that I didn't read of, in my opinion. I didn't know they existed because no one told me, look in the book, or none of the writers in my school system, I saw, and when I saw them, I was surprised. And my father said, "You go, you take note of them in your head. And when you come back, you will see my people." That's when I saw my people. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were so impressed that you decided to write about Ethiopia-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and is that what sparked your interests? Speaker 2: Well, I first wrote a book, 'We the Black Jews' ['We the Black Jews: Witness to the "White Jewish Race" Myth,' Yosef ben-Jochannan] because the things that my father tell me, I never heard them nowhere else. And so I start to write them down. And I didn't have proof. When I went over there, I saw them for myself. Speaker 1: So, this begins your quest to give information about Ethiopia? Speaker 2: Yeah, people would ask, and then I tried to go on the Gil Noble show ['Like It Is'], TV show. Speaker 1: Well, was--'Positively Black,' was that one of the shows that you hosted? Speaker 2: Dr. Mann [ph.] used to run one, a show, and the man who owned the properties, God, Gus Heningburg, that's one show. Then Gil Noble started running another show, and he invited me to come and interviewed me. And we did many shows. Story_ID: 380298 Speaker 1: --Was the name of that show 'Positively Black'? Speaker 2: 'Positively Black' (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Black,' yes. Speaker 2: Then-- Speaker 1: And this was in the '70s [1970s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. A woman challenged me about--she was Hebrew, and then she was to come, and she didn't come. She sent a man, and the man was from the Jewish group in Long Island [New York]. And he came with loads of books, and I came with mine. And he, they put us on the show, and I went there with them, and he went to, he was supposed to have another meeting with me. And they didn't. They sent him to Ohio. From then I used to be on Gil Noble's show ['Like It Is'], many invitations. And many other shows, I would get invitations to come. And they didn't pay well because I wasn't familiar with moneymaking, moneymaking. So I took care of my home, my family. At time--by that time, I got married [to Gertrude ben-Jochannan], I got--that's my granddaughter there, and that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year did you get married? Speaker 2: Oh, I got married, I don't remember age because-- Speaker 1: Do you know how long you've been married now? Speaker 2: For, oh, yeah, I've been married forty-nine years. Speaker 1: So, when you were on these shows like 'Positively Black,' and people would challenge you, when you say challenge, you mean that they would challenge your writings about black Jews? Speaker 2: No, never writing. They would talk about, nobody would ever write (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that's what I'm saying. They would talk about your writings, what you had written about black Jews? Speaker 2: No, yeah, they would criticize it, but they wouldn't write it down on paper. Then I know they didn't have nothing to say. For instance, in the Hebrew organization, got a newspaper that writes what B'nai B'rith [B'nai B'rith International] don't like, and they wrote, B'nai B'rith, that I was an anti-Semite. I couldn't, I don't know what that mean. How could I be a Semite, I don't know what it means, and be anti-Semite at the same time? But I had all kinds of negative things. Then I realized what it was, that in this country there was a time to, I could be Jewish, with one set of people that can be Jewish and that was to be black and Jewish, you couldn't be. Speaker 1: Do you consider yourself a black Jew? Speaker 2: I am Hebrew. Speaker 1: Hebrew. Speaker 2: Whatever black folks think of white, I'm Hebrew. Speaker 1: Okay, so now, you're living in New York City [New York, New York] in the '60s [1960s]. What was going on in your life during the black power, civil rights, even--well, let's go with the Civil Rights Movement in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: I was never in the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Okay, you weren't a part of that at all? Speaker 2: Because it was predominantly Christian. And there was too much bickering. I was practiced in the Hebrew religion, so I couldn't be both. It's really intramural. One was good as the other whether you were Christian, Muslim or Hebrew or (unclear), as long as you were a good person, you're a good person, you're a bad person, bad person, didn't make no difference. To me, I go downstairs here in this church, African church, right downstairs. And Sunday, today, you--if you weren't here, I would have gone to church there. I don't know nobody, but when they say--sometimes they say things that irritate me, I get up and walk out, and come upstairs. Story_ID: 380215 Speaker 1: So you said you would go to the African church downstairs (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I used to go to the, the synagogue-- Speaker 1: The synagogue. Speaker 2: --at 68th Street [sic. 87th Street] and Madison Avenue. There was where--the Park Avenue Synagogue [New York, New York]. It was a conservative (unclear). And then I used to go, people who was big there was living, Park, lived on Park Avenue, and they--Milton Steinberg was the chairman. And Rabbi Nadich [Judah Nadich] was the chairman. And then they moved Rabbi Nadich to 120-something Street and Broadway. They had one synagogue here up in Morris Park [Morris Park, New York, New York]. It used to be 128th Street and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard]. The rabbi there was Rabbi Matthew [Wentworth Arthur Matthew]. They moved the synagogue to, onto Morris Park, about 123rd Street. It's still going now. It's there, but I can't go--I use a walking cane. Sometimes I tend to fall down. So I go with a fellow in this building, my good friend, Omar Amara [ph.]. And he's supposed to be--he called me this morning. He's supposed to be home, but I can't get around as I used to, you see. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But a man that was very--you might know him. You see him up there with Leonard Jeffries [Leonard Jeffries, Jr.], Dr. Scobie [Edward Scobie], and Dr. John Henrik Clarke. He is well known. You see me there with them, and you had to know him to understand what I was. Story_ID: 380216 Speaker 1: Since we're in the '60s [1960s], tell me where were you when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, or what were your thoughts? Speaker 2: When Kennedy was killed, he was in Texas, I think, yeah. I was watching TV, the program, and he dropped his head and I see the men. So I saw that. I was watching it. Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about that, being that he was the president? Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: You didn't care that he was the president (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --of the United States? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me why? Speaker 2: I didn't care. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He didn't care about me. He didn't care if somebody had come and shot me. And I didn't care about him. They shot him, they can shoot anybody. Speaker 1: What about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Didn't make no difference to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If they shot Garvey [Marcus Garvey], it would have made no difference to me. I don't care about people because they got a big name. If you're a human being, and you are a street cleaner, a human being and you're the president, make no difference, you're a human being. If you, if your life is lost because you wash dishes, and his life is lost because he's the owner of a restaurant, you're both dead. And your life is as important to me if you're the dishwasher or the cook. People don't understand that. Speaker 1: What did you feel about the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: I--it was just like I felt about the black nationalist movement. Garvey movement. It--my friends were not there. I couldn't be with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, if I went to, for instance, I used to go to the Park Avenue Synagogue [New York, New York], but right down the street, there's another synagogue. It wasn't no sense in me going there because I wouldn't be welcome, where the other synagogue, I was welcome. So to me, it made no difference of what you did. It's, if you're a human being, you're a human being. Story_ID: 380217 Speaker 1: After you had your first trip to Ethiopia, you wrote your--the first book-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'The Black Jews' ['We the Black Jews: Witness to the "White Jewish Race" Myth,' Yosef ben-Jochannan] and it seemed to be very controversial. Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was your first trip to Egypt? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Who said it's controversial? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Don't mean that it's controversial. Who said it's controvers- it's, if I go and see (unclear), and I wrote (unclear) about it, and you say, it's controversial, that's your opinion. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's not mine. Speaker 1: And so, when you had these talks on the television programs, what was it that the people who came against your talking about the black Jews, what were their arguments? What were they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were no black Jews. Speaker 1: They were saying that there just weren't any black Jews at all? Speaker 2: They hadn't seen black Jews. You see, they had never been to Bahir Dar [Ethiopia] where we have millions of Falassas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I know them. So I--people that would argue, we had synagogue here, but I never argue. I said, "They feel that way," then move on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got no time to waste to argue. If they feel that way, it's okay. Speaker 1: When was your first trip to Egypt? Speaker 2: My first trip to Egypt was when my father [Kriston ben-Jochannan]--when I went to see my grandmother in Ethiopia. It was in the '40s [1940s] some time. Speaker 1: And did you take people from the United States to Egypt? Tell me about that, what year--do you know what year it was? Speaker 2: I used to give a trip twice a year. I would carry people to Africa, and mostly Ethiopia, Sudan and Egypt. Speaker 1: Ethiopia and Egypt and where else? Speaker 2: And Sudan. Speaker 1: Do you remember the year that you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --took your first trip, took your first group, take the first group? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947], I think. Speaker 1: That's when you took your first group of people from the United States? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. Speaker 1: And how many years did you do that, about? Speaker 2: I used to go twice a year. Speaker 1: For how long? Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of the time, every year. That's why I do not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm saying, did you do it for five years, ten years-- Speaker 2: More than that. Speaker 1: --twenty years? Speaker 2: You see, I don't have money because if you come to the trip, you had to pay a certain amount of money each month 'til you paid the full price. But suppose you didn't have the money, then you drop out. I had, I let him come. I make up the difference. I won't tell you, you can't come, no. The money was not important. It's more important for you to come. So I will tell you, pay money, and as a result, when I stopped and counted up everything, I was behind the eight ball. Speaker 1: Okay, so your trips to Egypt, Ethiopia and to Sudan, tell me about the trips. Tell me, take me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I-- Speaker 1: Take me on one of the trips. Speaker 2: I went all, I went all over the country-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from north to south, and go to visit in each temple, and we would go to the--then I had (unclear). I'll get up eight in--early in the morning, about seven, and we leave eight [o'clock] when we already eat. And we will go to the shrine. Speaker 1: Who is we? Speaker 2: We, we academicians. Speaker 1: Academ-, academics. Story_ID: 380218 Speaker 1: We teach what pleases us. We don't teach necessarily what's truth. But me, I am more interested in truth than what you got to say. And it was a hard thing to distinguish because I find that I have had better education, going into the Hebrew community, the Hasidics in Brook- in Brook- in Brooklyn [New York], when I go over the bridge, just ordinary folks, speaking to them. They had greater insight to my mind than men with big lofty degrees. Speaker 2: Do you speak Hebrew? Speaker 1: Yeah, but, you see, I, I speak a lot of things in books. And I look at them, and I ask, what is it about? I speak of some people--with laboring people, and there's more honesty from them. I am asking what it really is. Who is a god, for instance? Do we mean what? Jehovah, Jesus Christ, Allah? What makes one better than the other? Isn't Allah the same as you say Jehovah or you say Jesus the Christ? How one come better than the other? I got a friend upstairs. He's Muslim. He's a member of Muhammad church--synagogue, one of my closest friends. He buys everything for me. But I say, I don't eat all that thing because it's not kosher, because it's got pork, I find that a piece of pigtail may be better than a piece of beef. Is this a pigtail, you know, it's hard to understand. My way isn't good. It's too easy because I found honesty in people. You know, for instance, you are here with this brother. I don't think to ask you what you believe. You would tell me because you're gonna tell me the truth. So tell me what--I don't care. I'm, for instance, you've got on a cross. Does it make you bad or good? Nah. Don't make you bad or good. You like that cross. Story_ID: 380219 Speaker 1: Talking about the trips that you provided for people to go to Ethiopia and Egypt and the Sudan, and you did this for a number of years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was over a decade, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah, every year. Speaker 1: Every year, twice a year. Speaker 2: At least two, two trips a year. Speaker 1: What was the cost of a trip like that? Speaker 2: It's, the way that we started out the trips was about eight hundred [dollars] and we wound up about two thousand dollars because every year it went up and up and up. Speaker 1: So, how many people went on a trip on an average? Speaker 2: Well, the lowest I had was forty-seven and the highest I had was--I had at one time in, I think '82 [1982], I had a thousand on that trip that year. Speaker 1: So you found people were more and more interested in going and finding out. Speaker 2: A lot of people were more interested in going for drinking. For instance, the Pyramids [Great Pyramids] at Giza [Egypt], one of Khufu, I'm using indigenous language. One of Khufu, Menkaure and--Khufu, Khafre, Menkaure. Khufu is the large one, over twenty stories tall, not one brick, not one brick. There's a pyramid done at Saqqara [Egypt], one at Saqqara, don't have any bricks, stone, cut stone. Nobody tell us that they were--I only knew that there were brick, brick buildings, many bricks. But they didn't tell us, it's also of stone only. What's--but you can't tell me. I asked them, what was the name of the field. They don't remember--suddenly, they don't know. Nobody--everybody damn well must know the name. But then they suddenly don't know. They lie. They were taught to lie. They know damn well they got--but you see, we get to be so sophisticated with our degrees, but it went as lies too. What is--Juan Sotomayor [ph.], you know Juan Sotomayor, the man that did the book on Columbus [Christopher Columbus]. He's now very ill. I can't reach him, and I know--but how it feels to be honest. I mean--I don't know. Speaker 1: Well, okay, on the trips, tell me about the trip. Now, you said that you had almost a thousand people go and, you know, it could be maybe forty-seven people, just depending on the trip (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That trip was-- Speaker 1: --and the cost, you know, as the years went on, the trip cost more. And this was a two-week trip? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me what you saw--how did the day start out and tell me about the trip? What did you teach as you went on these trips? Speaker 2: For instance, we wake up around four [o'clock] in the morning. We wash up. Then we go down to the coffee room to have breakfast. We have--breakfast could be a sandwich or anything. Then by eight o'clock, we must be on the bus and we are ready to go. So that the first step would be depending on where you're going. And then we pick up the guide, a licensed guide, and we bring the guide with us. And we get a very experienced guide, and the guide would tell us what he knew about the situation, and we would tell 'em what we see and so forth. But we never argued. We would discuss. I make a distinction between argument and discussion. No argument. If you argue, find someplace to go, but discussion, yes. Then we come back in the afternoon, and we'll have get-together discussion. And I would lecture and the guide would lecture, and they are allowed to criticize us and questions. Then we finish, you do whatever you want with the rest of the day. That's the way we ran the trip. Story_ID: 380220 Speaker 1: You're having these trips, and you wrote your first book, and then your second book and your third book. How many books have you written? Speaker 2: Forty-two. Speaker 1: Forty-two books? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So tell me about, which book did you enjoy writing-- Speaker 2: All of 'em. Speaker 1: --the most? You enjoyed all of them. Speaker 2: The one is good as the other. Speaker 1: Well, I believe that. So tell me about the book about the 'Black Man of the Nile' ['Black Man of the Nile and His Family,' Yosef ben-Jochannan]? Speaker 2: 'Black Man of the Nile' wasn't on the Nile. There were black men there because in Egypt, the majority of the people are black, whether they're Muslims, Christians or Jews. Some are black and some are not black. But a lot of people don't know this, and if you ever mention to somebody--I saw a man today, he was black. They tell you, no, (laughter), you see. Why no? Well, he couldn't be black because of what? Because of his country of origin? Because of God, because of what, why? What will be impossible for him being black, and be Christian, black and be Muslim, black and be Jewish. Man's bias. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You see. I couldn't take that. I couldn't--it's--I couldn't take it. Speaker 1: Okay. Another book that you wrote was, 'Africa: Mother of Western Civilization' [Yosef ben-Jochannan]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about that book. Speaker 2: Well, when I did the research, I found that before the West had what is called civilization, it was high culture. And then you had certain things to protect, so that when they start civilization, who doesn't have civilization? What happened is that I looked, in my research, and find a man that controls a certain area because of money, because of the army, and you go and find out these people did great things. Look at what, the ruins. When they were allowed to do something on their own, they did great things. And we build on top of it, but it doesn't make them ignorant because they don't build no more. Some build long before ours are built. You must give credit. Let's see what they've done. So that was my attitude then; it's my attitude now. Speaker 1: So that's where you got your research? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Any other thoughts about that? I mean anything changes--that you said that's your thoughts--those were your thoughts then, and now also. Speaker 2: It is now. Speaker 1: The next book was 'Cultural Genocide' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --'in Black and African'-- Speaker 2: --'in Black and African Study' ['Cultural Genocide in the Black and African Studies Curriculum,' Yosef ben-Jochannan]. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me a little about that. Speaker 2: The culture of genocide, for instance, the Sudanese. Most of them are Islamic, and I listened to them tell me about themselves, just as much as I had to tell them what my research tells me. So they--I listened to their side like they listened to my side. And I had a lot of experience to get, and wisdom, by listening to their side like they listened to my side. It doesn't make it good or bad. We shared experience. Story_ID: 380221 Speaker 1: Another one that I thought was interesting was 'The Need for a Holy Bible' [sic. 'The Need for a Black Bible,' Yosef ben-Jochannan] Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And what was the premise of that book? Speaker 2: Well, you have. As you know. You are a Christian. When you say, "Oh, God," whatever is in your mind of God is no different than me saying, "Oh, Jehovah." We mean the same thing. You mean the ultimate, that which is the highest, all you know in your culture. I am calling the same person, that which is the ultimate that I could see. And I don't feel yours is less than mine. I see your god with same respect I have for mine. For instance, as I said, if you all didn't call me today, I would go downstairs because I wouldn't, I could go there on a trip, and walk down there. The minister is a young man. Well, I read enough research to know why that exists because when there was a church they wouldn't--they couldn't sip off the same cup. Now, what--he cooks, I cook your food. I can feed you your food, but I can't drink of the cup that you drink. But it doesn't make--you can tell me, but it doesn't make sense to me. So, but I go when I wish to be in a community but (unclear) because I can't understand certain words. I leave at that time. You see, I understand there must be something sacred to you, your culture, that's sacred to me in my culture. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any other of your books that you wanna say something about? Speaker 2: Like the one on philosophy. That's the one I did about Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. That with philosophy is not exact. Philosophy is a means of man portraying his ideas of the entity. And that all men have an idea of an entity. How are you gonna say that he's wrong, he's right? You don't know him. You don't know it. I know that when you pray, "God, I love you," you mean the same that when I pray, and I say, "Jehovah, I love you." You see the same thing. I have to be intelligent enough to understand the depth of your understanding. Speaker 1: Okay, and that was the book that you wrote on philosophy while you were at Cornell? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Let me ask you. What do you feel, if anything, about the Christian Jew? Speaker 2: Christian Jews? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, what is that? Speaker 1: It's actually a group of people who believe in the Torah. They believe in the Jewish ways, but they also have accepted Christ as the Savior. Story_ID: 380222 Speaker 1: I was discussing the other day. A woman who became pregnant without having any sex. They, a person said, "That's natural." I say, "It's natural, natural?" You don't know one incident--no, not like don't believe, you don't know one incident where it happened. You believe, and why can't you say, just let somebody accept your belief. They will accept another belief. No, no, no. Well, you see, it makes it so hard for me to understand that we could, as intelligent men and women, could one day sit down and either decide to agree with each other on everything. And there is strictly--are things within our own system that we only believe, not on knowledge, on belief. And if we believe without knowledge, you're just as bad off. That's what's bothering me. Story_ID: 380223 Speaker 1: We were talking about your, some of your friends where you actually, you know, were talking that you weren't in the Civil Rights Movement or any of the movements because your friends weren't there. But you did have a corps of friends that worked with you and, and had the same type of beliefs, like Leonard Jeffries [Leonard Jeffries, Jr.], who I believe is one of your friends. Is that not right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about him and your belief--who he is, and the relationship? Speaker 2: I told him--we do not agree on many things. And I told him like I told Scobie [Edward Scobie] and John Clarke [John Henrik Clarke], you believe some things. I do not necessarily agree that you're right. But you must understand there's somebody outside your view who thinks as hard as you do, on their point. And they didn't agree. They didn't fight me. Speaker 1: So did you all work together? On what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --what type of projects? Speaker 2: Some, on certain things we work together. Other things we didn't. Speaker 1: Well, what are some of the things you worked together? Speaker 2: Well, he was, he was very active in getting certain things for black students they would not have normally gotten if he didn't personally become involved, he didn't personally take his own money and contribute, his wife didn't take her own money and contribute. The one that's dead, both the men are dead (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) John Henrik Clarke? Speaker 2: John, dead, and then the other man. Speaker 1: Edward Scobie. Speaker 2: Scobie, dead. And if they didn't put their own money where their mouth was, it wouldn't have happened. So I said, the man, of course, your worst enemy could be your best friend, at a certain point. So there were times my own people would not accept me, and they would accept me. So what can I do? They can't kill a man because somebody misunderstood them. There are times, I know he got different views from me, but I can't, can't condemn him for different views. Speaker 1: So what did you come together to do, you and John Henrik Clarke and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Many people couldn't afford to go over here, couldn't--didn't have the money, and we took it and raised money for people. I think that-- Speaker 1: Both of you taught at the university. Which university did you teach? Speaker 2: At City College [City University of New York, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: At City College. And he taught what? Speaker 2: He taught, his courses on philosophy, courses, he did, taught some courses on philosophy and some on African history. John taught philosophy and history. Scobie taught another area and conflict--interlocking ideas. Story_ID: 380224 Speaker 1: You said you had some conflicting ideas, you know. They thought some things different. What were some of the things that were different about your philosophies? Speaker 2: Well, my philosophy is, I had developed certain ideas as a youngster, and I come to realize that they were based upon enough information I had, but I didn't have all. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: There were things I found out now about the individual that I didn't know then. And I, if I found out later, I'd have to make changes. Like anything I found out today, I didn't know before, I got to make changes. And I found, made it--but I, many things about Christians, about Jews today, I didn't know yesterday. So that would change my idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm not ashamed. I would gladly do it because you can only be sure, sure to an extent. If I make a decision today, and I found something was wrong with it, I should be man enough to face myself and change it. Speaker 1: Can you give me a specific idea of something you might have thought at one point and now you know something different? Speaker 2: All right, once, take my idea and a woman. I thought that women and men were separated because God had make us to be by Adam and Eve. Today, I found there's one thing that separates my granddaughter from my grandson, just that she is a biological woman and he's a biological man. But he got private parts like she has, and there's no different because her private part is different to him. They're not equal human beings. So he isn't, shouldn't be entitled to no more than her just because they are born. She should be entitled to more. She got more experience, not because of what she between her legs. She, it's unfair. We judge people, well, let me work it better. Now, they got a thing called same sex marriage. Today you see about it on the TV and everything, it's a big thing. Yesterday, you couldn't do the same thing. People would, you see. I don't know if we can deal with it. Speaker 1: So have your thoughts changed on it? I mean would that be something that, I mean if you thought that same sex relationships were not good before-- Speaker 2: It does not mean it's not good anymore. You see, I don't know what--do I have more information now? I wouldn't be involved in it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I wouldn't be involved with it, but I would say, if they are, so that's their business. I wouldn't be involved in it because I still think that it's dirty. What I would have to do, there are certain things that I couldn't stomach doing. I couldn't, I couldn't. But he could. Does what he's going to do hurt me? No. But I still can't do what he's doing. It doesn't make me bad. Yes, I would respect him and speak with him when yesterday I would not have respected him and not spoken to him at all. That's a change. Story_ID: 380225 Speaker 1: Well, what values do you consider most important? Why? Speaker 2: Well, that's a tough question because you ask me to everyday reexamine my position, which is a good thing. I think that I should do it more often. Each day I wake, I should reexamine my position. What--let's take, for instance, when I was growing up and my father [Kriston ben-Jochannan] says, this is a (unclear), a synagogue. I didn't look at it the same way as when I pass a church. I would run into a church if I wanted, but I didn't run into a synagogue. I'm, I went into a synagogue. Now, I would go to the synagogue with the same reverence as I have for a church, no less, no more. I find the same thing. I find, if I seek, I find solace in the church as I found it in the synagogue. I couldn't, I wouldn't have done it ten years ago. Speaker 1: So the value that are most important to you are? Speaker 2: The values that are the most important to me is, would be you and him, for instance. If he got an attack, I don't know if it's a stroke or what, I'm not a doctor. You want a cup of water, he wants a cup of water because he's a human being. He's a Jew, he's a Christian. Unh-uh. You want a cup of water? Well, I'm wondering if he's done that before. I learn that you need a cup of water to live as he needs a cup of water to live. Your religion has nothing to do with you needing a cup of water. That's something I learned, which I would not have done ten years ago. So that makes a difference. It's hard, and I know something is that we're doing it because of tradition. We've always done it that way. Not that today we're doing it because it's right. We're doing--no, we're doing it because I am accustomed to doing it. Not that the custom's a bad custom, but I'm accustomed to it. Speaker 1: Do you think that the generation should question some, some customs and traditions-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and research or find out where they came from-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and continue or not to continue to do it. Speaker 2: Yeah, because most things we do is because we have done it all the time, not we are intelligently reasoning, but we have done it all the time. It don't mean it's good, but we know it's more comfortable to be a certain way. But it may not be right. And we have to teach our children to examine a thing without being rude or, you can examine for understanding. Story_ID: 380226 Speaker 1: So what lessons do you have for your children or for your grandchildren? Speaker 2: For instance, here is my granddaughter. She now can discuss with me certain things about life, her moth- her father couldn't discuss with me, and she can ask me questions her father couldn't ask me. And I answer her now and don't think--I won't think that this is, was a question and she needed to know the answer. And I will tell her now, which I would not tell her father. It's a time, the time we live in, and what we are afraid to tell our children, and we're--and what we will tell them, and what we decide is good information and what we decide is bad information. And we have to be very careful because we're going to influence her life when we will tell her. I just hope that I, I just that I knew more what I knew now, I had known then. I think if I--if what I knew now, I had known then, him and I would have a better life. What it takes me to know now, I would not have done the same with him. For instance, when I walk in here, and I saw you and him coming in, it was nothing to me. But have I known it before, he couldn't come in here because it wouldn't have been thought right. And I wouldn't have been intelligent enough to say, "Well, wait, he's a human being. She's a human being." It would have been my bias. Story_ID: 380227 Speaker 1: Do you have regrets about that, the fact that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you? Speaker 2: I regret what I learned from the society around me. I couldn't tell the difference between right and wrong. For instance, say I don't know if you--there's a big restaurant in New York [New York] called Sylvia's [Sylvia's Restaurant, New York, New York]. I go to Sylvia's any time I feel like going, over forty years, forty-five years. Sylvia [Sylvia Woods] used to be at a restaurant with a friend of mine, a German girl, from the war [World War II, WWII]. He brought back a German wife. And Sylvia used to work in the restaurant. And a lady lived, Sally [ph.], that died, a cook, used to go there. But every time I went to Africa, I would bring back a painting or a relic of some sort and say, "Here, Sylvia," 'til one time her daughter, a baby, Crizette [Crizette Woods], was born, and I brought Crizette a picture of--Crizette was getting married to (unclear). "How much did it cost?" She had said. "It costs me one thing. Crizette, as long as you live, when you're planning to get divorced, get in your mind you don't love your husband no more, think on the picture. Think that I get one day, I don't love you anymore, the picture, I'll come for it." And Mr.--what was their family title? I forget their family title. But he died. She called me and told me, she had my number, do you know something that I had said? What you doing? Said, "We are going have the funeral up at Butts' [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin O. Butts] church [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York]. And the daughter and the son, they're gonna meet you at Butts' church." I said, "Can I do anything for you with my limited access to money?" She said, "No, I just want you to know." So I said, "I will be there. I don't want to know what's gonna be," I said, "I don't wanna know nothing. I'm gonna be there regardless." I went there. And I was treated like anybody in the church. I went to the place I went, as a matter fact, she saw me, and I went down to her seat. I went and spoke to her. Well, since that time 'til now, when Mr. Woods [Herbert Woods], by the way, Woods, he died. And she came, she said, "You know, it's different. You came and you wanted to know how you can help, even help in doing what," I said, "If this was me, and that was my wife, and you had done what you did for me, I will speak for you." Nowadays, if I go in there, as I get in the place, she will say, "Eat this." She don't say how much for it. So it, I don't know. We have to learn to live with each other as human beings. And it's hard to make a position. It's hard to live. I don't know because I really don't know the answer. I don't know the answer. We've got to learn to live--maybe, maybe the way the world is, it is scheduled so by God, but I don't think, I don't think--this is my thought, that our God, whosoever it is, or whosoever they are, is satisfied with us. Can't be, because the way we treat women, the way we treat red people, green people, deaf people, hard-of-hearing people, got to be another answer. Story_ID: 380228 Speaker 1: What are your concerns or your hopes for the African American community? Speaker 2: I hope that one day, with the way that society is going, there won't be no need for a white community, an African American community. There'll be, a man just comes in, you treat him. I don't see the need for an African American community, neither do I see the need for a European community. I see need for a community. If we can't reach that point, no sense trying. I mean, I see him as a man and you as a woman, as human beings. I don't see why it's necessary for you to be African American, be European, American, Western. What's the title? You're gonna die, you're gonna need. He's gonna die and need. Story_ID: 380229 Speaker 1: But do you agree that history is important? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me why? Speaker 2: Because I can't see everything, and I got to trust in somebody else, and that person writes down his findings. And I haven't have the opportunity to see it happen myself. I got to rely somehow on him, somehow. I'm gonna have to find him out being a liar, to condemn his writing. Otherwise, I got to accept the validity, validity that he had done some work, and assume that he had done it with honesty. I go down to--I am a member of the, what do you call, the science, they invited me. I know I'm a member of science, something, something. And the people in there, big people, and I go in there some days. I don't, I can't go in--I can't afford to go at night. I cannot see good. But some men in there, they got so big, too big for themselves, and they could be so wrong. I'm here, I got this telephone, forty years, same number. And the man was calling, was calling me by the wrong number. He was sure he was right and was dead wrong (laughter). But some of us can never learn. We can be wrong at times. Story_ID: 380230 Speaker 1: If you were to look back over your life, would you change anything? Speaker 2: One thing I could think of so that, I know it's got to be many more, but I wish my wife [Gertrude ben-Jochannan] and I could see certain things together. My wife was brought up in the--she went to the Lutheran church. Her mother, people, are strictly Lutheran. She went to the Catholic church, and got to school. That branch of her family is Catholic. The Lutheran is considered a high person, very close to the Catholic. I say it's money. If that man could teach people good enough, what would stop him from being able to speak in that church and not that church? If someone had picked you instead? Speaker 1: So what did you want you and your wife to see together? Speaker 2: No, I want us, if she could see that there is no difference being Jewish than being Christian. We all got frailties. I would, I'm weak some place, and you're weak another place. Together, can't we just bury the hatchet wherever we differ? Speaker 1: Had that been an issue in your marriage? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you work it out? You've been together for forty-nine years? Speaker 2: I've got a son and a daughter within the period, and I had to make adjustments for them. Speaker 1: You made adjustments for them? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What kind of adjustments? What do you mean? Speaker 2: Well, my son is a lawyer. He lives in Jersey [New Jersey], and I got a daughter is now eleven, twelve years old. I have, she is now developing her womanhood. She's getting her womanhood. Speaker 1: We're talking about your granddaughter? Speaker 2: Yeah...