 Story_ID: 580749 Speaker 1: Today is June 26, 2007. Today we're interviewing Joyce F., Dr., Dr. Joyce F. Brown [HistoryMaker Joyce F. Brown] at her office at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology] in New York [New York]. I'm the interviewer, Adrienne Jones, and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea. If I could start by asking you to state and spell your full name. Speaker 2: My name is Joyce-- Speaker 1: Very simple. Speaker 2: --F. Brown. Joyce is J-O-Y-C-E, and Brown is B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: I've already said so, but where are we today? Speaker 2: We are at the Fashion Institute of Technology, better known as FIT, and that is in Chelsea in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 580750 Speaker 1: I'm gonna start off with the five People magazine-ish type questions. They're very simple and you can just answer whatever comes to mind. So, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that I have a favorite color (laughter). I really don't. I like color, I like combining colors, I mean black is always good. Speaker 1: Okay. Black is a perfectly respectable choice here on the color (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is, but I really, I honestly can't tell you I have a color. I have some not so favorite colors, but I don't have a really one favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay. What is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Paris [France]. Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I love the seasons. I really love the seasons, it's why I stay in New York [New York]; why I am a New Yorker. And nobody likes to hear me say it, but I really do enjoy winter, and, you know, sort of the cool-ish time. The clothes are much more interesting for that time of year. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, yes, yes. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I'm very boring with food. I like salads (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you eat boring food? Or you think-- Speaker 2: Well, for people who are really foodies, I think it's pretty boring. I mean I love salads and I eat, I eat, like you know, grilled fish and vegetables, all those things they tell you you're supposed to do, that's what I do, so. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Phrase? Speaker 1: Yes, or saying or quote or quip or idea? Speaker 2: I can't say that I can think of one. I mean I think there are many different things that are just sort of apropos, you know, for the moment that occur and I'm not, not shy about using those. I think maybe the people who work for me might tell you that I would say, at the end of the day what's the bottom line (laughter) or something like that, so that we can kind of cut through it and, and move on to the next thing. But I don't know that I recognize that as something I say all the time. Story_ID: 580751 Speaker 1: I'm gonna start off by asking you about your family. I'm going to start with your mom. And we'll just sort of do a short family history if that's okay. So if you could tell me your mother's name and if you could spell it, and where she was from, when she was born. Speaker 2: Well, I'm named for my mother [Joyce Cappie Brown] so it's the same name and the same spelling. Speaker 1: Excellent. Speaker 2: My mother was born in New Orleans [Louisiana] and she grew up in Chicago [Illinois]. They moved and she grew up in Chicago, they moved, and she grew up in Chicago and made her way to New York [New York]. My mother is still alive. I'm sad to say she's not doing terribly well. She's now ninety-one. She still is, but was an exceptionally beautiful woman. She was a dancer. She was one of the Cotton Club [New York, New York] dancers. Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: And she was one of, she was like an understudy for Lena Horne, so I mean you know, she was one of the, one of those beautiful young dancers of that era. And after that career, she, you know, she raised a family and sort of became, you know, a home- homebody. She did work, she did work, you know, I mean we didn't have the luxury of her not having to work, but you know that glamorous side kind of all got channeled into home- homey type things. Speaker 1: I see. Did she tell you any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sort of taking you back to her childhood, before we get to ask some more questions about her dance career, but you know what was growing up between New Orleans and Chicago like for your mom? Speaker 2: I think it was kind of tough actually. It sounds that way. I think that, you know, they made their way, she and her mother [Maude Alexander Cappie], made their way to Chicago to, you know, kind of find a, a better life. Speaker 1: And about what time do you think that was? Speaker 2: Well, she was born in 1916, and I think, I don't know. She went to grammar school. She did her schooling there, so you figure she had to-- Speaker 1: In Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah, in Chicago. Speaker 1: So it was 1920, 19-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --or late teens [1910s] or maybe even-- Speaker 2: So you figure she had to be seven or eight, say, second or third grade, 1920--early '20s [1920s]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --at that time. And, and I think it was the, the dance that brought her to New York. Speaker 1: Do you know when she began dancing? Speaker 2: I don't know the year, I don't know, but I think she was rather young-- Speaker 1: I--just, just an idea. Speaker 2: --she was probably a young, you know, like seventeen, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother was an incredible seamstress and she would make the costumes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I found all of these wonderful pictures of entertainers who, you know, inscribed to my grandmother thanking her for her involvement and kind of making their experience so wonderful. So it's a whole world, you know. Story_ID: 580752 Speaker 1: Where was your grandmother from? Speaker 2: My grandmother was also from New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: And do you have any idea when she was born? Speaker 2: Well, I'd have to try and figure it out. I mean I could, I could go back and kind of do the math. She lived to about eighty-four, but I, at this very moment, I'm not going to remember the exact year. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Do you know anything about her youth? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well you know-- Speaker 1: --ever hear any stories from her? Speaker 2: I was, I was very fortunate. I have longevity on both sides of the family. So I knew my great-grandparents on my mother's [Joyce Cappie Brown] side. Speaker 1: Oh wow, so we get to even step back. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, her mother, my great-grandmother, was a very interesting woman. She-- Speaker 1: Do we know where she's from? Speaker 2: Well, she had some ancestors in Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's probably the, and I think probably Mexico because she looked very Mexican. Speaker 1: And can you tell me your grandmother, right now, I'd like you to tell me your great-grandmother's name, though when, in the moment, we turn to your grandmother, I want to make sure that we record her name. Speaker 2: All right. My great-grandmother's name was Isabel Molina [Isabel Molina Alexander]. And she was a very free spirit. She was sort of an interesting woman to be around as a youngster. I mean she just, she was an iconoclast; she didn't have rules she lived by. She was very interesting. Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of her free-- Speaker 2: Oh well, she would, no one was ever quite sure where she lived, you know. She kind of moved around a lot, and then she'd show up and stay a few days and go on. But she was healthy and she was fine and she just, you know, wasn't, it wasn't exactly a middle-class lifestyle she was aspiring to (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, but did she live in the Texas area presumably? Speaker 2: No, no, this was in New York [New York]-- Speaker 1: This was later. Speaker 2: --when I was a, when I was a child. I don't really know much about her early years. The only thing I remember, she would tell us about her father and an uncle I think, and I think they were educated and were music teachers, musi- you know, musical, had--their lives were involved with music and I believe taught music. And how she got hooked up with my great-grandfather I don't know. He was a very fragile-looking, quiet little man who was of French ancestry in New Orleans. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, anyway, and his name was Frank Alexander. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: And so my grandmother's name was Maude Alexander, but she married and became Maude Alexander Cappie. My mother's maiden name was Cappie, C-A-P-P-I-E. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 580753 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now we're talking about, a little bit about your grandmother's youth. We've got your long-living grandmother [Maude Alexander Cappie] who's popping in and out of New York [New York], which is fantastic. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, could you talk just a little bit more about your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother. Speaker 1: Maybe what she was doing. Was she a free spirit like her mother [Isabel Molina Alexander]? Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say so. She kind of, her life was very intertwined with my mother's [Joyce Cappie Brown], you know, they, I mean I knew my grandfather too, but he, they, he was another free spirit although that was a whole 'nother side of the family, but he was very much a free spirit. And when they, when she made her way to Chicago [Illinois], it was sans him. (Laughter) He was-- Speaker 1: You did say my mother and grandmother-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. He-- Speaker 1: --made their way to Chicago. Speaker 2: He stayed in New Orleans [Louisiana]. He was from the--big family, the Cappies, and I don't know that I know what kind of work he did. Actually my sister [Donna Levy Wray] would remember, but I don't remember, but I did know him later. I didn't know him as a child, but he came around later. So at any rate, my mother and her mother's lives were very much intertwined. They, they made their way to Chicago and, and then on to the career in the theater. Speaker 1: Dance. Speaker 2: And my grandmother was-- Speaker 1: You kind of need a mom in order, sometimes; it's helpful (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, and, you know, there, there was a certain interdependency too. I mean this was the work that my grandmother was able to do. And then interestingly, something I've never quite understood how it all worked out, but when I was a little girl my grandmother had a business, and she had a sewing shop. She had, I would go there; it was on 42nd Street [New York, New York]. It was her business. She sewed for all the big designers and her clothes were, their lines were in the big department stores. Speaker 1: Which designers? Speaker 2: Well, you know, oh. Speaker 1: If you can remember. Speaker 2: I could, not right off the top, but I mean the names that you will come across if you go into our museum now, I know those names because of my grandmother. It's really like coming full circle to end up here [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], you know. But it wasn't so much that she was sewing directly for them necessarily; it was their lines that were being produced. And she had, I remember, you know, these lines, I mean it was like a, what in its worst iteration would be a sweatshop. Now hers was not, but they have long tables with all these women at sewing machines. I remember there were many, many Eastern European women, a lot of Hungarian women, and they came and, I wish I knew more about how that all came together (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is 42nd Street and what? Speaker 2: Right off 5th Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In an upstairs like a loft area that, you know, when I go by there now I look up and I think there's a tailor in there, even now. Speaker 1: And how close is this to, I mean it sounds very close, but I have this idea of fashion being 7th Avenue, so are you close enough on 5th Avenue to be a part of the fashion world, or does 7th Avenue sort of become a strong presence later? Speaker 2: I don't know the answer to that because I was a little kid, you know I mean, we would go there, this was like early school, early grammar school years, so, you know, I'm like, hm, I wonder if I was maybe up 'til ten, say, years old. So I don't know the connection and the significance with the industry other than in looking back I realize she was actually producing what was going into the department stores. It's very interesting because of being here, I have the occasion to meet different designers. And I was talking the other day--I was part of a retrospective that they did for Arnold Scaasi. And he showed how he would do the dresses with coats and he would line the inside of the coat with the fabric of the dress and this was his signature at this time. Well, all my outfits were like that when I was a little girl, and it had to be that, you know, she was exposed to all that and, you know, was a big part of our lives being around fabrics and textiles and picking out prints and things that go together that make sort of these designer outfits for-- Speaker 1: So your grandmother was not only making clothes for department store, but she was making clothes for you also? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, for my sister, my mother, myself. My mother sewed; everybody sewed except me, which is sort of funny (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and you were choosing your own outfits and lines. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you could, as a teenager I could, I mean I cannot draw, let's be very clear. I'm not an artist, but I could do the most rudimentary kind of a sketch because I had an idea and she could make it. She was amazing, she was really amazing in terms of her talent, just-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --it's a gift. Story_ID: 580754 Speaker 1: So you mention that your mother [Joyce Cappie Brown] was a dancer and that she was dancing in the Cotton Club [New York, New York], can you just tell us anything else about your mom's life in New York [New York], or, and her career? Speaker 2: Well, of course she wasn't dancing by the time I arrived. So I only know from pictures and from some of the things she, the few things she would talk about, you know. It was not something she wanted either my sister [Donna Levy Wray] or myself to do, so I mean we weren't even allowed to take dancing lessons, so this was not the world she wanted her girls to go into. And, you know, the, my father [Robert Brown] I guess was sort of on the periphery of that world as well and then they, they were faced with the reality of being a young family they had to support, and so they had to go and get grown-up jobs, you know, at that point. And, you know, as you know, it's tough. I mean the reality was they were not overly educated. They were, you know, just trying to have whatever part of that middle-class life they could achieve and build for their family, and the reality of being African American and not having all those other qualitative things to make up for all that meant, meant that they, they worked very hard. They worked very hard to achieve the things they did. Story_ID: 580755 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about your father? Do you know anything about his childhood and, perhaps you know something about his, his grandparents also. We'll start with him. Can you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't have, I didn't know his grandparents. I knew my grandmother; I knew his mother. His father died when he was a youngster. She had remarried so I knew her husband, but I also knew he was not my grandfather. Speaker 1: What's your father's name? Speaker 2: My father's name is Robert Brown, was Robert Brown. My father passed away four years ago. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: So he also, he was ninety-one. It's on both sides. Speaker 1: You all are eating right (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's a--well you know, it's a good start anyway. We have to take care of the rest. But his name was Robert Brown and his mother's name was Althea Coleman [ph.] Brown, Althea Brown Coleman. And, before I was born, I think he, he traveled, he was, as I say, on the fringe of show business. He was not an entertainer. My father was really quite quiet and sort of a sweet and gentle kind of personality. I mean underneath there I think there was probably, you know, steel, but he was, he was very easy-going, but not an entertainer. He traveled with the Jimmie Lunceford band, so, you know, he had some function with that group of people, so I mean, as I said, it was on the periphery. This was a world he obviously liked and he married this gorgeous, flamboyant, you know, entertainer-- Speaker 1: Dance, a dancing star. Speaker 2: --type dancer, a dancing girl [Brown's mother, Joyce Cappie Brown]. He had a brother, but his brother died. I mostly knew his family growing up, cousins, it wasn't, you know, as I say, his brother died, I never knew him, and I never knew his father. Story_ID: 580756 Speaker 1: But there were you know extended family through cousins, whereas my mother's [Joyce Cappie Brown] family was all in New Orleans [Louisiana] or Chi- mostly in New Orleans, not really Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: And what about now? Are they mostly not there now since-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, you know, it was a small family. I mean there's my sister [Donna Levy Wray] and myself, the cousins, nobody had a lot of children (laughter). And, so I've sort of seen them pass away. I just lost the last cousin. She, she was ninety-two. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So do you-- Speaker 1: No, that's wrong, she was like ninety-five. Speaker 2: Do you expect that you will live as long? Speaker 1: I think nothing's promised. (Laughter) I don't, I try to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it's definitely possible. Speaker 1: It's certainly possible. It, you know the, I mean I've seen enough. I've had enough of them--you know, my, my [maternal] grandmother [Maude Alexander Cappie] was eighty-six. Her brother, who was also Frank Alexander [Frank B. Alexander], he lived to be ninety. So I've sort of, I've had this collection of old, old family who needed intervention and someone to kind of help shepherd those years. And you know, it's a life lesson, sort of watching those things. Speaker 2: And have you done that here in New York [New York]? Have you had them up here (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they were all in New York. I've always lived in New York, yeah. Everybody was in New York. Speaker 2: Everybody came to New York. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, no. My mother--family on my father's [sic.] side is still, many of them are still down there in New Orleans or in the, you know, that Mississippi area down there. That whole generation because there were many brothers. My mother's father had quite a few brothers so that family was larger, but they came north and didn't really--. And then there was the divorce so there wasn't really that much closeness until way later when, you know, my mother would make contact with some of them. Story_ID: 580757 Speaker 1: And where did your parents [Joyce Cappie Brown and Robert Brown] settle in--I know they lived in Harlem [New York, New York], I think that's correct, so where--but where did you live? Speaker 2: I lived on Convent Avenue, which is right by City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And that's where we grew up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a beautiful area. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what was that area like? I guess I should ask you first about your childhood, but you were about to answer. Speaker 2: It was great, it was great. That whole City College phenomenon is, is actually pretty central to a lot of my memories growing up. Speaker 1: So what's your earliest memory? Speaker 2: My earliest memory? My earliest memory I guess is of living there. I went to kindergarten at Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], so we walked through that campus every day to go to Music and Art. Speaker 1: Now Music and Art is right on the other side of City College? Speaker 2: Well, Music and Art at that time, and whether or not it's still there I'm not certain, but if you walked straight through the campus from, we lived at 141st [Street] and Convent, and you begin the campus, as you know, at 140th [Street] and Convent, and you'd walk down to, almost like 135th [Street] I would think, and there was s- that was Music and Art at the time. It might be A. Philip Randolph [A. Philip Randolph Campus High School, New York, New York] now, but I'm not positive about that. Speaker 1: I'm think, that's where I'm putting it into my mind. Kind of behind it. Speaker 2: But A. Philip Randolph might be in another building up toward Amsterdam [Avenue], so-- Speaker 1: 'Cause that sort of overlooks-- Speaker 2: The park [St. Nicholas Park, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: --the park which I think of--I know it's not called Duke Ellington park, but there's this picture of Duke Ellington overlooking that [sic.]. Speaker 2: No, I think it's, is that Mount Morris Park [New York, New York], I'm not sure, where St. Ni- Speaker 1: No, Mount Morris is on Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and Four- 5th [Avenue]. This is, I'm not sure. Speaker 2: I should know. Speaker 1: But nonetheless-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Music and Art is right near there. So you said your earliest memories are of being in that area. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean I would spend hours standing at the window watching all the students rushing back and forth to class and I could look across and look into the science lab. And I--obviously I now know they were dealing with Bunsen burners, but I wondered what, what was this place you could go and play with fire. I mean they would make fires and they would wear masks. It was obviously a science lab. I was, it was all very fascinating. I mean and we would play on the campus. I mean it was very safe. My mother could let us go downstairs and we thought big fun was to put on our roller skates and go into Shepard Hall [New York, New York], which made a tremendous noise-- Speaker 1: You were skating in Shepard Hall? That sounds great (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because, because it was marble. Yes. Years later when I would, when I worked for City University [City University of New York, New York, New York]; and I would go back and there would be meetings in Shepard Hall, and, they, you know, acted like a big muckety-muck was coming and I could say, wanna say, you know, I'm the kid that was on the skates, you know, you know I never let you catch me then. But, so that was fun, that was fun. Story_ID: 580758 Speaker 1: And did you live in a brownstone? What kind of-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Was it an apartment? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's still there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your home like? Speaker 2: We lived in an apartment. The building was quite nice. We, well actually, earl- my earliest years we were at 140th [Street] and Convent [Avenue], at a building, it was 260 Convent, which is still there. And we later moved to 270 Convent, which was on the corner of 141st [Street]. But when we lived in 260, that's when I could look through the window-- Speaker 1: And see the science lab [at City College of New York, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: --and see the science lab and see all the students going back and forth. And that was, that was a two bedroom apartment. I mean it actually be- was made, you know, probably in its day, was--probably in its day was part of the apartment next door. Probably it was really, you know, quite a large footprint, but now, because there was a back door, so somehow or another, the configuration was different than it was at this point in time. But, and so the second bedroom was probably meant to be the dining room, you know, how those apartments were? There was the living room and would have been the dining room and then the kitchen. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, and then through the kitchen there was the other bedroom, so that was how that apartment was. And then in, when we moved to 270, I think it was actually similar. It was similar. No, we actually had a dining room, I'm sorry, the dining room remained the dining room, so it was the living room, the dining room and the kitchen and then in the back were the two bedrooms. And of course, how did we survive, all of these had one bathroom. Speaker 1: One bathroom (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, but today we think, you know, first question you ask is how many bathrooms, right? Speaker 1: Was it a bigger bathroom? Speaker 2: No, no, it was--I mean, you know, people were tougher then. Somehow you know they made a life and everything worked. And we're a little spoiled today I'm afraid. Speaker 1: Probably I think so. Story_ID: 580759 Speaker 1: You've told me a little bit about the sights and I want to ask you about the sights and sounds and smells that you remember from your childhood. So you've told me a little bit about the scien- about observing the students and so forth, what about sounds and smells? Speaker 2: You know I think, I think the--you know it sounds strange I suppose, but it really, that whole City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] piece was very, very pivotal in all of my early memories. You know the sounds had a lot to do with what sounds got generated from the college. There was at that time, it's no longer there, it's what you know as the North Academic Center [New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --but there was Lewisohn Stadium [New York, New York]. And at Lewisohn Stadium in the summer there were these wonderful concerts: Ella Fitzgerald and all the big stars of the time. And so a big treat was, you know, while it was still light out, if we could run down Convent Avenue and listen to the music through--and peak through the grating, you know, for Lewisohn Stadium. Once or twice my parents [Joyce Cappie Brown and Robert Brown] actually got tickets and we were allowed to go in, but we went every night we could, you know, sort of listen to this music, so that is part of the sounds, you know. We would go to, to Jones Beach [Jones Beach State Park, Wantagh, New York] on the weekends, you know, and that was a big preparation. And there was like a big picnic and it as the family and, you know, the four of us, and my cousins, my father's family, and my mother would spend all this time preparing food the day and night before. My mother baked a lot so there was that as a smell of cooking and home and stuff. And so, you know, I think of a lot of the sounds and memories probably have to do with being by the water. I mean we would go to Jones Beach, and then they would take us when we went on one vacation a year. So, we would go either to Atlantic City [New Jersey], so that's again the ocean and the smell of the ocean. And then later we would go to Cape Cod [Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 580760 Speaker 1: So we were talking about your childhood. I had asked you about your, the sights and sounds. What was your childhood like? If you could sort of give us a daily, you know, what was a common day like? Perhaps when you're a little bit older living at home. Speaker 2: Well, school, school was very important. My job was to do well in school. Speaker 1: And you said your mom [Joyce Cappie Brown] and your father [Robert Brown] were working. What were they doing? Speaker 2: My father, well, at various times, my father obviously wanted to be in business for himself. He tried a couple of businesses and they didn't work. I mean when I was, when I was five, I remember because it was when I was in kindergarten, he had a laundromat, you know that was before all the coin operated things that we know today. I mean people actually took their clothes to a laundromat and somebody did them and folded them and did all of that. So they had, they had a laundromat for a while. And after that he tried another business. It was sort of a stationery store, greeting card store; that didn't work. And so thereafter he, he worked in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. Not delivering mail, he worked in the post office. Speaker 1: At the, as a clerk in the actual-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think more in the back where they sort and do things. Speaker 1: Did he work on 125th Street post office [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: No, no, actually worked at a place called Morgan [Morgan General Mail Facility, New York, New York], which I think is not far from here. It's further west and it's like in the 30s or 40s, in there. It's not the main post office, it's another one. Speaker 1: But it's near there. Speaker 2: Yeah. He actually, I take it back, he worked not at 125th Street, but somewhere in the, the Harlem community [New York, New York]. And then he became ill. My father developed cancer in 1969, and so, I mean in 1969 and he died in 19- four years ago, he died in 2003. So he was a survivor because he was basically quite healthy and he never smoked or drank or did anything that should have been abusive of the body, so go figure, but he developed cancer and had a laryngectomy. So he didn't want to go back and interact with a lot of people and that's when he went to Morgan, and, you know, kind of worked in the sorting of the--areas, things like that. So that's what he did. And my mother worked for the housing authority [New York City Housing Authority]. She worked, you know, administrative work. Story_ID: 580761 Speaker 1: Were your parents [Joyce Cappie Brown and Robert Brown] strict? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: Well, there were just rules. There were rules that you lived by. You know I always said my father never raised his voice. He could silence you with a look, you know. And, you know, you sort of wanted peace in the valley, right? I mean you didn't, so as I say, our jobs were to do well in school. I mean that was always the mantra, you know, you're going to go to college. College is what makes a difference in your life. That was the goal. So, I mean, you know, there were, as I got a little older, I mean I was allowed, we were allowed to go out in the evening like on weekends, but, you know, there was a curfew and they needed to know where and with whom you were and I mean they--. Nothing, you know there was nothing that should, that I would, at the time I thought they were extremely strict, you know, but as I think back, I guess it was really nothing that was so intrusive that it didn't allow really for the development of a personality. But they, they kept tabs pretty closely on where we were, and who we were with and what we were doing. Speaker 1: And how do you think your parents decided that college was the goal? They, they were not college-educated were they? Speaker 2: No, they weren't, but I think, I think they recognized that they had limited options because of that. Story_ID: 580762 Speaker 1: Was your family religious? Did you attend services regularly-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and where? Speaker 2: I went, I, I went-- Speaker 1: And what kind? Speaker 2: --I went to Catholic schools all the way through actually until I did my graduate work [at New York University, New York, New York]. And we went to the, the church right, Catholic church right in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: So can you tell us a little bit about your, you said you went to kindergarten, so what was your kindergarten slash elementary school experience like? Where did you do it, what kind of a student were you? What, I've never been to Catholic school so I'd like you to talk, at least a little bit throughout the school discussion about what Catholic--you know, what's that like? Is it very strict? In movies, it seems like it's (laughter) it's draconian. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't think it was. You know again, it was sort of an extension of the set of rules and parameters within which you lived your--lived your life. I think, you know, you have to remember this was the kid who wanted to please everybody, so I don't imagine it was such a great experience if you were really out there trying to make trouble. The, you said where was it? It was-- Speaker 1: Yes, where did you attend? Speaker 2: The grammar school was-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --I went the other direction there on Convent Avenue after having gone to Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] for kindergarten, and we lived, as I said, either at 140th [Street] or 141st [Street] and the grammar school was at 143rd [Street], right off Convent. It was, the name of it was Our Lady of Lourdes [Our Lady of Lourdes School, New York, New York]. And, you know, my goal was always to be at the top of the class. That's the kind of student I was, you know, I worked really, I worked at it, you know, I thought this was important, so. Speaker 1: And then did you attend like a junior high? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Or did you-- Speaker 2: --those schools went, and I'm not sure if they do the same today, but at that time Catholic schools went first through eighth grade, and then you went to high school you know nine through twelve. So I went there for eight years. Speaker 1: Did you have any special teachers while you were in school, or special interests besides just doing well, I mean obviously you were being a great student, but did you have any particular interests, math, science, focus? Speaker 2: I used to, I guess at that time I thought I was going to be a writer. I loved to read and I used to write little stories, I used to write short stories and I would give them to the nuns and they would ooh and aw and make me feel like I was doing something really important you know, which is a great way to encourage the behavior. So I, I wouldn't go so far as to say I was great in math and those sorts of things but I mean I was respectable. I think, you know, I just kind of did well as a, as a student; I was an all-around student I think. The writing was what was intriguing, and the reading and kind of novels and getting into, you know, other worlds escaping in that way. Story_ID: 580763 Speaker 1: You had a s- did you have a sister? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Which I forgot to ask you a little bit earlier about your siblings. What was her name and did she attend school with you? Speaker 2: Yeah her name-- Speaker 1: Are you similar or close at all in age? Speaker 2: There's four years' difference, so she went--. Her name is Donna, Donna Brown Levy Wray [Donna Levy Wray], so she's now--Wray is her last name. She went, she was four years ahead of me, so we did the same grammar school [Our Lady of Lourdes School, New York, New York], but we went to different high schools. Speaker 1: And what was your relationship like as you were growing up? Speaker 2: It was fine, it was good. I think we're probably closer now. Four years is a tough difference I think developmentally. You know she and her friends didn't really want to be bothered with little me and my friends, but, you know, as--we did a lot of things together, probably force-feeding would be, you know, a term that might come to mind. But, you know, those were the family things. And then, but, you know, it was, it was fine basically. I think as I say, as we got older, we developed a different kind of closeness than, than those early years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you're ten. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, ten and fourteen is a big difference-- Speaker 1: It is, it is. Speaker 2: --in terms of interests and coolness, so. Speaker 1: And eighteen and fourteen are--that's huge. Speaker 2: Yeah. So it's not the best. Story_ID: 580764 Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [Academy of the Sacred Heart of Mary, New York, New York], did you have any particular--you said that your parents [Joyce Cappie Brown and Robert Brown] intended for you to go to college and to absorb that as a goal. What did you have in mind for college when you were in your late high school years? Speaker 2: What did I have in mind in terms of what? Speaker 1: I mean did you have any ideas about what you were gonna major in, did you know where you wanted to go, what, what were you thinking about your life goals at that time? Speaker 2: Hm. Well, I knew--I had decided that I wanted to be a psychologist. Speaker 1: How did you decide that? Speaker 2: I'm not exactly sure how, how I decided it. I, as I said, I read a lot, I probably, I, you know, I thought I was going to be the great American novelist. I mean I really enjoyed novels and was kind of developing those characters. So who knows, maybe I read about some character that was a psychologist, although I really kind of enjoyed the--you know, around the fringes of what you would get in high school about, you know, what that world was like, you know, I mean you certainly didn't have deep psychology explorations and analysis at that level, but I thought it was interesting. I thought understanding how the, the mind worked; how the, that whole inner world that one projects and interacts with the external world that that would be an interesting handle on how to navigate. And, so I very--I, I had a great affinity for pursuing that and wanting to do that. I knew I wanted to go away to school for all of my great affection and sort of experiencing from a distance the vicarious life of the City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] student, I knew I wanted to go away. And I knew that I needed to get a scholarship to do that, that it, you know, that it wasn't really gonna be possible for my parents to send me away and so, I was sort of open to where I might go. I needed to, I wanted to be as competitive as I could be and I wanted to see what I could bring to the table. Story_ID: 580765 Speaker 1: Before we leave your high school experience [at Academy of the Sacred Heart of Mary, New York, New York], what were holidays like in your house when you were growing up? Which was the most important, were there special bells and whistles or were they subdued? Speaker 2: Well, Christmas was always big. Christmas was always very big and everybody made a very big deal of, you know, presents and wrappings and decorations and, you know, people in and out. Birthdays were, were big, you know, were certainly noted, you know. We did something where it was always a big party or, you know, just something out in a restaurant, you know, whatever. I mean these were, those were the principal times. I mean Easter you had to dress up, you know, and do that. So I guess it was all pretty traditional when you think about it, but again, it's not a big family. Remember it's not, you know, people coming from all over and kind of converging in one place. It, they were, it was a small family. Story_ID: 580766 Speaker 1: How do you decide to attend Marymount [Marymount College, Tarrytown, New York]; how does that work out? Or I guess I should ask you to say, where did you decide to attend college? Speaker 2: Well, Marymount, you know, was an extension actually of the high school that I went to [Academy of the Sacred Heart of Mary, New York, New York]. They all, of course, wanted very much for me to go there. And at that point it was between Marymount and I wanted to go to Bates [Bates College] as well, in Maine [Lewiston, Maine]. And, of course my parents [Joyce Cappie Brown and Robert Brown] wanted me to stay closer to home, and, of course, Marymount offered more of a scholarship than the other. And so, I mean it was not with great regret, I mean you know, it was very comfortable for me and, and I thought Tarrytown [New York] was beautiful, which it was, so it was, it was fine, you know, it was--those were, but those were the realities of the considerations that one had to make. I, I guess I had thought the whole different kind of experience. I had never been to a co-ed school. I had never been to a non-sectarian school. I had always--well, I mean the whole notion of going to an all-women's college was, was not something I, you know, was reluctant to do, and I'm actually quite pleased that I did. I think it was really value added as an experience. But, I mean, you know, as I say, it wasn't with great reluctance. I was very pleased to be going into--go with those--that's, that was the, that was the analysis that had to be made at that time. Speaker 1: So you go there and you're clear that you're going to major in psychology? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you have a particular school of psychology that you're interested in? Or how does, how does your, how do you develop your psych- psychology studies while you're there? Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I thought the whole notion of exploring the inner workings of the mind were, was, opened other vistas in terms of the ability to listen well and to interact and to communicate with people. And I thought I would be a therapist at that point. I thought I would be a therapist. I thought I would write and be a therapist. Speaker 1: So would you write novels? Speaker 2: Yes, I was gonna write fiction and be a psychologist. Now, can you think of two more insulating, isolating professions, you know, that you were, there I would be in my garret writing and, you know, not distracted by the external world, and then, you know, absorbed int- into the lives and traumas of my patients, so it didn't work out that way. (Laughter) So I mean it just, it wasn't what I was really able to do, although I did for a short time do some, some work with patients, which I enjoyed very much. Speaker 1: While you were in college? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no later, later. Speaker 1: Just subsequently. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well what else did you do while you were in college? Did you have to work? Speaker 2: No, I didn't have to work. I had a sc- I worked on campus, yeah, I mean I didn't have to go out. Speaker 1: That's what I mean. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I did, I had work study; I had a scholarship. I did, you know, all of those things that pieced together the package. I was very involved, I was very involved in the life of the college and student government and you know class council things and, you know, I was very much present and active and involved. Story_ID: 580767 Speaker 1: Did you start working in the college administration while you were at Marymount College [Tarrytown, New York]? Speaker 2: When you say the college administration? Speaker 1: Well, I have noted that you worked in the financial aid office, is that true (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that's where I began working when I, when I went to work. Speaker 1: When you came, when you came-- Speaker 2: When I went to graduate school-- Speaker 1: In--to graduate school. Speaker 2: --when I went to graduate school, I also started working at City University [City University of New York, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And the financial aid? Speaker 2: And, yeah, I'm the mailroom story in a college. I began in the financial aid office, that's right. Speaker 1: So at Marymount you said you were involved in, sort of the community of the college. And so as you're reaching your senior year in Mary- at Marymount, are you still thinking that you're gonna be a therapist? Where are your goals, where do you think you're gonna go next? Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought at that time, by them I decided I was going to pursue my Ph.D. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, yeah, I'm stilling thinking that I'm going to be a therapist; I'm gonna get this Ph.D. and I'm going to be in private practice. And probably still thinking that I could write on the--at some other point, on the side or whatever. And I thought I would move to California to do this. So, I actually, I went to California. A bunch of us that went to school together, we got in a car and drove across the country, as people are want to do at that stage of their lives. And we sort of zigzagged across the country and stopped at anybody who had a relative anywhere that we could stay. And by the time I got to California, my parents [Joyce Cappie Brown and Robert Brown] had figured out a way to get me back to New York [New York]. They had figured out that they knew someone at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] who could expedite my application and I could start in the fall. And so ultimately I came back. I did, I came back and I did my graduate work at NYU. Speaker 1: But you had a nice full summer experience there-- Speaker 2: I did, I did, I did, I had a great time. Speaker 1: --on the road, and in California. Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived in, I had a friend who was, had come back to New York and she had an apartment in a little suburb outside of San Francisco [California], and we all stayed there. Yeah, it was fun. Story_ID: 580768 Speaker 1: And was anyone else at Marymount [Marymount College, Tarrytown, New York] with you that you--who's worthy of mentioning? Speaker 2: Some of us, we stayed in contact. In fact, when I came back to New York [New York] and was going to graduate school, one of the, one of my roommates from college and I were roommates, had an apartment in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], which was fun. I loved the Village. But, I don't know, somehow we've all kind of gone different ways. I, I ended up going on the board of trustees of Marymount, so I was involved pretty much with the college for--you know there was a hiatus, but then I was involved and kind of had a sense of where some of the alums were. At different events, you, you know, I'd make contact with people, but, you know, it's been a while and somehow those ties didn't, didn't stay as strong as they might have. Speaker 1: So you're in New York now and you're going to graduate school. And, what's the political climate in New York like when you're, when you're at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: You mean in terms of elected office and what was happening in the world? Speaker 1: What's happening in the nation and what's happening in the world, yes? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Is it the same New York that you left before you went to college? It's only been four years but somehow it seems like after college it's-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, during college, you had, you had all that space exploration, you had, or, you know, and you had the, the whole Timothy Leary thing and drugs, and I don't know, I kind a felt like I missed all that. It was just sort of the juncture with such I just kind of felt like I missed all that, which was probably a good thing, you know. But you also had, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed while I was, that was my senior year. You know, you had things happening. You had the whole Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]-- Speaker 1: So is political activity happening or social awareness activity happening at NYU while you are doing your studies? Are you coming into any contact with that? Speaker 2: Not so terribly much-- Speaker 1: Not necessarily. Speaker 2: --you know, because I was working, I was working full-time and trying to go to school full-time (laughter). I was very determined to do this and get it over with as fast as I could, but I always maintained that once I finally finished the degree they wanted to write to me and ask me why I stop supporting them in the manner to which they had become accustomed because it took, it probably took me a good, oh, I don't even want to add it up. Because what I did after about two years, I thought this was really not going well. It was too slow. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I would, I stopped out, I transferred over and got a master's [degree]. I said, you know, I can't do anything without some sort of graduate degree so I transferred into a master's program, completed that, and then transferred back into the Ph.D. program, so all the time I'm working and then I would double up in summers, you know, and take whatever I could fit in. I mean it was deadly, but I wanted to, you know, sort of accelerate to the extent that I could. Story_ID: 580769 Speaker 1: And you said you were working full-time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you said you're the mailroom story, so I want to make sure that we develop that a little bit. So are you now working in the fin- in the financial aid office? Speaker 2: At the beginning I was, yeah. I was in the financial aid office and then I went into the counseling area. I mean financial aid was really supposed to be financial aid counseling, but it was, you know, it was a lot of technical stuff. And then I went into the counseling area, you know, which was kind of closer to what I was studying and hoping to do. And, then eventually worked my way. I dabbled a little bit in the continuing ed [continuing education] area but that wasn't really a good fit for me. I--then I ran a testing program which again was sort of a combination of the technical stuff and the, and the counseling. And then I went to central office and kind of developed--I was asked by the chancellor to come up and work as a special assistant up there, and it was-- Speaker 1: So for those of us who are not versed in the university system, what's the central office, and what's happening there? Speaker 2: Well, in City University [City University of New York, New York, New York], it's probably sort of a locution that doesn't make sense for other people, but because there were twenty-one campuses of the City University system, you, the centralized office where you had the chancellor--at each of those campuses you would have a president, but you had a chancellor who was really kind of running the system. And you had vice chancellors and deans. We're very big on bureaucracy and hierarchy, you understand, and, you know, the money flowed through there so that made them extremely important to the lives of the, of the institutions, of the, you know, the various campus institutions. So the chancellor had this notion that he wanted to develop a different kind of set of programs and asked me to come up and I did that. And I went from being an assistant to the chancellor to being a dean--a university dean, as opposed to a campus dean. So that meant that the deans of a certain area on the campuses would, would interact with me and we could kind of do things. Speaker 1: So this is not the dean of a college? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You're a dean-- Speaker 2: Might be, I had a couple of titles. I was the dean for urban affairs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was a dean for student services. I think those were the only deans titles. And so people who worked in those areas on the campuses, I would coordinate activities with them that were sort of centrally, I won't say driven because I think--. When I went to Baruch [Baruch College, New York, New York], I went to Baruch as acting president, I realized, I shouldn't say this for all of the world to hear, but I realized just really how inconsequential we all were in central office. I mean the life of the college was the life of the college and, you know, there you were interacting with students and really seeing the impact of, of what you did on a day to day basis. But we liked to believe that we were running the, the university. (Background noise) And so the people who worked on those campuses in those areas with those titles would come and (air quotes) report to me. Speaker 1: Interface with you. Speaker 2: Yeah. And we would have different kinds of programs that we would try and-- Speaker 1: Can you just mention a couple of those programs just, whatever you can remember about the kinds of things you were instituting? Speaker 2: Well one of the things that I was very involved with when I went up there was to develop for the university an outreach to the secondary schools. Now you know, it's an age old problem in New York [New York], as you've seen with Mayor Bloomberg [Michael Bloomberg] and Chancellor Klein [Joel Klein] and the new ways of organizing and, and allowing the schools to be, to run with some level of independence and authority for the mayor, and that's always being negotiated. Story_ID: 580770 Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna pick up talking about your being a dean-- Speaker 2: Thinking that--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of sorts, thinking that you're running the CUNY system [City University of New York, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --from the central office. And you started to tell us about some of the programs that you developed-- Speaker 2: Oh, the secondary schools, yeah. Speaker 1: --and, in particular, secondary schools. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So the chancellor [Robert Joseph Kibbee] had this idea that we were continuing as a city to talk about the lack of preparation of young people coming out of the high schools. They were not college ready. We had an incredible investment from, of the budget into remediation at the college level. Speaker 1: And what time period are we talking? Is this the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] or is this early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: No, it's later now. Now we're probably, by the time I went to central office it as probably, by now it might have been '80 [1980]. I mean I had sort of toiled in the, in the vineyards of, you know, of, of those various other kinds of activities, being the mailroom story from financial aid through counseling and testing and all of that-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --for quite a while. And, you know, building, I guess, some sort of recognition and-- Speaker 1: Apparently. Speaker 2: --achievement so that I was invited to come there. And I guess that, I'd say we were pushing up to like '80 [1980] by then. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980], okay. Speaker 2: And you, and, and the chancellor had an interest in saying, you know rather than us doing all of this remedial work, why not try and have some forms of intervention earlier on so that we can in fact have an influence and impact on these young people's lives, then create a better set of opportunities for them. So, we did that, we did that. We, and it was great. It was really a lot of fun. We started some high schools on college campuses. And it was always and, they, they still exist. They're called middle college high schools. And they were for, in each instance they were for youngsters who weren't going to succeed in a mainstream, regular setting. And they were some pretty standard caveats about what we wanted to achieve. I mean we didn't want them to be any larger than say 450 students. Speaker 1: And these are high schools? Speaker 2: High schools. Speaker 1: Who's there? I mean-- Speaker 2: High school students, high school teachers. Speaker 1: So we're talking fifteen, fourteen to seventeen years old. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And one of them, for example, was for students for whom English was not the first language. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So they were going to be either put in some form of developmental classes that was going to slow down their ability to succeed, or we were going to take them into this kind of an environment where the teachers were able to sustain the dissonance of a multilingual group of young people who worked with computers and dictionaries and, and helped each other. And then there was the whole interface of the college faculty and the high school faculty that we tried to nurture when you might have some adjunct, you know people having an adjunct status in one or the other. It was really terrific. It was just terrific. We had, I don't know by the end exactly how many we had and since then they've grown. Speaker 1: And so from this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All with a different theme I should say. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. And from the central office it sounds like you were getting an opportunity to actually go to the schools, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's interactive. Speaker 2: You know, I always said on a bad day you should just go out to one of the campuses, then you'll remember what it is we're supposed to be doing here. And, no, it was great. It was really a lot of fun, and we did, we did those things and I think were able to achieve, you know, really make an impact on young people's lives. Story_ID: 580771 Speaker 1: Around, during that same time, I was getting involved with South Africa. We, and we did a project in South Africa that was fantastic. And what we did was, it was around the time that Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was going to be freed and Thabo Mbeki was, of course, his deputy at the time, and Thabo came and we talk- talked to Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and, so from the city side, the city wanted to be involved and I was the point person at City University [City University of New York, New York, New York] and then we had some business people in the city. And we went over and we negotiated with business people in South Africa and said we wanted to create an opportunity for the young blacks in South Africa who in spite of apartheid had made it to a certain level. They had hit what was the equivalent of the glass ceiling. Maybe it was the apartheid ceiling. But in spite of all that, had achieved a certain level within these, you know, terrible institutions that, you know, really were not about advancing people of color. So we said, you make a contract with these individuals that you will continue with their salary so their families can stay. You set some goals you want them to achieve in terms of what kinds of business experiences you want them to be exposed to, and you make an agreement that if in fact they satisfactorily complete this contract, you will at least consider advancing them within your inst- your organization. We know you're not going to make us a promise today about what will happen, but you will at least consider this set of experiences as value added. So we, we brought in cohorts, we, and we worked out individual kinds of arrangements with each of them. One, they each had their own set of goals that the company wanted them to achieve; and two, we took to look, took a look at what was in their background, what this new experience would bring them and what was missing. Story_ID: 580772 Speaker 1: And so, by then, I was at Baruch [Baruch College, New York, New York] actually, now that I think about it. I was at Baruch and so we organized (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And are you the dean at Baruch? Speaker 1: No. I was the acting president at Baruch. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so I organized an educational piece to our program that they went on Saturdays. So, here's how it worked. We put them up at International House [New York, New York]. We had the companies in New York [New York] put the money up. Companies in South Africa continued their salaries so that their families, they didn't have to disrupt their families. Came to New York, we had all of the companies that were willing to have these young people placed in the equivalent of internship settings within their company and they would move, they would spent x number of weeks in, in one office and then they would rotate into another, so they would have a series of exposures within the company. Those companies were putting up money so that we could house them, give them a small stipend and I guess that was basically it because the, the college, we weren't, you know, the fees also would pay for the college program we were putting together. Speaker 2: And what kind of companies are people, these-- Speaker 1: Mostly banks, great number of banks. At that time, it was, you know, there was Citibank [Citibank, N.A.], there was Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], you know, a number of the banks that went, have now merged, Manufacturers Hanover [Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company]. I mean these are, by the time somebody someday is looking at this, they're gonna say, what, we never heard of those dinosaur org- institutions. American Express [American Express Company] was part of it. It seems to me ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company] was part of it. Speaker 2: And what kinds of companies were the South Africans working at in South Africa? Were they similar? Speaker 1: Well, yes, they were a lot of financial institutions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But they were also conglomerates, you know, kind of big corporations; that was sort of the model in South Africa that, you know, really needed, needed their employees to have sort of a broad exposure to business practices, so-- Speaker 2: And so these are additional business practices and then some international exposure (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And skills and exposure, yeah, yeah, exactly. (Background noise) So, that was a terrific time. I really enjoyed doing that. We went, we probably had about three or four cohorts of young people that came over. But the highlight for me, I mean all of that was great, but then not so long ago, well, I guess it is long ago now because it was before I started here [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] and I've been here nine years. So it was longer ago than I thought a moment ago (laughter). But we went, we took a trip, my husband [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall] and I went back to South Africa, we went on a trip with the Council on Foreign Relations, and they organized, you know, it was very much a regimented set of experiences, which was fine. I mean we saw a lot, we, you know, moved as a group with government officials, and it was, it was wonderful. But one of the things that they organized was one morning they said we were to have a breakfast with the young entrepreneur class that was developing in South Africa; young blacks who were now running their own businesses. And lo and behold, who do we see but one of the fellows who had been in our first group. So it was, you know-- Speaker 2: Fantastic. Speaker 1: It was all worth it, you know it was just exactly what you would hope and it was very, very gratifying so, that was nice. Speaker 2: Central office. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Central office (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 580773 Speaker 1: Can you talk, can you explain a little bit about how you decided to segue to be acting president at Baruch [Baruch College, New York, New York], and why, you know, why were you acting, i.e., why was the other person not there? And, you know what was your agenda and your success in that space. Obviously, it seg- it intersects with the South Africa function (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that was, I was already there, I was fortunate to be there because I could organize this program, you know, under that auspices, which was nice. Well, somewhere along the line I guess I had now changed my career goals. Speaker 1: 'Cause you're not gonna be a therapist-- Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not-- Speaker 1: --and write novels. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) and you're-- Speaker 2: I may one day, I may still. Speaker 1: At your farmhouse? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean I, I've, I've reached enough of an age to know I'm never gonna be a neurosurgeon. You know how--I always laugh how young people think I can do anything, you know, I always have all these choices. Well, I've now come to understand that it's time to limit some of those, but I still could be a therapist and write novels (laughter). I don't think, I don't know that that's what I'll do, but writing is still pretty-- Speaker 1: Absolutely you could. Speaker 2: --much of a draw to me. But I had now changed my career goals and thought that what I wanted to do was be a college president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That I knew how to do that. That was a job I knew how to do. I mean I had had my hand in many, many different aspects of college life, and I thought the charm of being the president was to be able to set the agenda and to, you know, through leadership, through setting a tone, be able to really make a difference in people's lives. So, there I was, there--. Oh, so the person that had been the president at Baruch, there was some difficulty, some, some great upheaval occurred and they needed an acting, they needed an acting president while a search went on. Now part of what the rules were was that if you went in as acting president you could not be a candidate for the presidency. So at that point I thought, that's fine, I just wanna go have the experience and learn what I learn and see if I know what I think I know. So that's what I did. I went, I knew it should only be for a year and I thought, the year (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it was for a year. It turned out to be for a year. But I was very determined that I was gonna use that year to get something done. You know I always say you get old very fast in this business because you live your life in semester segments. You live in fifteen week cycles that go very fast, and you call that a year, you know, so there we are. We are now, it's now summer. We just finished a year, that's the academic year. So I knew I didn't have a lot of time and I couldn't, I couldn't wake up in October and say I'd better get started because the next thing I would know was--would be the Thanksgiving break, you know. So I went in saying what I'm gonna do is develop a whole strategic plan that we can hand over to whoever is coming in here as president. Well, so we did, I mean we did that, but, you know, there's many, it wasn't exactly, you know, a smooth road from beginning to end. I mean first of all you know they figure you're an acting president, you're not gonna be there, we're the permanent government, you know. We know what goes. But we actually, we actually got some things done and we actually did have a bit of a blueprint for, you know, what might be the direction should the college want to grow new programmatic areas and directions. So that was a, that was a good experience. Story_ID: 580774 Speaker 1: Are you doing any teaching at this point? Speaker 2: No, no I wasn't doing any teaching. Speaker 1: How do you come to do some, to start teaching at City University? Speaker 2: Well one of the things that I had done when I was in central office in my various titles-- Speaker 1: Running the City University of New York [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Me and my colleagues we were running the place. I decided that I really ought to go someplace and teach because that was the core of the business, we were supposed to know what-- Speaker 1: And is that a part of aspiring to be a college president? I mean are you more like, I don't know, but are you more respected if you have some teaching years under your belt or does that not really matter for that top level administration (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably--it--I suppose it would, one would garner more, a lot, a different kind of respect if you had been through the experiences and the trenches in the classroom. Some people are researchers. It's really about being of, of the academic life I would say. And I think it's very important to be of the academic life. I think, you know I always laugh when politicians retire they say, "Are you gonna go be a college president?" Like there's nothing special you have to know about the inner workings of these institutions, and, and, and what works and what doesn't work and how you have participatory government--governing. That is really, and that is really at the core of academia. So you know, my favorite thing was when Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] left government and they wanted to know if he was going to be, to go be a college president, and I thought, you know, this man was head of the Chiefs of Staff [Joint Chiefs of Staff], right, and he said, "Jump," and people said (gesture), you know. That's not how it works (laughter) you know, in colleges and universities. So, at any rate, I think you can, you ought to be immersed in the life of the academy in some way so that you understand the language and the lexicon and the mores. It makes it work a lot better. And so, did you ask me how, we get, we're going off on these tangents and so I'm forgetting exactly where I'm going with this. Speaker 1: I asked you about how you began teaching and you said that-- Speaker 2: Oh, the teaching, the teaching (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you decided you were interested in teaching, you thought it was something that you should do. Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I am the first to say I'm not a teacher. I'm blessed in many ways, but I think teaching is a great gift and it's not my strongest one. And so I have profound respect for people who can do this every day. It, it, it really is an art and a gift and a great talent. And, I like what I do, which is to hopefully create the environment where you can blossom and flourish and do those wonderful things that you've been gifted with, and it's really not what I do best. But I, you know, and I knew that and it was very hard for me but I still thought that if I were going to be engaged in the running of an organization then I needed to know what was in the day to day toiling of the people who were, you know, were delivering our products so to speak. So when I was in central office I would every now and then go and I would team teach a class with a colleague of mine because I didn't dare go out and try and do it all on my own. And so I did that, and then later decided--. Oh, I guess I, I guess one of the things that I did was I, I took a break from the university. I had been in the university, you know, like all my working life at this point, and then I left, I took a leave and I was deputy mayor in the city. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: So that was different. Speaker 1: So you did this before you began teaching, or you said you were doing the team teaching. Speaker 2: I was doing the team teaching and doing all my other stuff. And then-- Speaker 1: And you've been in academia now for quite a while? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So now you're taking a break and you're gonna be--you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well now I'm gonna go be deputy mayor. And then it's when I come back that I go on faculty in the graduate school [Graduate Center, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 580775 Speaker 1: I've got to ask you to segue into the deputy mayor. What's your agenda there? What-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: What, how long are you there and what do you do? Speaker 2: Well, I'm actually only there for a year because I guess the first lesson I learned was never go in the last year of an administration. Speaker 1: And whose administration are you entering? Speaker 2: It was in--David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was mayor, and we are now entering into the reelection phase where everything is focused on that. Now I'm not a novice to the political world, but, you know, it wa- if anything could send you running back to academia, this was it, you know. Speaker 1: So I guess one of my questions is, what do you find is much--I guess I got the impression from looking at your materials that the city seemed a lot more, less ruly perhaps than an academic organization. They've got a lot more experience with the colleges, so maybe it's just that, but-- Speaker 2: The city seemed a lot less what? Speaker 1: Seemed more unruly, is the more common term. Speaker 2: As a system? Speaker 1: As a system as opposed to the-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --college scene, but it might just be you have more experience in the college scene or in the academia. What, you know, what shocked you about running a city? Speaker 2: Well, I guess what was the--what was surprising and difficult to deal with was you never knew what was on the agenda. So I'd wake up in the morning and turn on the news to figure out how my day was gonna be-- Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: --you know. It could be anything. I mean you, you wake up and you hear the news and you go along, you know, getting ready for your day, but you know, we had boat people showing up on the shores in Brooklyn [New York]. I mean you have riots, you have--you know, it is just a constant beat that you can't control. I mean that is, you know I used to say I could get there at seven in the morning and there would be people waiting. So then I would allow myself to leave say at nine at night only by making a list. So I'd make my list of twelve things I was definitely going to do in the morning and then when I left at nine that night, my list of twelve had now (laughter) become twenty because you, you just really can't structure your life that way. I mean it's really in many ways reactive. And that, I think we try to do too many things for too many people for all the right reasons. You know, we want, we want to be welcoming. We want people to find their place here, but it is, it's huge, it's huge. So, you know, from street fair permits to deer--overflowing gutters in, you know, one of the boroughs to, you know, you name it, that's what comes to city hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York]. So-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --it was an interesting experience. Speaker 1: So you thought perhaps academia? Speaker 2: Perhaps all those, those internecine little battles that I thought were so important, maybe they're pretty tame (laughter) compared to all of this. At least they were about one set of things, you know, that, that-- Speaker 1: And you said earlier that one of the reasons you wanted to be a university president was because you could set the agenda. I mean I'm sure there are things that do not act exactly as you planned them, but do you still have a sense that as a president you have the opportunity to set the agenda? Speaker 2: Yes. I think you have the opportunity to set the agenda. But you also have the responsibility to have, to create the circumstances within which people can buy into that agenda. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You cannot set the agenda and ramrod it through. You will not succeed. Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: This is a community of people, and everybody has a contribution to make to the success. While I might own all the failures, I certainly do not own all the successes. And so there has to be what I think you have the opportunity to do as the leader in this kind of community--in, in any academic community--is create dialogue and to create the participation, invite that participation. You don't always have to do what everybody wants you to do. But you do, I think, have an obligation to explain why you are doing the things that you are doing, and those things ought to be contributing to the greater good of the long range vision and the long range plan. Story_ID: 580776 Speaker 1: So I wanna get back to your teaching career. When, when do you start, about what year do you start teaching at City University [City University of New York, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I--let's see. I was at, I'm not good at keeping all these years of my life straight. Speaker 1: In the mid-'80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Because I was at Baruch [Baruch College, New York, New York] in '90 [1990]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I came back for a while and then I did the Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] administration. So we're now well into the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Okay. I want to take a step back because it's my understanding that you were the director of Boys Harbor [Boys and Girls Harbor, Inc., New York, New York] (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on the board. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that? Is that something that is dear to you? Speaker 2: I always, let me just step back and say something. You know we talked about my, because I think in my head it all links. We talked about my wanting to go, my believing in education; my parents [Joyce Cappie Brown and Robert Brown] having inculpated this notion of education being transformative and you must go to college, and my wanting to go away to college. My, the real driving force, I mean even if it was as a therapist and a writer, the real driving force for me was always to achieve enough so that I could be a role model in some way, have an influence on young people's lives who might be like me, you know, might have been looking out that window onto Convent Avenue [New York, New York] seeing other people-- Speaker 1: I wanna say, add that to your little summary. I mean you have your parents and you're, they're sort of engineering your, your energy towards college, but I feel like from the beginning you had this gaze-- Speaker 2: This fascination, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean you're just in the midst of CUNY [City University of New York]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --(laughter) just sort of soon as you come out. Speaker 2: It's very, it is interesting, it is interesting. I mean it was a very influential force. So, you know, there were two things that motivated me in that regard and that was really to be in a position to be able to say this was my experience and, and you can do this too. And, but to achieve enough so that I don't have to go and toot my own horn; that people can, in fact, see that, it's possible to do things. It's possible to kind of have that, that journey. And the other was, you know, hopefully, be in a position financially to create opportunities for kids with scholarships or something that, that meant the difference between the dream and the reality. So, having, having said that, when I think about, you know, how, what is the draw to the transition to wanting to run an institution, it is again kind of the same motivation, where as the leader, yes, you set the tone and you set the strategy and you are in a position to set a budget; to put the resources behind achieving those goals. And what is the goal? The goal is really to create a learning--a teaching and learning environment that you can, in fact, transform the lives of young people who have talent; now you create the opportunity and that hopefully will translate into success. So it's all about not--you cannot govern and be autocratic and be successful. It's really all of the piece. It's a very different form of governance, but there's no one part of it that without the others-- Speaker 1: Work (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) can create the fabric for the success. Story_ID: 580777 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the atmosphere in which New York City [New York, New York] existed when you became the deputy mayor under Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins]. Speaker 2: Well, Dave Dinkins was, of course, the first African American to be elected mayor of the City of New York [New York], and there were, there were a lot of challenges. David did some wonderful work for which I don't think he always gets credit. You know we, he started the whole community policing effort, you know, which takes a while as one has to have, I'm fond of saying that I'm clearly a person with a lot of patience because think of the two things in life that I've done: psychologist and an educational administrator. You measure success in incremental changes in both those professions and I think it gives me a great appreciation for what David was in fact able to achieve as mayor of the city and for which I don't think he often gets credit. But many of the programs that, in fact, led to a resurgence of a feeling of safety, to businesses coming back and reinvesting in the city; he really had sown those seeds. And he did, you know, the community policing effort. He did the after school programs, the Beacon schools, Beacon schools, and that was a concept in these neighborhoods where the schools were kept open late at night so that young people could do sporting events as well as tutoring, and parents for whom English was not the first language could come and have classes. Geoff Canada [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Canada] whose work a number of people talk about, has just done an incredible job in terms of revitalizing, you know, activities within neighborhoods and really saving the lives of a lot of young African American kids. He was, he was very much involved in our work. So those were, those were kind of the toiling in the vineyards kinds of work that Dinkins was carrying out. And at the same time you had a lot of tension that had, that was building. And of course, we had the whole debacle of the Crown Heights era--period, the riot that occurred as a result, and how people actually, you know, blamed David, felt that David was out of touch in not, and didn't respond quickly enough and understand the magnitude of what was going on. It was very unfortunate because Mayor Dinkins was a man who had really devoted a great deal of his adult life to building bridges between communities and, and it was really, it's, it's too bad to have that, all of those things to coalesce, the racial tensions that were developing in the city to have any part of his administration painted with that brush was, I think, very unfortunate and unfair. So you--that was kind of the tone in the city and as I said, I came in, it was the last year of the administration. Everything was gearing up for reelection. And, you know, you were sort of dodging the slings and arrows that, it's the nature of the business people, you know, when people covet your job, they really do not, there's no etiquette that's involved that you can, you can learn to navigate and, and work to your advantage. So, he was not reelected, and I returned to the City University [City University of New York, New York, New York], and I was grateful to be able do that I might add. Story_ID: 580778 Speaker 1: Do you do some teaching at that point? Speaker 2: No, when I went back actually I did not. I, I decided--oh, I was asked to develop a whole new sector or segment of the university [City University of New York, New York, New York] and that had to do with fundraising. The university had--. You know public colleges really do not have a long history of private fundraising and people tend to believe that these colleges can run on the budget of public dollars that they get in their budgets from the city and the state and it's never enough money. And it's a public institution so it's not like you can charge enough in tuition to make up that difference. And if, in fact, you're going to have cutting edge kinds of pro- programs, new equipment, infrastructure, you have to go out and raise money and to supplement what these budgets are. And so, more and more the individual colleges were embarking on the fundraising aspects, you know, putting their toe in this water. And some were being very successful and some were not being successful at all. I mean it really does depend upon your alumni to a great extent, and how long the tentacles are that you have in, in the communities in which you're situated, and how long you've been in existence. So, I was asked to put together some sort of programmatic overlay that would in fact be a development, or institutional advancement, all these fancy names we call fundraising in higher education, some sort of program that all of the colleges could buy into. So, I did, I did that, did that for a while. And, in fact, put together a program that some people were more successful in carrying out than others, and I think that will always be the case. And I think it was sometime thereafter that I decided that maybe I ought to--I mean after all I've been in a college all this time, maybe what I ought to do is go and teach and be really involved in the heart of what the work was really about. And I went on the faculty of the graduate school of City University [Graduate Center, New York, New York] in the, in the clinical psych [psychology], the counseling psych program rather. Story_ID: 580779 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you teach [at City University of New York, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I taught, what did I teach? I taught--I developed a course actually that had to do with legislation--government and legislation. At that time we were as a city really suffering through the impact of some measures that had been put into place that essentially released people from in- institutionalized mental healthcare. We're sending people back, the notion was to have service delivery centers in these communities where you would have social workers and physicians and psychologists and psychiatrists as teams who would deal with people as they came back into the community. Many of the people, of course, were ill-equipped to be self-sufficient. They, they really couldn't go out and get jobs. They weren't able to function in that kind of a setting. And so you had teams of people, teams of professionals who would either go out on the street and gather these people up at night and bring them back to these centers. So, people who were studying to be therapists and analysts really needed to understand what the overall lay of the land was out there, along with understanding some of the legislation that was then being moved through that really was changing the landscape for therapy, where pay for service, you know, the private pay where I come and I see you as a therapist and I give you a check and that is how you are supported, and maybe I can send that into insurance and get some reimbursement, and maybe I can't. That was becoming, going the way of the dinosaurs. And less and less were insurance companies willing to pay for these therapy sessions in mental health kind of care. And we decided that young aspiring therapists really needed to understand a little bit more of what that world, how that world was changing and what they needed to know if they were gonna survive it. So, I developed a course in that. And I also taught a course that was very interesting I thought, in terms of ethnicity and culture and identity and how these themes really resonated within, you know, the kind of psychological issues that people had to deal with. Speaker 1: That sounds interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very interesting. We were able to do some interesting work, and, you know, again, needing to get people to open up and really kind of talk about what their, what their early experiences were that might lead them to be open to the cultural experiences of others at this stage of their training and professional life, their ability to do that. Story_ID: 580780 Speaker 1: How has your psychological training, or your training in psychology affected or helped your administrative career? I mean do they, do they co-exist together? Do you use that training, do you use the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh very much so, yeah. I think that, I think that what I really, what one develops through that training is an ability to listen in a way that others don't necessarily have the ability to do. Some people certainly do, but I don't think it's the norm. You know I'm not analyzing everyone, I'm not, you know, sitting back and retiring to my laboratory mode and really analyzing people as they come in. But I think I do have an ability to hear what's not said and understand somewhat, in either body language or presentation, you know, what some of, not necessarily what the underlying issues are, but that there might be underlying issues that maybe we need to deal with if we're going to get from this point to the point we'd like to get to. So I think it's, I think it's very valuable. When I was in city hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York] I used to threaten to bring my couch because I thought that was really what was required with some of the behavior. Speaker 1: Lay everyone down. Speaker 2: But, no, but I do think the, you know, I call it my third year, I think it, I think it's very helpful. Speaker 1: The third year. Story_ID: 580781 Speaker 1: So how did you come to be interested, eligible, under consideration for the presidency at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, I was minding my own business. I was teaching my classes [at City University of New York, New York, New York], although I have to say I did not think this was going to be a career for me. It was, it was very difficult. I had the, a friend of mine said, "You'd rather speak to three thousand people at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] than thirteen in a seminar." I say, hey, you know, three thousand aren't going to ask me questions, you know, or--. But the exchange, the exchange in the classes was very stimulating. It's just, I really do believe it's a gift, and, you know, my gifts are elsewhere, that's all. I think one has to be honest with one's self about that so that you do the best that you can do in the things, in the ways you spend your time. So anyway, a headhunter called me about another presidency that I thought I would explore. Speaker 1: And did you? Speaker 2: I did, I did. I was actually a finalist in that. And I did not get that position, but as a result, the headhunter said, you know, "We think we have another, we have another search that's ongoing that we think you would really be perfect for." I said okay, you know, here I am, you know, I'm never one to shy away from a, an opportunity or a challenge. And I certainly knew about FIT having been, you know, in the city and in this world for so long. I actually knew the person who had been the long standing president here [Marvin Feldman], you know, the sort of everyone's idealized version of what, what their president should be and I had actually had opportunities to be in meetings with him over the years. So I knew a bit about the place, not, when I think back, I really knew very little, but enough to be interested and curious about it. Story_ID: 580782 Speaker 1: What is FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]? Is it fashion school? Speaker 2: It's really a lot more than a fashion school. I mean it is--I don't even know exactly what people mean when they say fashion school. FIT is a unique kind of, kind of conglomerate here. We are classified as a community college. We give two year degrees, but we also give four year degrees and we also give master's degrees. We have over forty majors, and fashion is not our largest major. Speaker 1: And I need you to just name a few of the majors that we don't know are housed here at FIT. Speaker 2: Let's see, our largest program is in merchandising and management. We have direct marketing, we have advertising and marketing communications, we have interior design. Speaker 1: And do those marketing majors include things other than clothes-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --so are you marketing and merchandising items that are not apparel? Speaker 2: Yeah. We have, you, you would never come here for an M.B.A., but you would come into one of our business majors to learn the business of creative industries. So, I mean we have home products development, we have toy design, we have interior design, we have cosmetics and fragrance marketing and development. We have computer animation. So, you know, we have textile development. We have fabric styling. I mean we have, it's really an interesting set, a very rich set of creative kinds of disciplines that--. I think our curriculum is known, one, for being pragmatic that the students are very well educated and trained when they come out. We have--at graduation--about 90 percent have jobs at graduation, which is an amazing, really an amazing statistic. It's very hard to get in and some of our majors we take probably one out of ten applicants. It's very competitive. You have to be really good, and they work very hard. They're very special the students here the best part they are creative, they want you to--. You know all my years at City University [City University of New York, New York, New York] which I really loved and I loved the students, but they were gonna change the world and they had non-negotiable demands and we had strikes and we had closings of colleges. We had, you know, all those things that went with that era. But these students really want to change the world by making beautiful things, and they want you to (cough) excuse me--they want you to really love what they do, and they work very hard at it. They're very passionate about it. Speaker 1: I've got more questions, I just don't know which order. Is FIT a CUNY [City University of New York] school? Speaker 2: FIT is part of SUNY [State University of New York System], the state university. It's not a city school; it's a state university school. Story_ID: 580783 Speaker 1: And when you were in the running for the presidency, were you the obvious choice? How did that, how did that selection develop? Speaker 2: You know I'm not so certain. I don't, I don't really know who my competition was. I never asked once how I got here. I think they had been searching for a while. And-- Speaker 1: And had they had a black or female president before? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: And does that make a difference? Speaker 2: You know, I always say it's, it's never incidental to who you are. I don't think people look at you and do not take note of your ethnicity or your gender. I think, however, there was so much work to do, we, you know, and I was very serious about the agenda of the work and I was hell bound and determined to succeed, so there were no excuses and certainly people can bring it up and they can raise it, but it's really got to be, I mean the dialogue has to be around what's important for our- us to succeed with our mission and our vision for going forward. Quite frankly, I think people have liked having a female president, and maybe they even like having an African American president. I'm not-- Speaker 1: Well I read one article that informed me that the rumor was that perhaps your political connections enabled you to attain the presidency. Do you think that your getting the job had anything to do with whom you're married to and the politicization of New York City [New York, New York] and state? Speaker 2: Well, you know the--. I love it, I love how people get paid to sort of twist things into a headline that they think will sell their twenty-five cent newspapers. So, the, the media types decided that because my husband [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall], how was that to work? I mean it was so convoluted that because my husband was running for governor that the sitting governor who was his opponent would name me president so that, maybe so that my husband wouldn't run or wouldn't attack. I don't really even remember, so the, I mean, if you would like to, you know, denigrate thirty years of work that lead me up to being eligible to compete for the job, I suppose that would be a reasonable thing to say. But, on the other hand, I loved the headlines. I saw it in one of the tabloids it said: "McCall's wife to head FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]." This nameless person, wasn't that biblical? Wasn't it, you know, the, the wife who remained nameless and was to simply obey, so, McCall's wife. So I said that was fine as long as when he ran for governor they said, "Brown's husband running for governor." I thought that would be a fair exchange. Of course, that never happened either, I--. So no, I think it was all kind of business as usual trying to, you know, make headlines, twist things and, you know, it makes a one day story. Speaker 1: Then it goes away. Speaker 2: You just have to, you really do have to learn to roll with it. You have to be able to tolerate a certain dissonance in these jobs or you will not succeed. I mean you cannot indulge yourself by losing it over things that have nothing to do with what your focus is supposed to be. Story_ID: 580784 Speaker 1: Does being married to someone who's in politics [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall]--you said that, or I don't know that I'm going to summarize this so perfectly, but there is an agenda to be set in academia and that if you work with people who are there, the faculty, students and give people a voice, you're able to run towards your goal, you were saying that working in city politics was a lot less structured. You're dealing with emergencies and things are coming up constantly. Speaker 2: A lot of vested interest, there's a lot of vested interest (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do, do you feel that you're, I'm sorry, I-- Speaker 2: A lot of vested interest in politics. Speaker 1: So does that-- Speaker 2: I mean yes, a lot of emergencies, but also, you know, it's not, it's not so transparent how you-- Speaker 1: So does your relationship with politics and politicians give you any type of an edge or contribute to your exercising your duties here [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], or in your career of educational administration? Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, again, we're a public institution, consequently we have to rely on--upon public elected officials for budget considerations for special grants. If, you know, if there is money earmarked in the state for certain kinds of projects we have to be able to go and interact and speak with them and make the case in order to be successful in getting (background noise) some of those funds. So certainly the exposure is helpful, you know, knowing how to communicate and how to understand the systems and where the bodies are buried and who is more influential than whom. That's always going to be worthwhile. I don't care what institution or organization you are, you are trying to navigate and get yourself into a position that it will (unclear) to the benefit of your programs or your vision or your strategy. So, certainly it's all helpful. It all has contributed in ways that, you know you have to kind of--you can't bemoan all the things that happen. You really have to be able to sort of delve into it and, and ri- take, allow the message to rise up, you know, what am I supposed to learn from this experience, and then figure it out and hold on to it. Story_ID: 580785 Speaker 1: So what's your vision for FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] and what have you done since you've been here? Speaker 2: Well, we've done a lot actually since I've been here. I've been here, believe it or not, nine years. I find it hard to believe. We've been very busy. We've built a couple of buildings. We went out and we raised money to do that. Speaker 1: I guess one of my questions that keeps gnawing at me and I keep forgetting to ask it is, do students at FIT live here? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean is this a boarding college? Speaker 2: We have three dorms on this street where, the building we're in now, and those were 1250 beds on this street. And we just opened a new dorm. This was the first year it was opened, over on 31st Street, and that has an additional eleven hundred beds. Speaker 1: As is that dorm one of the buildings that you were discussing having built since you've been here? Speaker 2: Well, yes. I mean it's the third building. We built two new buildings here that are, one is a, is a new food court, which allowed us to bring all the dining rooms, we had two huge dining rooms up in the buildings which made the elevators a lot of fun at lunchtime. And so, and we have now freed up all that space and we're in the process of renovating all of that for new studios and laboratories and classrooms, so that's, that's ongoing now. We're about to actually, we're gonna do that in the next year. And we also built a conference center and continuing ed [continuing education] and professional studies center within-- Speaker 1: I think I passed that on the way here. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You know real estate in New York [New York] is very tight and very costly, so we keep building in between our buildings and try to do it-- Speaker 1: And it sounds like recycling your buildings for better and greater use. Speaker 2: Well, well, yes, the renovations that are going to take place are certainly that, that are going to take place as a result of moving down the food, the food court. But these other spaces we built-in, you know, we sort of created, we call them courtyards because we were being creative, and sort of closed in existing spaces. I have actually ideas for doing more of that, and I think, I think it's great, you know, I think we have a ni- it's a nice footprint, this block, we're a square block, you know. We go from avenue to avenue, 27th [Street] to 28th [Street], 7th [Avenue] to 8th Avenue. So anyway, so we've done those parts. We've, we've expanded our campus. I thought it was very important to have more beds for the students because we were on a lottery system because we only had twelve hundred beds. Now we have twenty-three hundred beds and it really kind of works out nicely. We keep the freshman on this street and the upperclassman can go a couple of blocks away. Story_ID: 580786 Speaker 1: We did a whole strategic plan, planning process that really is leading to a revitalization of the curriculum [at Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. And a new kind of strengthening of the core of the liberal arts which are, our students, even though they come here because they say they've known their whole lives what they want to do because they're creative individuals and they have that passion and motivation. They have to have a core of liberal arts; it's--you know, we're accredited by the state. And what we hear more and more from industry is they're certainly looking for talented people. They're looking for people that are well educated and well trained, but they are really looking for people who can speak and write and have communication and presentation skills. So we've developed a Presidential Scholars Program, it's an honors program with wonderful separate core of a curriculum that the kids are very excited about, and it's really a wonderful experience for them. We've developed more international programs. We have numbers of students now with opportunities to travel to many different international sites. And we are working on more interdisciplinary kinds of approaches because we have all of this great richness of the creativity and they are, there's really no point being quite so siloed and say if you're studying art, you, you don't really need to know about how that mixes with product development, you know, textile development, whatever, however we can get. You know what's really interesting is seeing other really talented teachers who are math teachers in a place where, you know, this is probably the last thing students would think of wanting to do, but they intertwine that and integrate it with some of the artistic concepts that really do resonate for the students and they make it interesting and they do wonderful projects that we then, you know, display around the campus. So, it's really, you know, making the curriculum and the learning experience that much more exciting. Story_ID: 580787 Speaker 1: At the risk of being remiss, I want to ask you how you met your husband and if you might tell us a little about being with your husband. Speaker 2: Well, I met my husband at a political convention, the black and Puerto Rican caucus [New York State Association of Black and Puerto Rican Legislators, Inc.] that is held in Washington [D.C.] every year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I probably should get you to state his name at the outset so that we're-- Speaker 2: My husband's name-- Speaker 1: --so those who are viewing will know who we are speaking about and why we're asking. Speaker 2: My husband's name is Carl McCall [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall], and he has been in politics for many years, had an interesting career. And we met at the Black and Puerto Rican--it's like meeting someone in Grand Central station [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York], you know, but that's how that happened. And we just figured out we've been married now like twenty-four years, so I guess he's a keeper (laughter). And, you know, it's--Carl has had a lot of success and wanted to continue to pursue higher political office, and, and did that. And you asked what it's like. I mean it, it's very disruptive of your life to be involved in political campaigns, needless to say. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: Well, your time is never your own. Speaker 1: I think some of that answer for you is probably obvious, but-- Speaker 2: Your time is never your own. I mean you are, you need to be, it's an impossible kind of process. I mean when you see what you see on television and you see these candidates that are showing up in these various parts of the world and the states, you know, it is very frantic and frenetic and moving people from place to pla- and literally the candidate doesn't know where, where he's got to be next or how the schedule is going, you're, you're, you know, in the--. You're subject to the handlers and so is your family to a certain extent, you know, I mean because, you just have to have the right mindset or else you're not gonna, you're not gonna succeed in surviving this process. Speaker 1: What's the right mindset? Speaker 2: The mindset is that it's part of the territory. That you have a greater goal; that your goal really is to--well, in Carl's case, the goal always was to be in a position where he could be instrumental in, in helping the condition of people's lives. I mean that was his motivation. Others may have other motivations, but that was always his, you know, the importance of good government and being an advocate for your constituents. And so if you keep focused on that you are able to withstand an awful lot of other things that might nip at your heels, and your psyche, and your ego and your sense of order because there's nothing really terribly orderly about campaigns at the end of the day. And you kind of--I mean my, my thought always was that the worst thing that I can imagine is for someone to get to some later point in their lives and say, I wish I had been able to do that. And either I stood in my own way or someone else prevented me from taking advantage of that confluence of events that allowed me to have that opportunity that I could have grabbed, but something prevented me. I never would want to find myself in that situation, nor would I want him to ever be in that situation, so. Speaker 1: So did you have to consider--or was it a separate kind of a consideration when deciding to marry him, this idea that it would mean participating in sometimes what's a whirlwind, uncontrollable kind of political lifestyle. Did you, I often think that if you're gonna marry someone who's gonna be president, for instance, that you, you have to decide to be a president's wife, do--did you have that kind of a thought process, or--? Speaker 2: I think, I think I would put it another way. I, I admired his motivation. I thought, you know here was a man who probably could have done any number of other things if he wanted to, but he was really motivated to make a difference in the world and in the lives of people that, that might look up to and rely on him. And I didn't, I didn't want to--would never want to be part of stifling any part of that, so that's what goes with the territory. No, I don't think I have, I did not have a separate set of thoughts about being the wife of, who, you know, I mean look, it's a partnership and so you, you make it happen so to speak. Story_ID: 580788 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of the awards you've received and some of the boards that you sit on? Are you doing that now? Speaker 2: Yes, I have, I've enjoyed the opportunity to sit on corporate boards. I, I, I have in the past done non-profit boards as well. I mean I think it's important to, to kind of make your contribution in that way as well, to kind of help these various organizations who might not have access to resources that you might have if you believe in the mission of those groups. I've had to cut back on some of it. I mean I just, there's only so many hours in the day, but some of them I maintain a relationship with. When you ask about the boards, we were talking earlier, I am assuming you are talking about corporate boards. Speaker 1: We were talking about boards. I do. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you were saying you were on the board at Boys Harbor [Boys and Girls Harbor, Inc., New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Well that was a while ago, I'm no long on the board of Boys Harbor-- Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: --but that was, that was a good experience. I mean there are some wonderful people associated with Boys Harbor on that board and we had some great programs and after school programs. Speaker 1: And that's an example of a non-profit board? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. One of the other ones that's very dear to me that I still hold onto is the Central Park Conservancy [New York, New York]. I think, you know, I really am a secret environmentalist I think. I think it's just so important that we preserve the planet, you know that we, that it's part of a legacy that we pass on. We're just so cavalier about these things, so I very much find the park an oasis and some really wonderful people that are associated with it. But I am, I'm also on the, on a couple of corporate boards. I'm on the board of Polo, Ralph Lauren, which is a wonderful experience and I think, you know, value added from my work here as well. And vice versa I guess, kind of the image and vision that I can bring to the synergies, you know, that, that are related to the worlds we're all in are good. And so that's, that kind of takes my head to a whole 'nother place, you know, which I think is good. It's as good as a nap you know. I mean it kind of refreshes your, you to think about it in a different way. And so the Polo board has been very exciting. The company is doing stupendously well. I don't know if you have any reason to follow, but, but it's really, it's growing and it's flourishing and I mean it's just a major success story and it's, it's a great experience being associated with the board. I have been on the board of a company called Paxar [Paxar Corporation] that was just sold. I mean we just completed the transaction. And so Paxar will be no more as a stand-alone company. It was a, it's a, it was taken over by another company [Avery Dennison Corporation] in the same field that essentially they do labels, they do inventory controls. It's a whole 'nother business, you know, and a whole 'nother world, how you control these inventories. How, and how you brand and identify through labeling. You know as well as things you take for granted, you know, labels that you find in clothing with care instructions and other kinds of country of origin, workmanship and that sort of thing. But it's, it's almost an art form I mean how some of them are. You know there's the press-on ones and then there's the finer, you know, the couture kind of label. Anyway so that's a whole 'nother world because it's also quite an international business. So many things are, as you know, are going offshore and so you have to kind of control many different aspects of those businesses. And I'm on the board of a company called United States Enrichment Corporation [Centrus Energy Corporation, Bethesda, Maryland], which is like totally different from anything else that I do. And it's, it's, it really, truly does take, you know, clears my head for another whole enterprise, which is uranium enrichment. It really does have to do with foreign policy with the U.S. government, and, and it's an alternative fuel source. And, you know, there's a lot of emotion that goes around when you start talking about uranium enrichment because over the years people have built up a certain resistance and fears to those things. But, you realize, of course, how our reliance on foreign oil is something that we're going to have to address as a country, as a nation, and we won't talk politics about, you know, all that means that weighs on all of us at this point in 2007. And I'm on another board that is actually not a public board but--Linens 'n Things, which is another business board. And again it all helps in terms of the businesses that we are preparing our students to go into from here [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 580789 Speaker 1: Regarding what your students do from here, you said that 90 percent of the FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] students at graduation have jobs, so I'm interested in a couple of things. And where do students go, do you have any special, I don't, I feel like the terms I'm about to use are kind of trite, but do you have a special interest, special programs in students of color, and you know, where they end up going in the different industries that you serve. And is there a graduate level--you said you serve up to master's [degree] students here, but is there a graduate level fashion training, or would that be haute couture or how exactly does that work? Speaker 2: No, we don't have a master's program in fashion design, but we are thinking about developing one and actually-- Speaker 1: So the master's were, were in the business industry? Speaker 2: Different things: museum studies; cosmetics and fragrance; illustration; and I guess, I'm trying to think, there's actually two others that names are escaping me at the moment. Speaker 1: Very good. So what about students of color at FIT? Are-- Speaker 2: The students, you know, there, there is a small, there's a group that works together, there's, that are students of color. I mean you have sort of the Jewish group of students who might come together; you have the black students group that comes together. You have many, not as many as you might find in other places, but you do find some groups that get together, take trips, do various sets of activities or programming as a result of, of that identification. There is a group, there are some groups in industry that reach out specifically to students of color in fashion particularly and I think it's really a result of people who have had such a difficult time on their own getting recognition and, you know, their footing in the industry. But for the most part, you know, the students, we have internship programs that really, I think, lead to a lot of the job offerings. I think industry people come in, they know these students are very bright or they wouldn't be here and they're well-educated and they're well-prepared and so they hire them. It's kind of like shopping and then upon graduation they offer them, in many instances, full-time jobs. The, the students of color are right in that mix. I don't know that there's any--. Certainly people of color in industry are interested in reaching out and seeing if they can bring those students, you know, into the light so to speak, so they can get recognized. But, I will also say that the students of color are in those same internships and able to prove themselves, you know, quite often. I'm not trying to say that that there is no, there's no resistance any more in industry as long as you're well-educated and well-trained. We know that's not the case, you know, there will be certain resistance to making equal opportunity for students of color, but in terms of being competitive, on the same footing as everyone else, our students are certainly competitive, you know. Now if we need someone else to open a door, that, you know, I think we have to be realistic that often that is the case. Story_ID: 580790 Speaker 1: You've talked about the number of different industries that FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] serves that are far beyond just fashion, and, you know, I asked is it a fashion school sort of (laughter) in that naive way to get you to tell us that. But when I came to your office today you showed me a number of toys that were developed here, so maybe you can just give us a smattering in the different, in different industries of, of things that have come out of FIT that we might not know about. Like the toys I didn't know about. Speaker 2: I'm sure-- Speaker 1: You've taught me something about labels today although it's related to Paxar [Paxar Corporation] and not directly to the school, but, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: But it's, but it's, but in--the students do learn that sort of thing and it's related to whole notion of labeling is, is related in our merchandising and management area. I'm sure you don't know that we have computer animation, which is a growth area, more on the West Coast than here. Speaker 1: And where do those students go? Do they do cartoons or do television animation or-- Speaker 2: They do, they do animation for small movie companies, TV as well. Yeah, I mean it's small. We only--you know, we keep it small but I think we're the only public institution that is offering this opportunity at these prices to students. I mean they can certainly go to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] for many, many, many thousands more dollars, but we are probably the only opportunity for students to get this kind of training in a public setting, you know certainly on the East Coast. What else would you not know about, would you not expect? Speaker 1: Tell us about a couple of these toys, because we didn't know. Speaker 2: Well, you know what you're seeing really, if you go into any, if you are toy shopping, most of the toys, you know the characters that you are aware of that you see, the--our students, or our graduates working in those companies are really the designers for those, those characters. Speaker 1: What's your favorite toy that is-- Speaker 2: My favorite is Eeyore. My favorite is--my favorite toy? Speaker 1: Yes, in this group. Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite toy is Eeyore with his-- Speaker 1: And Eeyore talks and does ear, waving. Speaker 2: He wiggles his ears and he does all sorts of, all sorts of things that are very endearing. Speaker 1: And where is that character from? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not big on the toy wor- on the character world. Speaker 1: It's Winnie the Pooh. Speaker 2: Is, is it Winnie the Pooh? Speaker 1: It is, is. Speaker 2: You, you seem to be right up on all the characters. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I just want to say-- Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know why that is. We have to, you have to tell me why you know all the characters. Speaker 1: Well, I only know some but I definitely know Eeyore. Speaker 2: But you definitely have opinions. Speaker 1: I definitely like toys, I definitely like toys. There's no doubt about it. Story_ID: 580791 Speaker 1: If I could ask you, in the end, what would you like your legacy to be, if you had to state it on your own? Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me. That I made a difference, you know, that, that my life's work made a contribution and made a difference in the lives of young people that gave them the faith to pursue their dreams and thought--made them think that people cared enough to create opportunities for them. You know I'm, I'm fond of saying when I'm gone, you'll know I was here [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], you know, and I'm sort of joking about the place and the new buildings and the changes, but it's not really a joke because it really, it really was my motivation all along that whether any--it really doesn't matter if people say Joyce Brown [HistoryMaker Joyce F. Brown] made that difference. That's not the point. The point is that the conditions are different, the opportunities are different as a result of you know putting quite this level of heart and soul into the work, so. Speaker 1: Well, we want to thank you for giving us this interview with The HistoryMakers and we want to thank you for putting in this long-term educational work, especially where you've integrated the secondary education element and just really varied and been prolific with your impact. We really, we appreciate it. Speaker 2: Well, thank you. I'd like to, I'd like to think you're right. That it's had that kind of an impact on a lot of young lives. I think the project is wonderful and I hope many, many young people get to see the benefit of, and learn lessons maybe from the lives and work of a number of people, so, thank you. Story_ID: 580792 Speaker 1: You're looking now at a picture of my [maternal] grandmother, Maude Cappie [Maude Alexander Cappie], my sister and myself. I don't know where we were, and I don't know how old we were, but you can see we were quite small and looking rather bored actually. Donna [Donna Levy Wray] is making faces and I'm jumping on one foot, but there we are. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So here's Donna and myself, probably tempted to pull on Santa's [Santa Claus] beard, but afraid we wouldn't get any presents for Christmas if we did that. So we were being very attentive in telling him everything we wanted for Christmas that year. I'd say this was, maybe I was six. No, Donna would have been ten then, she's too small; maybe three and she's seven. She looks about seven. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So here I am trying to talk early on as you can tell, always trying to communicate. A happy baby I'd say, at least at that particular moment. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, this was my grammar school picture. I'm probably about nine, maybe ten, my school uniform. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So this was where, where was the school? Speaker 1: This was in grammar school, Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic School [Our Lady of Lourdes School]. Those were our uniforms. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): New York City [New York, New York]? Speaker 1: Yes, in New York City, always in New York City. Speaker 2: So this is my high school graduation [from the Academy of the Sacred Heart of Mary, New York, New York]. This would have been 1964. I was very proudly decked out in my blue cap and gown. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So this was in New York City in July of 1986. I think it might have been a birthday party for me. And that was in an apartment Carl [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall] and I were living in at that time on Riverside Drive. So my parents had come down, we were having a big party, and that's my mother. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And her full name? Speaker 2: My mother and I have the same name, Joyce F. Brown. Speaker 1: And the hot chocolates were really cute. Speaker 2: We need to see that. I really needed to see your mom in any kind of costume. Speaker 1: Oh, I have some beautiful pictures. This is my family. This was when I was sworn in as deputy mayor in the Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] administration. So that would have been in the 1990s. We haven't, if we'd take a look at my resume somewhere, it ought to say what those years were, but this is my nephew, my sister's son, Gregory Levy [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You can go ahead, you can say from left to right. Speaker 1: From left to right is my nephew, Gregory Levy, that is my sister's first born son. That is my mother, Joyce Brown [Joyce Cappie Brown]; and then my father, Bobby Brown [Robert Brown]; and that is Mayor Dinkins, David Dinkins; and then myself; and then Carl, my husband, Carl McCall; and then my sister, Donna Levy Wray. So that was a big day. This picture of the swearing in was taken in January of 1993. Speaker 2: So this is a picture taken in September of 1992. It was in my parents' home on Cape Cod [Massachusetts], and we were gathered actually for a family celebration. I thought my father's birthday, but maybe we just had the pictures developed later because his birthday is in March, but from the left is my cousin. (Cough) She's actually my father's first cousin. She's now deceased, but her name is Marjorie Segal Van Putin [ph.]. She was very close to, close to us the whole time I was growing up. Next to her is my cousin, Mollie Simons, Mollie Garland Simons. She is the next--she is the generation before me in terms cousins but someone with whom my father was always quite close and she's been at all of our family celebrations. That is my husband Carl McCall. That's me in the red dress; then my sister, Donna Levy Wray; and then my dad Bobby Brown; and my mother, Joyce Brown. Speaker 1: All right. This is the Christmas party at the White House [Washington, D.C.] during the Clinton administration. I think it was actually the last Christmas of the Clinton administration. So there I am on the left next to President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Senator Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], now Senator Clinton; she was not at the time. And then my husband, Carl McCall. Speaker 2: This is the commencement at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], the year we had Bill Cosby as our commencement speaker. So starting from the left is a member of the state university [State University of New York System] board of trustees, an attorney here in New York named Ed Cox [Edward F. Cox]. Next to him is Bill Cosby and then myself presiding over commencement at Radio City Music Hall [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: This is the stock exchange opening for the board that I'm on called USEC, which is United States Enrichment Corporation [Centrus Energy Corporation, Bethesda, Maryland]. And these are--you will see me there on the left, and the rest are the members, my colleagues on the board of USEC at the time, other than, of course, right next to me to my right is Dick Grasso [Richard Grasso] who was at the time the head the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York]. And on the far right is a gentleman associated with the stock exchange as well. The rest of the group were s- were my colleagues on the board of USEC. Story_ID: 580793 Speaker 1: This picture is taken in Albany, New York, when it was the occasion of the inauguration of the governor, and Carl's [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall] swearing in as state comptroller. So to my left is my sister, Donna Levy Wray. To her right is Carl's daughter, Marci McCall. To her right is my brother-in-law, Tony Wray. Then there's me; then Carl. Then my two dearest friends, we like to say we're all sisters; that's Cynthia Beatty Beard [ph.] who at the time lived in New York [New York], but now lives in St. Louis [Missouri]; and Wanda Henton Brown who is now a Brown. I've let her into my tribe. And because she is now married to Ewart Brown who is in fact the premier in Bermuda. Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Unclear). Speaker 1: This is a picture of Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and myself in the mayor's office. This was the day I was sworn in as deputy mayor. I think we said this was 1993. Speaker 2: We did. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: This is a picture of President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] on the left; Carl, my husband, to his right; and then Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan; and myself. And I am sure we were at some political event. I'm unable to say exactly which one (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is graduation, another year at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] at Radio City Music Hall [New York, New York]. To my left is Anna Wintour from Vogue, she was our speaker; myself; and Calvin Klein to whom we gave an honorary degree that year. Speaker 1: Ooh. I like the suit. Speaker 2: Like the suit? Speaker 1: This is a picture taken in South Africa probably at the start of our work with the South African government in, in program development. And that's me on the left speaking to Nelson Mandela. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is the, a picture of the groundbreaking when we were just about to start construction for the food court that's on the plaza, just down from where we're sitting now. And these individuals represent different groups. Right to my left is the chairman of our board at Goodman [Shirley Goodman Resource Center, New York, New York]; and to my right is the vice chairman of the SUNY [State University of New York System] board of trustees. The rest are faculty representatives; a student representative; and the borough president of Manhattan [New York]. It's sort of an array of people who had some involvement in helping us to get the funding and to move the project forward. It was a very exciting day. Speaker 2: Which is the SUNY person? Speaker 1: Well this is the vice chair. This is a fellow by the name of Randy Daniels who thought he was going to run for governor for a while. I don't know if you remember that did the bonds, and this was the borough president. Oh, I can't believe her name just flew out of my head. The borough pres- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: All right. This is a picture that was taken at one of our Christmas parties here at the college. Every year we have a big Christmas party and we have, you know, those cutouts that people can choose what character is their real alter ego. So I don't know exactly what it says about Carl and I, but we were Bonnie and Clyde in this picture. And I wouldn't mind the legs I have to admit, but the rest of it went with the cutout when we stepped from behind the curtain. Speaker 2: So this is our little family. This is Carl and myself and our little Bichon [Bichon Frise], Bebe, who actually rules the roost. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And this was taken? (Unclear). Speaker 2: This is at home and actually one of the shots from this series was our Christmas card a couple of years ago, so Bebe is only four today so I think he was about two then, so it's probably about 2005. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: So this was a picture we used for our Christmas card one year that was at the start of, it was in advance of one of Carl's campaigns and it showed the true partnership, the McCall-Brown [HistoryMaker Joyce F. Brown] partnership. And Carl is wearing an FIT sweatshirt, and I'm wearing a McCall for Comptroller tee shirt...