 Story_ID: 116157 Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing are Andrea Rander [ph.] and Andrea Todd, okay. Speaker 2: Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us? Speaker 1: A. Scott Bolden, Bolden is spelled B-O-L-D-E-N. Speaker 2: And what does the "A" stand for? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Alan, A-L-A-N. Speaker 2: Okay is there a reason why you, you refer to yourself as A. Scott instead of Alan or A. S. Bolden or? Speaker 1: When I graduated from Howard's Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] in '87 [1987] first time I used A. Scott Bolden was on my law degree, 'cause I just thought it sounded more lawyerly and I always thought that I was gon' be a litigator and I was gon' win a big case and I was thinking far ahead and I kept seeing this, I had this dream that had this headline that said "Great Scott wins again" some big case and so I just didn't think they'd say "Great Scott wins again" if my name was Alan Scott Bolden. But I thought they'd think about it if I said, called myself A. Scott Bolden, so I was really ambitious coming out of law school. Speaker 2: Okay, all right well that's a good, that's a good answer, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: 6/8/62 June 6, 1962, Joliet, Illinois. Speaker 2: Okay and sir what is your occupation? Speaker 1: I'm a lawyer. Speaker 2: All right and today you are the managing partner with? Speaker 1: Um-hum, Managing Partner of Reed Smith's Washington, D.C. office. Speaker 2: Okay now what is today's date? Speaker 1: July 25, is that a competency question? Speaker 2: No, (laughter) everybody thinks that these after a while but it's just the way we slate the beginning of the interview. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: July 25-- Speaker 1: 2008. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We're at the law offices of Reed Smith in Washington, D.C., 1301 K Street, N.W., Suite 1100, East Tower, Washington, D.C. 2005. Story_ID: 116158 Speaker 1: Okay all right, now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is--they are kind of a warm-up. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Catfish. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is that? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm wearing it today. Speaker 1: All right, and what's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay what's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: (Laughter), South America, Rio de Janeiro [Brazil]. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I often say, well a couple of things. One, is I tell folks and colleagues to be excellent at all times somebody's always watching, and two, that make sure you have a plan B, C and D 'cause plan A never works (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 116159 Speaker 1: All right now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 1: Ina, I-N-A, Kathleen, K-A-T-H-L-E-E-N, Whitfield, at least her maiden name was Whitfield, W-H-I-T-F-I-E-L-D. Her married name was Bolden of course, B-O-L-D-E-N. Speaker 2: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: January 30, 1937. Speaker 2: Okay and, and where was she born? Speaker 1: She was born in Newton, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Okay, N-E-W-T-O-N? Speaker 1: N-E-W-T-O-N, yep. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family in terms of the ancestors? How, how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 1: Probably to my great aunts and uncles, after that it gets kind of fuzzy. Want me to continue? Speaker 2: Well yeah, I'm not, I don't mean just who you have actually met, but how far back can you actually go, I mean do you know, did you know? Speaker 1: My great aunts and uncles. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: My, my mother and her mother and her mother's mother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I guess I can go back a little further. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah to a great, great you know. Speaker 1: We're all from Newton, Mississippi. Speaker 2: I mean to, to a great grandmother I guess. Speaker 1: Right, Thelma [Trammel] was her mother, and then Nana was Thelma's mother, Nana's name escapes me. I guess she, she passed away when I was about eight years old and I can visualize her but, I really don't know her, her full name. Speaker 2: Okay but you all called her Nana? Speaker 1: Nana, and, and then my, my grandmother, Thelma had a number of brothers and sisters whom all lived in Newton, and like so many African American families migrated to Joliet, Illinois or in Chicago [Illinois] and other parts north as I would--I guess it would be in the '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hum and so from my mother's side, my grandmother Thelma, her mother passed away on my birthday, June 8, 1962 so I never knew my grandmother. My great-grandmother, Nana raised me for a number of years before she passed away when I was about oh, seven or eight years old. That left my, my great aunts and uncles who were Thelma's brothers and sisters. Many who lived in Joliet, most all lived in Joliet who had kids who were my cousins then and then my mom had a sister who had kids and we were all centrally located in the South Side of Joliet, where most black families lived versus the West Side which was the wealthier side with a lot of white folks. Story_ID: 116160 Speaker 1: Okay, okay now so as far as you know, I mean there's no other location that's discussed on your mother's [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] side other than Newton, Mississippi that (unclear)? Speaker 2: You know my father, my mother's father lived in Chicago [Illinois], Henry whose name, last name escapes me but it'll come to me a in a minute. Speaker 1: So he met your grandmother [Thelma Trammel] in? Speaker 2: He met my grandmother in Joliet [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Joliet, okay. Speaker 2: He lived in Chicago, they dated--Joliet is thirty-five miles south of Chicago, okay. My mom's sister, Betty, whose name is Bird now but was Betty Whitefield had a different father, James Whitfield, okay and my mother now that I think about it took James Whitfield's last name because Henry who was her paternal father did not, did not marry Thelma if you will. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Are you following me? Speaker 1: Oh, okay so your, your mother took her. Speaker 2: Stepfather's name "Whitfield." Speaker 1: Stepfather's name. Speaker 2: "Whitfield" basically. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Betty, her sister, her only sister took James Whitfield's last name. Now I don't believe James Whitfield and Thelma ever married either, but James lived in Joliet, and I guess these days we would say they were common-law husband and wife, and so you know one thing I remember about Joliet and my family was I had lots of aunts and uncles, I had lots of cousins. Joliet is only so big, it's got about 80,000 people, but the African American community is even smaller and since my dad was the only African American lawyer for quite some time in Will County where Joliet is located, I would just, I had a lot of family members, a lot of cousins, aunts and uncles and we all lived within blocks of one another. Story_ID: 116161 Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there, are there any stories on your mother's [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] side of the family about Newton, Mississippi and what it was like? Speaker 2: Um, well Newton was a small town in Mississippi and the, the I guess the Trammels, it was the Trammels who, Thelma Trammel [Bolden's maternal grandmother] I guess, well they were well known in Newton, but they all migrated north and, as, and with them they brought (laughter) their customs and traditions which included hunting. So I guess the funniest story I can tell about Newton, Mississippi and from stories from my mom, not so much from Newton, Mississippi but from the traditions and, and stuff that they brought with them which is in Joliet [Illinois], which is far from the South. My mother used to share stories with me and my brothers and sisters about, you know, taking the train up with a chicken-box lunch to visit in Jo--to visit my aunts and uncles in Joliet before she and aunt Betty you know matriculated North and how difficult it was because you know my aunt Betty, her only sister is a dark-skinned black woman. My mother was quite fair, in fact she was often, she was very beautiful, but she was very light and fair and from time-to-time arguably, 'cause I don't remember any specific stories but you know coming from the South, North she could often pass, but she could never pass when she was with her sister, of course, and so the stories of does she pass or not pass in her mind were always present when she was growing up in the South and it put some pressure on my aunt Betty as well because my aunt Betty understood but she was you know, brown-skinned and just as beautiful you know. Speaker 1: Now this could affect where you sat on the train for instance right? Speaker 2: Sure, absolutely. Speaker 1: Or in the South anyway. Speaker 2: Right and she [Ina Kathleen Bolden] always, she never passed that I knew of. She contemplated sometimes, other times it would have been beneficial for her to, but at least when she was with her sister, she never passed. She was always--with her sister she was always an African American woman and if there was ever a mistake she had no problem saying so and so that would affect where they sat on the train and so forth and so on. Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear) if they were shopping for instance your, your mother without her sister could probably try on clothes. Speaker 2: Yeah, could. Speaker 1: If they didn't know who she was. Speaker 2: Yeah, could right, but I don't think she did. I don't have any stories of that, but I, I think my memory of mom and those stories, you know it was an issue. I don't think she ever would claim to me or my brothers and sisters that she passed at any point in time. We all knew what that term was and it was discussed openly in retrospect when as we were raised but I don't she ever conceded that she ever engaged in that. Story_ID: 116162 Speaker 1: The other tradition from the South that I remember is we all lived in the same community within four to five blocks from one another. You know I had four or five sets of clothes at four or five houses. I mean I had aunts and uncles and cousins and you know, Hillary Clinton wasn't the first one to say ,"it takes a village to raise a child", 'cause I had a whole family of folks within four blocks of my real home that I could sleep at, I could get up and get dressed and go to school. My mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] and father [Raymond Allen Bolden] use to say you know, "we could not see Alan for days, yet I'd know where he was every time", but she use to call around to my aunt and uncles homes to see if I was there, and sure enough she after the third or fourth try, call she'd know where I was 'cause I was never good at calling, but I had clothes everywhere, and then we had a--I was raised on just some of the most, you wanna talk about soul food you know, my aunts could cook up a storm and they did, 'cause that was a southern tradition, but I was really raised on soul food. I mean I'm talking about, my aunts and uncles use to go out--I'm sorry my uncles on Friday evenings would go out into the forest and woods somewhere in Illinois or in Will County in the back woods of Kankakee [Illinois] or wherever, they would hunt rabbit, they would hunt squirrel, they would hunt raccoon, they would bring it back. My aunt Beulah and Betty, you know my uncles would, would gather in the kitchen or out in the back and they would skin these animals and clean them and freeze them. On Thursday nights they would go hunting, and would not just hunt, I'm sorry, they'd go fishing for large-mouth catfish, buffalo fish, perch, croaker; they would catch them and on Friday evenings there'd be a huge family gathering at Beulah's house which was kind of the central location, it wasn't the big or the best but that's where we all gathered and they would clean fish and I learned how to clean fish, and my job was to quote "pop the guts" in the catfish and they made that my job 'cause when I was younger I was--it scared me you know seeing them skin fish and stuff, so my uncle would get me over being afraid of the fish 'cause once they cooked it up and fried it up I wouldn't eat it. He gave me a job and the job was to, "pop the guts", and which was kinda of funny at the time ' cause that was kinda the most disgusting part to do, but I was too afraid to disappoint him or my father so I would do it, and after a while I got pretty good at it. I could pop it and catch it and then run around to my, my sister and my--you know girl cousins and scare them and stuff so that job didn't last too long after that. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Well all right. Speaker 2: You ever pop fish guts from a catfish? Speaker 1: I've, I've cut them open with a knife and cleaned then out. Speaker 2: Well you've never popped the guts? Speaker 1: But I don't know what popping means. Speaker 2: I think I could still do it. Speaker 1: No how, explain how that's done? Speaker 2: (Laughter), you gotta have the fish to do it, but it's pretty, it's, it's in the heart of the fish and it's a sac and you, you pop it and trust me it's not really pleasant to look at. Speaker 1: Do you squeeze it from the outside and? Speaker 2: No, I use to puncture it with, with a knife. Speaker 1: Oh really okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause you could do it either way, it didn't matter you know. You know when you pop it its popped 'cause everything rushes out. I think I'm gon' leave it that (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, okay all right. It sounds like a fast way of cleaning a catfish. Speaker 2: That's why we gather it and go scare my sister (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause it was disgusting (laughter). Speaker 1: I see. Story_ID: 116163 Speaker 1: All right. So now, now what was growing up like for your mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] in, in Joliet [Illinois]? Speaker 2: My parents. Speaker 1: Well did--she grew up, she grew up in two places right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: First in Newton, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Um-hum, I think she came to Joliet in her early teens, because she. Speaker 1: Now where's, where's Newton, I'm sorry--where's Newton? Is it close to? Speaker 2: I think it is in central-- Speaker 1: Near Jackson [Mississippi] or? Speaker 2: No, I think it's closer to Greenville [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it may be close to Jackson too, I'm not sure but my mom and dad met when he was a senior and she was freshman at Joliet Central [High School, Joliet, Illinois], so I don't think she, I don't think she was in Joliet before then, 'cause like I don't have any reference and I don't have any conver--remember any conversation with her about Joliet until high school. Speaker 1: Okay so she really grew up in Newton? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay well, well what was it like, did they have a black school in, in Newton or did she have to go someplace else to go to school or? Speaker 2: I think they had a black school I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think they had a black school, I don't think they were particularly poor in Newton. It was a very segregated city, I think that there was a--my sense from her is that you know it wasn't very urbane and--urbane so we're talking about the country. There was farming, my sense is that there were a lot of livestock and if--she didn't talk a whole lot about it. Now as I think about it she may have been here before high school with Thelma [Trammel, Bolden's maternal grandmother], because you know her father, she had to have been in Joliet before high school because her father was, you know, was, was from Chicago or Joliet, yeah, Chicago. So she had to have been here before then, so I'm not sure much about Newton. I don't have any real recollection of Newton, but that's where she was born. Speaker 1: Okay, did she have any stories about Newton or anything or? Speaker 2: No, not a lot other than the traditions and kina the stuff I, I spoke of. Speaker 1: Okay, the family talk about the racial climate in Newton at all on your mother's side, what it was like? Speaker 2: Other than it was very segregated and you know they would pack chicken-box lunches because they couldn't always get fed on the train and she would be leaving Newton to come up north to see her aunts and uncles who had preceded her and then go back and you know the whole passing issue, so other than that, that's what I got. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And she passed away prematurely at fifty-six about fourteen years ago so I don't really have a frame of reference-I don't have a reference point to like discuss that with her. Story_ID: 116164 Speaker 1: Okay, well let me--so your parents met in high school and did they marry soon thereafter or? Speaker 2: I think when she was twenty so yes, within a year or two of graduating they got married. Speaker 1: Okay now did she pursue a career at all or did she, was she basically a housewife? Speaker 2: Yes and no, you know. My mom [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] married my dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] when she was nineteen actually, not twenty. So it would have been a year or so after school. My dad was in the [U.S.] Air Force and he was very poor. He, he was homeless for a period of time in Chicago [Illinois], but he was hard working. He left high school I guess at seventeen or so, eighteen he graduated from high school, very bright, and, and he went to the military, he went to the Air Force, wanted to be a pilot, couldn't be a pilot and so he came back to--and went to the University of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois], undergrad. Speaker 1: Now, now I may as well get his name now since we're. Speaker 2: Raymond, Raymond Allen Bolden, B-O-L-D-E-N. Speaker 1: Raymond Allen Bolden. Speaker 2: Right, the reason I preface my remarks with, with that about my father is because they did meet, I mean they did marry at nineteen, he was still in the Air Force. He couldn't pass the flying test because he had--he wore glasses so then you couldn't, couldn't do it so he got out of the Air Force at some point and went to the University of Illinois with the G.I. Bill. He was married to my mom then and she, in, in 19--I guess in 1960 I guess it is '61 [1961] then 1960 they had my sister and they had my sister in Champaign- Urbana at the University of Illinois. So he was in undergrad [undergraduate] at that point, I'm pretty sure he was, and he went to the University of Illinois, undergrad on the G.I. Bill. He then stayed and went to the University of Illinois law school [University of Illinois College of Law, Champaign, Illinois]. One of the first African American graduates from the Law School. What year I do not know but he had a family at that point, and she [Ina Kathleen Bolden] was supporting them. He eventually left after getting to his degree, he went to the [U.S.] Treasury Department, he was a treasury agent for a number of years and then went well two or three years. Speaker 1: In Joliet [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, in, I wanna say Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, he then would come to Joliet and serve as a local prosecutor, assistant district attorney or assistant county prosecutor for some number of years, maybe two, three, four years that's my sense and then he went out on his own in private practice, and he practiced with some colleagues from Illinois, but my mom--having said all that, my mom supported him by working, when he was in school, when he was just starting out, she worked with the Social Security Administration, okay and she worked with the Social Security Administration for a number of years and then what she--she would--when he went into private practice she left the social security office, didn't go to college, but was a volunteer and worked with him in his office to get his law practice going. You know had me, took care of the kids, but she was always working, either with him or in the community and raising us, okay. After so many years she would go back to school. When I was twelve or fourteen years old, my mom went back to school. She went to Lewis University [Romeoville, Illinois], and the Joliet Junior College [Joliet, Illinois] first and then Lewis University and got an undergraduate degree in, I wanna say history. I'm not sure but it was some social science. She would then go on to get her master's [degree] from Lewis University after the--after getting her undergrad degree from Lewis University. I wanna say in African American Studies and another social science I think, it was her master's. Speaker 1: Is this the same as National Louis University [Chicago, Illinois] what they call National Louis? Speaker 2: I don't think so, it was in Lockport [sic, Romeoville], Illinois, it's a Jesuit, it's a Jesuit---blah,--Jesuit Christian Brothers School. Speaker 1: Okay and, and. Speaker 2: So I'm not sure it's the National. Speaker 1: Is it spelled L-O-U-I-S or L-E-W-I-S? Speaker 2: No, L-E-W-I-S, L-E-W-I-S okay, and so she went back to school after we were, got to be ten, twelve, fourteen. He continued in his law practice, either on his own or with various law partners, no more than three, four, five partners at a time. He tried cases all over the state, arguably one of the top criminal defense lawyers in that state. He was a civil rights lawyer, he was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for twenty years in Will County [Illinois] and for a long time was the only African American lawyer in Will County, so his success allowed her to go back to school to get her degree and then she would eventually work as a college professor at Lewis University, as a college administrator and eventually an entrepreneur. When I was in high school and in, went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] she would start her own business called the College Success Program, and so you know her, her career if you will, as a mother, as an activist in the community--she sat on the Housing Authority Board--she went back to school to get her degrees and eventually became an entrepreneur. She did all of that over the course of an eighteen-year period of time, or twenty-two years in the sense that I remember the entrepreneurship piece when I was going to Morehouse because it was the only historical black college that she would let me go to based on her research and her company and this College Success Program would take disadvantaged kids and take them to Historically Black Colleges [and Universities, HBCU] and other colleges to give them a flavor of what it was like and urge them to take a, to go to college as opposed to you know going to work at the local mill which was Caterpillar, Commonwealth Edison or the prison system. Story_ID: 116165 Speaker 1: Now, let, let me back up a little bit, now, now can you give us your father's birthday, birth date and place? Speaker 2: Dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] was born December 17, 1933 in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, was he raised in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay all right so did, what, what do you know about his ancestors, anything? Speaker 2: Less than what about my mom's [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] ancestors. Speaker 1: Is it tradition in his family, that they, they're from, do they have any other tradition of origin other than Chicago, I mean that you know of? Speaker 2: His father was from Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His mother was from Chicago [Illinois]. He had eight brothers and one sister, or seven brothers and one sister, 'cause he'd be the eighth brother. All seven have passed away, so he's the only one left. His one sister is still alive, his, his mother--his sister's still with us, but his origins are from Chicago. His mother and father divorced at an early age and his dad left and went back to Cleveland. She was there to raise a many number of them, and he had a very difficult childhood. You know his mother was raising nine or ten kids on her own back in the, you know '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. They were homeless at one point, lived under the "L" tracks as you well know, the subway system, it's above board. His mother spent time away because of the mental pressures upon her, which caused him to be homeless. His grandfather took him and his brothers and sisters, at least some of them and the others would go to the military and others would go elsewhere, and his grandfather is the one who brought him to Joliet [Illinois] to go to school and live with him because had nowhere else to go. He was always very bright, very eloquent, powerful presentation even as a young man and he then had mentors who pushed him along. Speaker 1: Was this his mother's father or, or his, I mean? Speaker 2: Good question. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: You know he's never distinguished that, but his grandfather. Speaker 1: Well since his father left, I would think it's probably his mother--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: His grandfather, I wanna say it was his grandfather from. From his mother's side. Speaker 1: You know what, I don't know, I don't know but his grandfather was there. His grandfather worked for [Mayor Richard J.] Daley, he was a lieutenant for them and precinct committeemen. Speaker 2: Yeah, it think it's probably a good chance on his mother's side just because his. Speaker 1: She was from-(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Father's from Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he probably wouldn't have a father in Chicago. Speaker 1: Right, I think it was from, I think so. Story_ID: 116751 Speaker 1: (Unclear.) Speaker 2: You can, in fact you can complete that thought because we, we were discussing between the tapes about how your father [Raymond Allen Bolden] was really an exception to the rule. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: In a lot, so many ways and. Speaker 1: I use to, I use to wonder why--well I considered my father to have limited ambition as an attorney, and one of the things that has always driven me was because I thought he, he lacked ambition and I wanted to--I got his ambition and my ambition in my, in my professional and personal life and it's only been in the last ten years or so when I've had some incredible conversations with him, the last fifteen years, since my mom passed away to really appreciate you know, what he did and how he got to where he was, and I don't, you know I've never, I've given up that story I told myself about him lacking ambition because he came from nothing and-- Speaker 2: He came from under the bridge. Speaker 1: That's right, he came from homelessness and as a retired state judge and had a successful legal career, very successful and was such an incredible lawyer in the courtroom, and was the basis for me being you know a lawyer and having the same drive and wanting to be an incredible litigator, a great lawyer's lawyer as Jay Clay Smith says from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], one of my professors. I've given up that story over the last fifteen or twenty years and rightfully so, because you know I think my dad did the most that you could do coming from where he was to where he is now, and it's beyond a new appreciation, it is you know I guess when you get older you start to, the things you somewhat rejected, you start to embrace because you, you become--the more you mature, the more you appreciate others around you who've gone before you because if you don't do that you, you're going through what they went through probably less. I'm probably, I probably had it less difficult because of my father's overcoming so many of his challenges. You know he's instilled that in me, you know. I never give up, I've never been homeless. I've had my bad times, but I've always defined my success with how I've responded to challenges and I've never, and I've never had an expectation of not overcoming those challenges. I'm convinced now at forty-six that I get that from him and my life's not over, but I know he gave that to me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know whatever challenge I've had, people have defined me and I've defined myself by how I respond, how I overcome and how I move on. Not the fact that you know, I didn't pass the bar in New York the first time; I passed it the second time. You know not that I ran for office and didn't make it in 2006 as a D.C. Council Member, but I'm leading an incredible firm here in D.C. as managing partner now, not that I have a daughter, I know I'm getting ahead of us and stuff, but not that I have daughter that came into my life when she was nineteen that I never knew but that I am building an incredible relationship with her now and my granddaughter and she's a part of my family rooted in love and spirituality, so I believe he's given that to me, I know he's given that to me. It's not physical, it's mental, it's emotional. Story_ID: 116752 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Emotionally my mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden], my mother was a warrior man, like so many of our sisters out here from before and now, they're warriors, you know I'm a warrior, you know, I, I like to get it on, you know if I feel like you know it's necessary or there's been an injustice or something's wrong or whether you know I'm being disrespected at whatever level you know, she had that in her. She loved, she loved the fight, she didn't like to fight, she loved the fight because she was a civil rights activist herself and I remember her and my father were a team, man they desegregated schools and hotels and restaurants in Joliet, Illinois you know. Speaker 1: You said that head was the head of the-- Speaker 2: NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: The Will County [Illinois] NAACP? Speaker 2: That's right; I mean you have all these warriors in these smaller communities that were doing the same thing as some of the other warriors on the national front were doing. They really were the unsung heroes of the Civil Rights Movement 'cause they carried it to those smaller communities. Right, right 'cause it didn't just spill over to those smaller communities. They had to-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's right so my mother was a warrior. I mean me and my brothers and sisters we grew up on the picket line. People don't believe me when I say that you know. I remember desegregating the schools, I have pictures, I don't know if I can put my hands on them. I have pictures of me at five, six years old sitting on a lawn with--in front of the school administration building or the Department of Education in D.C., in Joliet with--eating a watermelon in one hand and having a fine "Free our Schools" in the other. I mean the weekends man were, the-- (laughter) we, you know we didn't really you know go to the park and swing on the swings for a long time. We were on the picket lines with my father [Raymond Allen Bolden] and his, and his people and my mother. So I think the, the emotional, the spirit of how I fight for my clients and how I raised my daughters and protect them and teach them what it is to be a man, 'cause they need to know that so they make the right choices and how I teach them self-respect as young women, as young black women. I get that from her, I need that, you need that if you got kids. Professionally, what I get from my father is you know just, an extreme, a, a fearlessness and a supreme love of self in a positive way. It can be misread, but a supreme confidence and a love supreme of self that I take with me in the courtroom, in the boardroom, on the street, at home and at this law firm, because if you don't believe in yourself or if you give the power to--of joy, love and happiness to yourself, if you give it away to somebody else by letting them say something or believe something, or, or bring negative energy to your spirit or to you, that's your power. You're giving it away, why would you give it away, so when someone says it does, doesn't have to be true but if you have a supreme love of self and know yourself, they can never take your joy, they can never take that power and you should never give them that power 'cause you'll never succeed if you keep giving that power away to have somebody else define you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Whether they do it publically or privately, okay. They tear you down, they want to tear you down because, because they wanna either be where you are or they lack the self-love and confidence to be where you are. So you have to protect it. You have to be a jealous protector of your choice of happiness, joy and peace within. Story_ID: 116753 Speaker 1: Now, now you say you've got, you mention one older sibling. How many siblings do you have and where do you--you're second right in the or? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm the middle child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never got enough (laughter). Speaker 1: So, can, can. Speaker 2: I hope my brother [Joey Bolden] and sister and my parents [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden and Raymond Allen Bolden]. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Can you name your other? Speaker 2: See that (laughter) in this interview I hope they see that. My, my sister is two years older than me, Kathryn Marie Bolden, brilliant woman, went to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]. A great actress in high school, you know "KK" and I, we call her KK and I were pretty close growing. You know she went away to school for a couple of years so from the time I was sixteen to eighteen she wasn't around, but we argued and fought like cats and dogs. We were very close, she was a couple of years ahead of me, she never let me hang out with her. She never wanted me around (laughter) but you know we, we appreciated each other and we're very close over the over the years and have gotten closer you know. I've gone away, she stayed in Joliet [Illinois] or came back to Joliet and been there and been a necessary force in my father and in my mother's life while I've been gone and she you know, one of the--you wanna hear a story? You know one of my front--(laughter) she actually knocked out one of my front teeth. Most people think my two front teeth are real, porcelain, they're real porcelain crowns though, you know because my sister [Kathryn Bolden] you know knocked out one of them and you say, I thought you said y'll were close, well we were but I told you I was a little, I, I like to get it on. I like to start stuff as my father would say. My grandfather would say I was a "something starter" (laughter) you know. I can't say that on tape, but you know it was, it'd get real cold in Joliet [Illinois]. We'd go to school, we get off the bus and we cross Ottawa Street to come to my aunt Beulah's house 'cause she'd keep us until my mom [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] and dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] would come pick us up 'cause mom was in school, she went back to school and dad was working. Well one day it was really cold and icy and she had this enclosed porch and you know we would go in, we would go into the porch from outside and you take off your boots 'cause you couldn't wear your boots in. Anybody from the North knows you take off your boots and your socks or at least you keep your socks on if you gonna do that and you come on in the house because you don't want to track all that stuff in. Aunt Beulah would make you go get a switch and nobody wanted her to do (laughter), she made, "you go get the switch in the cold," so, so this day I got outta my boots early, you know and she got outta her boots and she wasn't paying attention so I picked up her boots, went inside and locked the door. So she was like in her socks on the outside porch and it's really cold on the porch. If anybody from the South know it is not as cold outside, but it's--ain't no heaters on the porch so I had locked her out, and so she was knocking on the door and I'm looking on the other side just laughing at her and stuff and asking her how warm she is and how cold she is and the more I say she get madder and madder so she--I finally opened the door and took off running, you know, and you know these were like one them super shotgun houses you know, so you know you gonna run outta space, the kitchen is in the back and door is in the back of my aunt Beulah's home. So I was laughing so hard and she was so mad you know she caught me. I used to have a big afro you know back in the day, and she grabbed my, me by the afro (laughter) and jumped on me and you know kinda like you know got me to the ground. She was bigger than me and I was laughing right, so as she hit me--so as I went down to the ground I was laughing but my face, my, my tooth hit the, hit the floor, you know and these linoleum floors they you know, this wasn't nothing sophisticated and (laughter) I remember, I remember I lost my tooth and it was cracked, it fell off, a big part of it and so obviously the momentum shifted at that point. She got up and said, "Serves you right," and I said, "you busted my tooth." She said, "You know serves you right, you left me out there in the cold," so my aunt Beulah had to take me to the doctor and you know or the dentist and I finally got it all worked out but for years before I went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] I had a gold crown and a silver crown on my front two teeth. You know my cousin knocked out the other one (laughter) in a whole another story, but you know I had, I always tell my buddies I was the first to have a grill then all these hip hop artists 'cause my front two teeth, one was gold and one was silver, and I was just known by that in Joliet all through basically high school and elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We'll get to that a little later sorry. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's one of those tangents. Speaker 1: Yeah, well that's-- Speaker 2: It's true though, I forgave her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I forgave her. Story_ID: 116754 Speaker 1: So you've got an older sister and there's you and then-- Speaker 2: And I got a younger brother. Speaker 1: And then, then there's a younger-- Speaker 2: About five years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Joey was a surprise; Joey (laughter), Joey marches to his own beat you know. Joey is my brother or the family member we all have that just kinda you know does his thang and you not very ambitious, you know takes care of my dad [Raymond Allen Bolden], has his own family and is just kind of around. You know educated, went to the [U.S.] Navy, but you know he's, he's had his challenges if we say, but we all love him you know. Joey is a rascal you know, but he's our rascal so no telling what he'll be into or has been into over the years and you know hasn't always been pleasant, but he's fiercely loyal to his family and we need him, and we love him very much. Speaker 1: Okay, so just the three of you? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 116755 Speaker 1: Okay, all right now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: You know um maybe, I remember we had a dog, beautiful Alsatian Shepherd, big dog who as she stood up on her hind legs was, you know, she's--my dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] is about 5'5", 5'7", she would tower over my father. It was a big dog, maybe not tower, but he was 5'7" and she'd be face-to-face with him and I remember taking pictures with this dog on Christmas mornings you know. I remember Christmas mornings where you know, we were the only professional African American family in Joliet [Illinois] so you know, as you grow up you notice the difference you know. My friends' parents worked at the mill, my dad wore a shirt and tie and you know he did well compared to a lot of folks. Speaker 1: Were no black doctors in town? Speaker 2: No, not for a long time, not for a long time. I didn't see any, Dr. Griffin wasn't black and I saw him all the time. Speaker 1: Was there a black funeral director? Speaker 2: Yes, Ferdinand Range, there's always one and he was good friends with my daddy (laughter). Oh Ferdinand, Ferdinand's still around too, same location, everything. I go home, I go by the funeral home and see Ferdinand (laughter). He's there too, he doesn't look any different, he don't look like he aged a bit. I said, I asked him what he doing with them dead people 'cause he don't look like he aged at all. He's good people, and was a good friend of my dad's, loyal friend and you know, you know back in the day man, my dad--everybody thinks you know when I walk around in this K Street law firm and they say, "His father was a judge and a fine lawyer in Will County," and I always chuckle because I remember when you're a sole practitioner and you black you gotta go get your money on Fridays, and my father (laughter) as professional and sophisticated and as a great a lawyer as he was, he was a businessman like everybody else, and I had a big uncle, big relative, good friend of his. His name was Thurkell, Thurkell Poole [ph.]. Thurkell Poole must've been 6'4", 270 [pounds], I mean he was a mountain of a man, he had a bald head when nobody else was wearing a bald head, boy Thurkell would give you the shirt off his back, gentle giant we use to call him. He was married to a wife that had to be like 5'2", 125 pounds (laughter), just as sweet as she could be, I mean the oddest couple in the world, but my father and Mr. Poole we use to call him, on Friday nights they would come home at five o'clock. My father use to work late, but they would come home at five o'clock on Fridays 'cause you know we had a fish fry over at Aunt Beulah's so that didn't--we didn't start eating until like eight or nine but we were over there all night, but Mr. Poole and my dad would meet at my house, at our house at five o'clock, change clothes on like the Fridays when everybody got paid, whatever they got paid, whether they were on public assistance or whether they you know at the mill or whatever, or you know whatever it was, every two weeks they would meet there, they'd go change, get in casual clothes and they would go get my father's money (laughter) 'cause people owed him. 'Cause you know when you represent black people and poor people you know, you, you gotta get your money, but you only charging so much, but, but you representing them on criminal cases and civil rights cases-- Story_ID: 116756 Speaker 1: --So (simultaneously) Speaker 2: Since they tend to--I mean when they really need you they really need you, but-- Speaker 1: Sure, but he [Raymond Allen Bolden] still had to go get his money and he use to have to go get his money before they drank it away or ate it away or did whatever. So that first stop would be, you know Mr. Poole owned a bar (laughter) up on the hill on a section of Joliet [Illinois]. Joliet's no different than any other community (laughter), you know the black community and so that first stop would be Mr. Poole's bar because all the local patrons would be in there drinking. It would be payday on Friday and then they would hit all the other bars and all the other lounges and stuff, and he would take Mr. Poole with him to assure that he got his money (laughter), and I remember he'd, he'd come home at midnight or if they got lucky they would--my dad would make Friday dinner or lunch, I mean Friday dinner at Aunt Beulah's house, but if they didn't, they'd come home twelve, one o'clock at night. I use to stay up and wait for them because they, because they would go get his money (laughter) and I was always amazed as a young man about this special night. Friday night was a special night when my uncle and my dad would come home and they would put, they would empty their pockets of this money and it wasn't a whole lot of money, but it was money that was owed and it was cash (laughter) you know and they would dump it on the table and start counting it and my mother then--we were little kids, my mother would have a pad there and the clients would be there and the money and what they owed and stuff and the three of them would sit there and count out the money and do the books and you know then they would put it an envelope and the old man would take it to the office on Monday and he, or rather Saturday 'cause he worked on Saturdays. We only saw him on Sundays and in the evenings if we stayed up to see him. He worked a lot you know and you know he was an entrepreneur and so, but that was his thing but I used to want to stay up to see them count the money and my mom do the books and Saturday morning he'd go to the office with it and then he'd get off on Saturday about one or two. We'd see him on Saturday afternoon too, and it wasn't a big deal. You know so many families break--you know I can tell you chapter and verse about not being home or available or what it does to a family these days, but back in the day I grew up watching my father work six hours, six days a week and not one word was ever said to him 'cause it wasn't, it was no big deal. It was understood that he was providing, even when my mother went back to work he still worked six days out of the week and was off on Sunday and Saturday afternoon. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But that's my first memory. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Of him. If he was sitting here he'd look at me and roll his eyes and stuff and say "Don't tell that, why you telling tales on your family." (laughter) But it's true. That's my first memory of him, the dog, and them you know, them gettin' that money (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 116757 Speaker 1: You've talked about some of them already, but we always ask this question and it brings back other memories. What, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The back of the Clarence C. Warren YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], which I saw go from being a YMCA and owning it, divesting it and the community fight to keep it there and then Ms. Sharp who was the executive director left the YMCA to run this center and it was called the Clarence C. Warren Sharp Center. In the back, they had a pool that was covered with a metal cover in the summers they would undo it and you'd swim there, and it had a basketball court, and some of the most intense basketball games in Joliet [Illinois] history took place there and I lived at that basketball court whether the older guys came or the younger guys came. It had a big garbage bin near it. It never smelled very well, but I remember I would get up early in the morning to go play basketball by myself because I knew the other kids would get there by nine or ten and we'd start running games. It was only half court, it wasn't full court and that was fine and on some days we had some of the local high schools stars there. I never played then as I wasn't that good but I used to love seeing that and you know the, you know high school girls and elementary school girls there and trying to impress them and so forth and so on so-- And that street was a dead-end street too, you know you had Joliet Street and then you had this street, it think it was Shelby Street and the YMCA had an upstairs and a downstairs and it was a big building and you saw it there right on the corner, and people would come from all over the community, and that was a gathering place. Inside it had a ping pong table and we had some of the greatest ping pong matches in the history of Joliet on that ping pong table. I remember getting thrown out of the YMCA 'cause I lost and threw a paddle, and Ruben [ph.] who was a mentor of mine growing up, a student of my mother's, threw me out, and he was my best friend. I never understood why my best friend could throw me out and he got--I couldn't come back until I figured out how I was gonna be a better winner. Had a pool table in the back, I had the--it was some--I made some of the greatest pool shots in the history of Joliet [Illinois] on that pool table. My uncle Orland and my family and the YMCA put on this 'Roots' musical that was based on the 'Roots' television show upstairs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They practiced up there with these music and all these talented people who you never heard who basically sang their hearts out and then took this thing on the road around Illinois and in Joliet and performed for thousands of people and my uncle Orland was an incredible, you know what do you call it, orchestrator, not orchestrator-- Speaker 1: Conductor? Speaker 2: A conductor, he taught music at Blue Island Eisenhower, Eisenhower, Blue Eisenhower Law School, Blue Eisenhower High School [Blue Island, Illinois] you know. He was an award-winning conductor and music teacher and stuff and those are my mem---those, those, and I never paid attention to the smell but the sights and the cornerstone of my childhood was based on that center. Story_ID: 116758 Speaker 1: When the gangs moved in, when drugs moved in, when the defendants and the inmates would be released from the three prisons in Joliet [Illinois], they stopped going back to Chicago [Illinois] and they started coming to my community. I remember--you know that Center [Clarence C. Warren Sharp Center] you know took on an anti-gang position and anti-vi-anti-gang violence piece. These young kids were killing each other. This was all new to our community. My mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] and father [Raymond Allen Bolden] bought that center and put programs in it and got grants and refused to leave their community. This was later one when I was in college and law school, refused to leave and my father was on the bench then and he still would walk to work every day. He'd walk by the very people he was gonna see in court that day. There was an incredible surge of violence that we had never seen before. I had never grown up in it, you know my brother got caught up in it a number of times, but you know. I say that because you asked me about my childhood but then when I juxtapose it with what it became and what my family's role was I think that's relevant, because while it may be my best childhood memories, I also have memories of them and their having--their leadership and holding onto their community, it became an all African American community. You know what, let me tell you something. When I grew up man, I guess I shouldn't be so, so, so easy with you, but when I grew up, I grew up my first fifteen years or the eighteen years I spent in Joliet before I went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] okay, my neighbors were the Zoyas [ph.]. Mr. Zoya helped build our house, he was Italian, immigrant okay, Mr. and Mrs. Zoya. We had the O'Connells, another door or two down, Irish immigrants, you know. Who else? We had German families; we even had a family from Yugoslavia living in our community for about fifteen years. When drugs and gangs moved in they didn't really want to deal with it, they all moved out except the Zoyas, and Mr. Zoya used to say, "I built that house, I'm not leaving." My father used to walk to work and say the same thing. I used to always think that (laughter) something was going to happen to Mr. Zoya and my father 'cause they was so outspoken you know when they walked by drug dealers or walked by gang members. They didn't care, they use to--they had that heart man from back in the day. They never lost that heart and, and now that community was just ravaged by drugs and gangs in the '80s [1980] so that juxtaposition is important I think. Story_ID: 116759 Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your earliest school memory? Speaker 2: I remember Sacred Heart on Ottawa Street [Joliet, Illinois] and these seven or eight small individual classrooms that we were in. I remember the nuns, Sister Margaret, I remember them being in habit and uniform and I remember one year them all of a sudden just being in regular clothes. They were still Sisters but they didn't have to wear the nun uniform. That was a major transition, they still acted the same way, they still hit me with that ruler, but they didn't have the gear on basically in those individual classrooms. I remembered knowing that I was, I remember love--I remember loving to learn. School was not an issue for me, I loved going to school. I, I you know I knew I was learning. There were moments in the classroom where I knew I was learning you know and I liked it you know. It didn't, it didn't bother me, and you know I worked hard at it. Another early memory I have is you know playing in the schoolyard on Ottawa Street and Sacred Heart Church and you know having snowball fights. I had one snowball fight that you know I almost lost my eye on. They had this like big wooden fence and my team was fighting the other team with snowballs and you know I was hiding behind this fence and I came up, this little boy on the other side came up and we were like that far apart and he didn't see me really, we were like surprised when I came up and he was starting to throw already and he hit me in my left eye and cut me up pretty badly. I remember going to the hos--I remember going to the hospital and-- Speaker 1: This was a snowball? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was snow, ice ball you know but it was close you know and I remember that, I remember my mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] crying because the doctor told her it wasn't clear whether I was ever going to be able to see outta that eye again, and to this day I have a scar on my retina from that accident, but I fully recovered okay. And then I remember Sacred Heart and St. Mary Carmelite, two African American Catholic schools that merged, and having to be bused from that Ottawa Street location to the location further east, in Joliet but further east into one big building, really pretty building and it had a lot more facilities and it was still in the Catholic Diocese, and I remember learning there. At that school I remember being bullied though. I was small, I'm not like, I'm not as big as I was then, but I was small for a child and I remember you know, man I had about two or three bullies to manage on a given day. It was very stressful you know. Speaker 1: So your school-- Speaker 2: I was going to school with my younger brother [Joey Bolden] too. Speaker 1: Yeah was your school--what, what was the racial mix of? Speaker 2: All black Speaker 1: Sacred Heart? Okay. Speaker 2: All black and some Latinos. Story_ID: 116760 Speaker 1: Okay. But I had like two or three bullies man (laughter). I was on the basketball team, I was a good basketball player as a guard, but I was small and all my friends were my bullies. Like my parents [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden and Raymond Allen Bolden] thought my best friends were so great, but they were bullies to me. I mean they used to get me in the back of the bus, we'd take a bus back down to the South Side, and you know their--the bullies that I had to manage, they were the worst of the bullies in the sense that their parents were good friends with my parents and they weren't bullies in the sense that you know they wanted to do harm, purposely do harm to me and hurt me and blah, blah and I had like no relationship with them. I did, I had a relationship with these bullies, but they were so mentally and physically abusive, and I was so small I would, I would take it 'cause I just wanted to be liked and I had some connection to them pretty much looking back. I had teammates who were bullies, I mean everyday they would punch me or choke me or do something and you know when you're that age you play it off, but, but it was hurtful. Speaker 2: But did you ever, did you ever resist them or and anything about it or? Speaker 1: Yeah, I resisted them, I would resist them a couple times and I never won the resistance. The movie never came to me, 'cause I, I just couldn't handle it, but I would play it off, but I was, I was bullied for a while in elementary school, from a good, from my fifth grade to my eighth grade. Speaker 2: So they, they were really making you angry and then-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but I--you know I don't think they thought they were making me angry. I don't know how to describe it. They were bullies, I hated getting on the bus and going to the back because they would just punch me and kick me and take my stuff, but then act like we were friends, they didn't like really mean it but they did and-- Speaker 2: You think it was? Speaker 1: Them acting like they didn't mean it was kinda comforting a little bit you know? Speaker 2: You just think--you think it was a certain amount of class resentment since your father's a lawyer, the only lawyer in town and that sort of thing? Speaker 1: Yep, yep absolutely, but you gotta remember, I didn't have any, there wasn't like a class of lawyers' kids or doctors' kids for me to go play with or go be around so I had to be around the folks and I was just as rough as they were. I was hanging out just like they were. I didn't have anybody to hang out with but, but that group. So you know I wouldn't get in any trouble with them, they would get in trouble. They would do other things you know, I wouldn't do any of that you know, but I rem--in elementary school I remember that, and then I remember being so happy to be going to high school because I was gonna be away from those folks in elementary school, but I also I thought that I would grow and that you know in high school there really weren't gonna be that many bullies and the focus would be different and for the most part in the--for African American students, it was--that was the case but at Providence High School in New Lenox [Illinois] where I went was a whole another story. You know I'd gone to all-black elementary school, all-black grade school but now I was at an all-white Catholic School in New Lenox, Illinois where they--were you know it was majority white, the kids didn't have a lot of experience with black kids. Most of them were basketball players, and you know I had to deal with a whole other level of bully that was part racial and then just part nastiness, you know what I mean? It was at Providence [High School, New Lenox, Illinois] where I was first you know the n-word was used against me by somebody white. Story_ID: 116761 Speaker 1: What happened, can you tell us the story? Speaker 2: Sure, I remember. I played tennis, I ran track and it was after practice and we were sitting around outside and the football players were coming in and I think there was this football player who I didn't know very well but I had seen around but you know he was yelling the name, the term, using the n-word. None of my business really, he was using with some other colleagues of his. Speaker 1: But he was yelling it loud enough where? Speaker 2: Right, and I--you know coming from a family that was civil rights-related you know that was just--you just had to do something about that. So I got up to do something about it (laughter). Man, I probably weighed about 120 pounds, this football player weighed about 200 you know and (laughter) and I remember the guy turning around and he and his friends came towards me and the black kids I was with they were all gone by then, I turned around they were gone and I told him not to use that word you know at least not around me, and boy I tell you he used it over and over again, you know cursed me out and he and his boys were around me and I remember just standing there taking it because I was too afraid, I didn't see a win--I didn't see a winning situation, I didn't see a way out and I just took it. It was so demoralizing and so that was a whole other stress management piece, 'cause I--see I got around, he never said anything else to me after that, but other white kids would use the term to me and they were so comfortable using it. Speaker 1: To, to address you or just in (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, to address me you know. Speaker 1: They would call you? Speaker 2: Not on a regular basis. Speaker 1: They would call you the n-word. Speaker 2: Yes absolutely, in science class I got in a fight with a white kid because after a while you know you either fight or you just ignore it, and I know what they mean when people--I've heard people talk about this, you know, in, in gym class you know in the locker room, you know in gym they would either refer or use the term or refer to me. This one really country bumpkin kid, and I would have two or three fights with him, but I couldn't keep fighting him because I'd be getting, I'd get in trouble so then you just have to ignore it. In science class I got in a fight because I couldn't take it, it was just so, just so offensive to me and so then I had to figure out how to manage that. I would tell my parents [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden and Raymond Allen Bolden] and my parents would call the principal, but you know man, we in high school you know, them folks ain't around all the time, and so I started to just ignore it and I started to want to leave Providence [High School, New Lenox, Illinois] because I didn't, because I didn't want, I didn't like being around that pressure you know. So I would either ignore or fight it. I thought it was beneath me to call them a name, 'cause I never believed in name calling. I, I, it just, I hated that word until this day I hate that word you know, but I did well at Providence, I got into Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I wanted to go to an all-black school because of that very reason. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: I didn't want to be around white folks who would-whether they called me the n-word or thought it or, or--I didn't want to risk being around that anymore at least not for a while. Story_ID: 116762 Speaker 1: So your parents [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Battle and Raymond Allen Bolden] didn't--what, what did they suggest? Did they have anything to--they, they called the principal? Speaker 2: Well they would call the principal, my father was a pretty well-known civil rights lawyer you know and you know I wouldn't tell them every time and when I would they would you know go up to the school and kind of go off-- Speaker 1: So, so you think. Speaker 2: --and be given certain assurances and stuff. My father would say you know "you're gonna use your best judgment you know. I'm not gonna tell you--" Speaker 1: You think they had any idea of the extent to which you were abused with that? Speaker 2: No, because it was prideful for me, you know. I didn't, I didn't, I never felt like I wanted to run and tell my mother and father everything. I wanted to handle my own battles. That's very important when you're in high school and so you know, it just depended, man. It was such a stressful time because of that because you know I got pressure at home too because I'm growing up with these, these civil rights folks in my house. I'm dealing with this over here, I'm not that big. I can't fight every time somebody calls me out of my name or uses that term. I just can't you, you know so it just was very stressful. So I would pick and choose my shots, I would try to figure out the best way to manage it but I remember there was a black monsignor from Africa who was in school with the principal who, who was a white Catholic priest and he came to visit and they scheduled a mass in the, in the gym and none of the African Americans were Catholic, none of them knew how to be altar boys, they were all Baptist or something. I was Catholic and when the mass started they had all the basketball players serve as altar boys. They didn't know where they were going, what they were doing. They didn't even know the meaning of it, they had never been in a Catholic church but they were serving as altar boys because the black monsignor from Africa, which I thought was the height of insult, plus I was Catholic and I knew how to do it but they never asked me, you know, and so I remember being in the stands and just kind of going off, just yelling and screaming and just telling them they were all full of it and this was nonsense. I stormed outta the gym you know and they'd--I went to the principal's office 'cause I knew I had disrupted the mass and-- Speaker 1: Okay so you actually yelled out and scre--okay. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely you know this is BS, blah, blah, blah. Speaker 1: During the mass? Speaker 2: During the mass, big gymnasium; you know I went to the principal's office and I just cursed him out. I told him it was all BS, they were all a bunch of racist pigs and they knew it and I've been dealing with this n-word stuff and y'll haven't done anything about it you better get my parents 'cause you a racist, you a racist and you a racist. I just blew, you know and you know. My parents you know came to the school and you know we had all these discussions and all these constructive discussions and my parents were going off and so I told them I wanted out of the school. I just want out. I didn't get out of the school, but I never had any more issues like that. That was my senior year and so the sen--my senior year was or junior year I guess, I didn't have any more of those kinds of issues. The pressure was there, nobody ever called me out of my name again. The dean, I remember his name Dean Gaula [ph.] and whoever the principal was, you know never game me any more issues, were very supportive and you know people graduated, so the people I had issues with had graduated by junior or senior year, other than a double s's in my class and I could manage them, but I still wanted to go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I wanted to go to school with my people. Story_ID: 116763 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit, you said, said your mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] majored in black studies or, or African American history. Speaker 2: Um-hum, when she went back to school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now that's interesting 'cause there aren't a lot of black people that actually do that but, but there are those that do, and so she-- Speaker 2: Yeah, remember this--we're in the '70s [1970s] now, early '80s [1980s] okay? Speaker 1: Yeah so, so in your household was there a lot of discussion of black history and culture? Speaker 2: Oh, man, oh man, African art, you know I had a big afro, I had one of those picks, I mean I had, I had shirts that said, "ungawa, black power," remember, remember that phrase? You don't remember that phrase? Speaker 1: Oh, I remember, I remember the double dutch song that went with it which I won't get into here but. Speaker 2: I remember "ungawa, black power," I remember learning about Lumumba you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, Patrice Lumumba yeah. Speaker 2: That's right, I and let me tell you man, I never lacked for black history but you remember my mother went back to school, before she got her degree, that was a big part of my life still. I said we desegregating these places, you know the race relations, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I mean- Story_ID: 116764 Speaker 1: Let me tell you something man, in the '67 [sic, 1968] when the riots broke out after--and this is Joliet [Illinois] now--see all these communities around the country got the same issues. I remember my father went with the ministers and other people to try to quell the riots. Students burned down Joliet man, they burned it down. I remember the [U.S.] National Guard, I remember the morning after, after the three or four days of rioting riding in the car with my mother and riding by National Guard tanks and jeeps with guns, they had Joliet on lock down. Speaker 2: This was after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated? Speaker 1: Yes, what triggered it. Speaker 2: This is 1968? Speaker 1: That's right Chicago Street, Ottawa Street, downtown. Speaker 2: So you would have been about seven years old? Speaker 1: Yeah but I remember it, you know 'cause Joliet [Illinois], you know the South Side is over here and the West Side is over here but that separates those two is the Des Plaines River. They raised, they raised the bridges during the riots so that neither side could get to the other side and we didn't have a bridge like you have on eighty right now that you can get you to the other side, so they shut it down and I remember my father [Raymond Allen Bolden] being gone for three days and you know trying to get the kids to, to stop and to bring some order. I remember him coming home three days later and coming home with twenty students whose clothes were torn and burned and, and soiled and him, seeing him in a light that I'd never seen. He was exhausted, he didn't look like he had slept for three days and the kids were sleeping on our front porch with blankets that my mother had found for them and we got up and fed them and they wanted to go back out and do some more damage and you know they had--we, my father and my mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] and others from the religious community would--had this you know this, this talk with them on non-violence and where do we go from here now that King isn't there? Impromptu on this big front porch of ours, I sat there and listened you know, you know and I remember my mother was gone, there were people who would call the house and hang up, there were people in the back yard who busted out our windows who we always thought was either the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or the [Ku Klux] Klan and back then let me tell you, there was different from me and my family, the Klan or the FBI, it didn't matter they were the enemy. They were the enemy because my father was an outspoken civil rights leader, at least locally he was and statewide he was and I remember her, you know he was gone and she didn't know where he was and you know she was on the phone with the FBI and they couldn't, they wouldn't tell her any information and you know I remember her gathering us you know in the den and she shut off all the lights to the house, locked the doors--and the dog and me and my brother [Joey Bolden] and sister [Kathryn Bolden], me and my sister 'cause my brother I don't think was born until '67 [1967], but I remember her vividly going in the closet you know loading that .38 caliber you know and she use to keep a switchblade in her purse too. She kept that and we gathered and we sat in the den with the lights off and the TV on. She was trying to get us to go to sleep it was about midnight but you know she slept with that gun in her hand--with us comforting us and we went to sleep and I remember waking up and I remember seeing my fa--I can see her now she was sitting up against the wall in the den and me and my sister were sleeping in her lap but she was sitting up like this and she was sleep and she had the gun in her lap and I woke up before her, and you know those were crazy times. Speaker 2: Yeah, really tense times it sounds like. Speaker 1: And you know, you don't--I tell you I'm forty-six now, I'm no, no baby but this wasn't, this wasn't that long ago and I just remember it. So my base, you know, despite my success is rooted still on the end part of the Civil Rights Movement and I think we tend to forget that as a people, as a community. You know, I tell this story, you know, these stories when I ran for office, but when I'm talking to students and stuff you know they don't really believe that. They get lost in the suit and the tie you know, the K Street corner office. This is, this is my base and my root, so those are my memories. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 116765 Speaker 1: These stories should still be told you're saying and not, not forgotten. Speaker 2: Sure, I think so, I don't think people believe me as much as they, you know they look at me and my life and "success," but this may have been the tail end of it and I'm not gonna compare my story to anybody else's but you know I was born in '62 [1962], so the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] were still very real you know. I remember my, my parents discussing with other civil rights leaders and, and religious folks about transition from non-violence to, to black power and incredible philosophical discussions in the living room and dining room of my home with folks from all over the state of Illinois and elsewhere you know about these issues so you know, I come from you know (laughter), I may be, you know, my success may be race neutral but the base of my success are those years that I'm, I'm describing to you, you know and you'll see as we go on and talk, you'll see how that base has shaped my professional career and my political career you know, they, they struggle with one another because you know I may be the managing partner of Reed Smith, but I'm, I'm still very concerned about my community and my colleagues who are of color and how they're treated. I'm still very concerned about that, that's my base. Well when I ran for office in 2006, my message was one of empowerment and uplift of our challenged communities and for people of color who have not participated or had their fair share you know. That, that message, that's not [HM President Barack Obama] message, that's not Adrian Fenty's, their message is race-neutral, their message is kind of on broad-based issues because in this day and age to get elected you gotta have that race-neutral message of empowerment and uplift for all people and fairness and justice and all the other things, but my message was a little different and I, I didn't, I didn't win but I don't think you can win with that message right now. That message of mine comes from the base no matter how successful I am, no matter how much money I make, no matter how much press I get, that's still my base and I, I don't really run from that too much, and you say well okay juxtapose that or compare that to where you are now professionally most people would define me as successful as a managing partner of a [Washington] D.C. office of a major law firm. I haven't compromised that base one bit because rooted in that base message is excellence and I've always done my level best to be excellent and when you're excellent, okay, then that means you gonna be better than most people around you or who you compete against because most of us don't think about excellence. I think about excellence every day. Speaker 1: Does, does that, does your background and your community that you came out of, does that heighten the sense of competition in this setting? I mean as far as you're concerned, do, do you think it does? Does it make your more competitive? Speaker 2: Probably, but I know I didn't get here by myself. You know let me tell you something, in these environments, in these settings, I tell my colleagues this all the time who are of color, whether they're in another law firm or another professional service firm; you know we're here because we're excellent, but we're not just here 'cause we're excellent, we're here because someone of power and definition has decided that we're the ones that they will let in. I have no problem saying that, you gotta be excellent and you couldn't get in unless you were excellent, but, but you also couldn't get in if the powers that be did not determine that you were the one, that you were acceptable that you may be even manageable. I'm not saying I'm any of those but I will say that I think about being excellent every day, and I think about just as someone has decided that I'm the one at the height of my career right now arguably, I also think often that one day I, I may not be the one. Someone can decide that I'm not the one and I believe that when that day comes I won't be the one, but I won't be in this position anymore. Story_ID: 116766 Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Well, let me go back to school for a minute, and where there any special teachers or mentors when you were coming up other than your dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] you know--coming along, any, any teachers that-- Speaker 1: All of the nuns--I'm gonna tell you something man, all of the Catholic nuns were excellent with me, names I can't remember but you know I had a real kinship with them you know, they nurtured my desire to be excellent and to be great and I had no issues with that you know. You know my--I came from a family that you know was excellent, they, they--excellence was an expectation. We got a B or a C you know my mother and father--you know we had to explain that. Well we got a lot of B's and a few C's but we always had to explain that you know and the nuns you know were there, they, they taught everybody. They didn't care who you were or who your parents were or what race you where, and so everybody had the same shot and we all did very well. So you know I can't remember the nuns' names but all of them-- Story_ID: 116767 Speaker 1: It was just generally a good education (unclear). Speaker 2: Absolutely, no doubt about that, and you know what? You know what's ironic about that? When I went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] I never wanted--it's the only time in my life where I really didn't wanna be an A student. I wanted to be a B student. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Well because (laughter) let me tell you why. I'm not endorsing this I'm just reporting right? Hey, you know, I went to Morehouse and I discovered it was a lot to life (laughter). There was my fraternity Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity] that I wanted to pledge. There was Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] that was right across the way where I could take classes. I mean man, man when I went to Morehouse my world opened up compared to Joliet, Illinois (laughter), you know, 'cause my buddies say it was on (laughter). Story_ID: 116183 Speaker 1: We, we were talking about sports at Providence [High School, New Lenox, Illinois] before--Walter Downing was one of the [basketball] players and there's another young man there you said there's. Speaker 2: Barney Mines Speaker 1: Barney, Barney Mines. Speaker 2: That's right, two great players. Speaker 1: And they were there when you were there? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Now you played for a couple of years, but did you get a chance to start any, did you come off the bench-- Speaker 2: (Laughter), I think I started on the freshman team. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I got cut from the sophomore team, I played a couple of games then I got cut. I just couldn't keep and the height and stuff you know, I wasn't gonna be a--my, my NBA career remained in my dreams (laughter). Speaker 1: Now did you, when you graduated did you get any special honors or anything, were- Speaker 2: I was one of the top tennis players on the Providence tennis team, and I had a, I had a B plus average and I think that's pretty much it. I didn't, I wasn't very active like with the year book or the debate team or the camera team. I went to the prom and stuff, but I don't think so, nothing of any great significance I don't think. Speaker 1: So, so did, did you date young ladies from the neighborhood or were they from the Catholic school or? Speaker 2: Um-hum, both (laughter). Speaker 1: Now how did you choose Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] I mean over the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois], your father [Raymond Allen Bolden]? Speaker 2: I dated a lot in high school, I had my own car. Speaker 1: Okay let's go back to, all right let's go back to that (laughter). Speaker 2: I dated a lot and the, the girls from the [Washington] D.C. Public Schools were a lot more fun than, than the girls from the, the Catholic high schools, that's pretty much it. Speaker 1: I understand, I think that's universally recognized (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) is it really. Speaker 1: Girls from Catholic schools they need a couple of years (unclear)(simultaneous). Speaker 2: My parents would never let me bring a young woman home to my house or to their house without them being around, never. It was just, it was like a golden rule and stuff. Speaker 1: Did it ever happen? Speaker 2: A few times, but I would, I would get caught most of the time so whenever I would get caught--I wouldn't get caught doing anything inappropriate, they could just be sitting in the chair we talking. My mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] would walk in and say, "come here," and I'm like, "what," she say, "what you doing," I said we just talking (laughter). She said you know that rule, y'll got to go, or excuse me, she gotta go, it ain't personal so anyway, yeah, but that was a training ground (laughter), 'cause that was another beautiful thing about Morehouse because then I had my own room, I had my own apartment. I could (laughter), I didn't have my parents there to tell me I couldn't have anybody in the house. Story_ID: 116184 Speaker 1: How did you choose Morehouse [Atlanta, Georgia] in the first place, why not the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois] or you, you were determined to go to a black school? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely I, I wanted you know I heard a lot about Morehouse. Morehouse was the only school my mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] would let me go to. She didn't think much of the other historical black colleges. No offense to Howard Law [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] where I got my degree from or the other historically black colleges [and universities, HBCU] who all have outstanding traditions, but she didn't think much of 'em and so when I said I wanted to go to a historical black college she said, well you better go visit Morehouse 'cause that's the only, and I tried to get her to look at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and Howard and a few others and she wasn't having it, Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], she wasn't having any of it though. Speaker 1: Now did you know much about Morehouse then? Did--I know you probably found. Speaker 2: I researched it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I went down with a buddy of mine and we stayed at a crappy hotel. You know I went down with a buddy of mine and one my mom's former students was supposed to kind of take care of us and show us around but he just abandoned us basically. So we stayed at a hotel and near the campus and the community around Morehouse was not that great, it's a lot better now but it wasn't that great and then we toured Morehouse, we toured Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and it was on the weekend really, but there was a lot going on and needless to say we both fell in love with Morehouse and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. He wound up going to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], a buddy of mine I grew up with for a few years and he left, but I went to Morehouse and you know the average student that goes to Morehouse comes from over 500 miles away and I was a little intimidated when I first got there. I knew, one, I didn't want my parents to stay long so they left right away (laughter). They helped me unload and left right away, but I was a little intimidated because you know these students you know were coming from large cities you know. I went to school with kids who parents I had read about or heard about or seen on TV or heard on the radio. They had cars, they had great clothes, I mean they just looked rich. Speaker 1: Well was this the first time-- Speaker 2: And great. Speaker 1: --you were in school with black kids that had-- Speaker 2: Were successful. Speaker 1: --fathers who were lawyers and doctors. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely and for so long I was the only in the community that whose dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] was a professional, so it was, it was amazing. It was powerful and intimidating at the same time, but it was addictive. I knew that was where I wanted to be. Story_ID: 116185 Speaker 1: Who were some of the friends you made at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, I had a friend from Chicago [Illinois] named Charleston Lee. I haven't talked to Charleston in about three or four years. I pledged Kappa my sophomore year, Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity] and all of my fraternity brothers over the years have remained friends with me. You know Derrick Evans is one of my best friends who's in Atlanta [Georgia], Demar Loving who's in Seattle [Washington], Taylor Fuller whose in Atlanta who went to Illinois but we were in school together and we'd travel back and forth to see each other, Greg Johnson who's in Atlanta (laughter) who you know finished up at FAMU [Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, Florida] and we would road trip to FAMU and he would road trip to Morehouse. I think the fraternity was a real dominant force in my life when I was at Morehouse. It kind of, it, it really defined and laid out within those fours were gonna be. I pledged in sophomore year. Speaker 1: Now, now had your father [Raymond Allen Bolden]? Speaker 2: No, he was an independent, he was a GDI [god damn independent]. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay I kind of figured he probably. Speaker 2: Yep he was a GDI, he didn't really understand all of that. There was a lot of hazing-- Speaker 1: He went to school on the G.I. Bill after he served in the [U.S.] Air Force and had a family life. Speaker 2: But, there was a lot of hazing. Speaker 1: How was it, was it hazing in retrospect? Speaker 2: And he was not comfortable with that. Speaker 1: Okay, in, in retrospect the hazing that you received at Morehouse, I mean what do you think about it? I mean what was it severe or light or what? Speaker 2: It was still a historical black college [HBCU] in the South. Speaker 1: So it was hard, it was tough hazing (laughter). Speaker 2: And historically all of the fraternities in the southern black school can be fairly intense. Speaker 1: So did you get injured or anything? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Every day, you mean like did I, was I hurt, was I in pain, yeah, yeah. I guess I shouldn't be admitting that, I'm a live member of the fraternity, they're probably gonna get after me for saying that. I was never injured but you know it was intense and a fair amount of hazing, a lot of hazing and it was expected and accepted, and I never--years now back, looking back I never understood why at nineteen I put up with so much abuse but it seemed to be the most important thing to do. I mean I pledged, I was number one on line, I had a great pledge period but it was very painful, very expensive and then my grades I got all C's and I was lucky to do that. I finished in four years though because my father wouldn't pay for any more. I knew that I believe, you know let me tell you something about my father. I believe everything my father says. He doesn't have to say it but once to me, but my brother [Joey Bolden] and sister [Kathryn Bolden] he can say it over and over again and sometimes he doesn't and sometimes he does, doesn't, sometimes he doesn't. With me, my father only has to tell me one time and I believe him. You know I always told him he was rougher on me but it's true. He said he was gonna pay for four years and I could get loans and scholarships which I did, never a full ride but he said he was only gonna pay for four and in finished in four, most people finish in four, five, six years, I finished in four, and I pledged and my grades dipped that first semester in my sophomore year. I remember being on line and my mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] came down for homecoming and I'm walking in line, outta--with my line brothers out of a class and it was so intense that I didn't recognize, I didn't acknowledge, I didn't--I recognized my mother, I acknowledged my mother with the nod of my head but I was too scared to embrace her, to you know acknowledge her in a significant way because I had big brothers around, I had other pledgees around and I was so focused and so intimidated that I, I didn't even know how to react to her and when she saw that (laughter), that was big mistake, boy I should have done more but she immediately turned around, 'cause my mother's like, my mother's name for me is "boy baby," she's like what have y'all done to my boy baby (laughter). She turned around and went to the president's office and within an hour I was, I was taken off line and brought to the President's office (laughter), it was so embarrassing. I lied, I kept saying, "I don't wanna leave my line brothers," and she said, "You gonna leave this college if you don't get over here and figure out and tell me what's going on, I'm taking you to the hospital," I said, "I don't need to go to the hospital." She said, "You must, you lost your mind, you ain't gonna say hello to your mother "(laughter) it's true. So I said, "I'm fine," I got completely right. Story_ID: 116186 Speaker 1: I got three days off line and I didn't want three days off line 'cause she [Bolden's mother, Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] was there 'cause I knew when I got back the heat was gonna be intense. So she said, "I thought you would enjoy spending time with your mother." I said, "Mama, I love you to death, I love you to death and when you get on that Delta plane back to Chicago [Illinois] I just want you to know you ain't gonna be here and I'm a tell you right now I'm gonna have some rough days ahead of me." She said, "I know they not putting their hands on you, they better not be, you tell me if they are. I'm gonna tell you right now I will blow this school up if they are putting their hands on you." I said, "They're not, it's all good, I would never let them touch me, never" (laughter), that's one of the few times I've ever just told a bold-faced lie to my mother, one of the few times. I don't lie to her either, but I looked her straight in the face and said, "I'd never let them touch me." She said, "You better not." I said "Okay." Speaker 2: Well how long were you on line, how long did they keep, they keep you at on at Howard-- Speaker 1: It's like eight weeks. Speaker 2: How big was your line? Speaker 1: Oh, sixteen and we were the crimson, the, oh gosh, the PLO, our line name, what was our line name? Our line was The Krimson Resurrection PLO, it was something. Boy, when my line brothers hear this interview they gonna beat me up for not knowing my line name, oh my goodness gracious. The line before us was The Krimson Resurrection, 'cause they were back on line and I think our line name was the Krimson PLO something like that. Brothers forgive me, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Not you, they're (simultaneous). Speaker 2: You're in now, so they're not (unclear). Speaker 1: That's right and I'm financial and I'm a life member. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That's right (laughter). Speaker 2: So, okay, so any, any anything about going over, I mean what do they call it "crossing the burning sand" (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, nothing I could speak of, it was intense, it was done and I was Mr. Kappa. I was Mr. Kappa, I lived in the frat house for two-and a half, three years. I even lived in a frat house that was falling apart most people thought, but I was vice pole mark, vice president for a year or two. I was chair of the social committee, I was chair of the sweetheart committee you know I was fully engaged, but you know what prompted your question was I wanted to get B's. Well the reason I wanted to get B's was 'cause I knew I couldn't have as much fun getting A's and I evaluated whether I could graduate in four, have a B average, get into law school and do all the other things I wanted to do as far as social dating and the fraternity and throwing parties and just having a well-balanced life. You know that's important to a college man, well-balanced, and so I was committed (laughter) to having a well-balanced life. So as long as I got B's I was happy. It used to drive my parents crazy. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 116187 Speaker 1: You know, I had never--let me tell you something man, Atlanta [Georgia] and Morehouse [College] was so different than Joliet [Illinois]. I thought I had died and gone to heaven, this was it. This is what I wanted, this is what life was gonna be about. I remember the first year I came to the Congressional Black Caucus weekend. We take that for granted in [Washington] D.C. I came up I did the--there was a black college day march and I did that. I met and did an interview with [Dr.] Benjamin Mays with a local TV station. He was still with us on campus as part of this Black College Day march because this march was about getting funding, continued funding and more funding for historically black colleges and then I worked as a intern or like a host or volunteer for the Congressional Black Caucus weekend and for the dinner. Speaker 2: And so, so. Speaker 1: I had never seen any of this in my life, I didn't even know it existed, it's secondhand now, it's second nature now, but I mean you wanna talk about a guy from Joliet, the first year just being exposed to all of this, you couldn't beat it, you just couldn't beat it. I was talking to Congressmen, I was talking to people--Congressmen from the CBC [Congressional Black Caucus] that I'd seen on TV or known, who were legends in the black political front, Civil Rights Movement, you know, I was having a conversation with them. Speaker 2: In those days [HM Ronald] Dellums, [HM] Julian Bond. Speaker 1: Sure, [HM] Parren Mitchell, I remember I had lunch with Parren Mitchell and some friends of mine from school from his district. I couldn't believe it, I--you know (laughter). I'm telling you, I can't tell you enough about it. I was, I was there, I was done. I never wanted to go back home to Joliet. Story_ID: 116188 Speaker 1: These are the days 1980, Atlanta [Georgia] was well on its way to becoming like a--one of really, I guess centers of black political power in the county. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And. Speaker 2: Gosh, who was mayor? Maynard was Mayor. Speaker 1: Maynard Jackson was Mayor. Speaker 2: You know and Marvin, [HM] Marvin Arrington was chair of the [city] council. Andy, one of my sophomore, junior year, maybe my freshman year, I'm not sure, freshman or sophomore year, Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] ran against Marvin Arrington because Maynard wasn't gonna run again, he was doin' something else I think with the investment banking firm I think, something like that. I remember I, you know, worked with a group of kids and the SGA [student government association] President we put on the Merrill Debate at King Chapel, got great television 'cause it was a televised debate, it was called 'The Great Debate' sponsored by the SGA of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, University]. We had CNN there. Speaker 1: And, and you were president of SGA? Speaker 2: No, no I wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Speaker 2: I worked with the SGA President. I put it on, a lot of exposure I mean man this was good stuff, this was all the stuff I wanted to do, all the stuff I wanted to be. You know I mean was only eighteen, nineteen years old but you know and then next year I pledged, and the next year I pledged so I was tied up with that, next year I was head of the fraternity or one of the leaders of the fraternity and in my junior year getting these B's, I mean my senior year getting these B's, excuse me, I only had twelve hours to graduate in my senior year. I could have finished in three and half years but I didn't 'cause I, I wanted to stay the year or so, so I took six credits. I'll tell you another lie I told my parents [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden and Raymond Allen Bolden], this was wrong. I told my parents (laughter) that I needed twenty-four hours to graduate, which made sense, but I really only needed twelve so what I did was I took two classes, three credits a piece for six hours in the first semester and I interned with [HM] Julian Bond and the Georgia Black Caucus for the other six hours. So the second half, and so for the first half, I mean the first semester and second semester so half of my day was at the capitol doing political stuff with the Jenny Montes who's not with us anymore. She was head of the southern, Georgia Southern Legislative Conference who provided interns to the Caucus. I had two classes and then I spent the afternoon, at the, at the Georgia Dome 'cause they're part time legislature so I guess I couldn't it all year, I guess, so I guess I had to do the second half, can't remember what I did the first semester, but the second semester that's what I was doing, and I graduated in four years, because while I partied and hung out and did a lot with the fraternity, and various--a lot of social dating and so forth and so on, I would work, I would work well into the evening, I would work well into the evening after I would get back home because I had to, because I didn't have--I knew I only had four years and I wanted to get it all in, in those four years. Story_ID: 116189 Speaker 1: Okay. Now who were some of your favorite teachers? Now were you a political science major? Speaker 2: I was, Henry Brisbane [sic, Robert Brisbane], I was a Brisbane boy, you know pledged the Political Science Honors Society. Brisbane was a legendary political scientist at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Dr. Hamid Taqi, who taught us international politics who was in exile from an African Country, it wasn't Liberia, it was somewhere else, huge influences on our political thought. Speaker 1: Is that a Dr. Mack, you remember, Mack Jones I guess Mack Jones says he was (unclear) he there? Speaker 2: I knew of him I didn't take him, but Brisbane and Dr. Taqi were major influences, major influences. Dr. Gloster, Hugh Gloster who is not with us anymore was my president when I was there years--during that period of time, and he was the first, he had us all registered to vote. You know when I was at Morehouse when [HM] Jesse Jackson ran in '80 [1980] I think. Was it '80 [1980] or '84 [1984]? Speaker 1: Eighty four [1984] (unclear). Speaker 2: Eighty four [1984], that's where he announced at King Chapel [Martin Luther King, Jr. International Chapel at Morehouse College] he was running. It was "Run Jesse, Run" and we all stood up and said we were registered to vote. To start every program Dr. Gloster would bring introductory remarks so he says, "if you're registered to vote stand up," and we would all stand up, and voting, we had to register and we had to vote, in Atlanta [Georgia] and I think you could register and vote somewhere else I guess you could, but I always took Dr. Gloster's words to mean in Atlanta, so I registered in Atlanta, we all voted and he was so proud of us for voting as young people, but Jessie announced that he was gonna run at King Chapel in '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Now that was an exciting time, he took the county, the black community at least by storm. Speaker 2: Man, I was in the fifth row, I was right there and his speech to announce was, was like a crescendo, you knew it was coming and he just baited us you know until the point where like a Baptist preacher that he is you know, he never said he was gonna run, he just said it was time, "Run Jessie Run" (laughter), at least that's how I remember it, boy it didn't get any better than that, it didn't get any better than that. We were at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], we were making news, and news was being made at Morehouse. It was a great time '80 [1980] to '84 [1984] man, it was a great time. Speaker 1: Literally Atlanta, CNN was taking the country over with cable TV new and the cable TV news business which was brand new. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. So. Speaker 1: Twenty-four hour news was happening right there in Atlanta. Speaker 2: So you know, you coming from a base of Joliet [Illinois] right, and now I've moved to this, this mecca, you know of African American political power. It is a, it is a perfect match at least in my mind, it's a perfect match, it's kind of what I've been preparing for and I loved it I just--you know there were no bad days other than I was always broke of course as a college student but there were no bad days. Story_ID: 116190 Speaker 1: Give me an impression of [Dr.] Benjamin Mays, he's someone who's been cited by other people we interviewed in various stages of his life you know in the beginning, in the heyday and now, now he's kind of retired and he's in his last days. Speaker 2: Yeah, he had retired, he addressed us a few times as freshmen, but he was in failing health. I did an interview with him with a local station in this whole Black College Day march back in 1980, he was quiet, he was frail, he was very regal, very sharp, still sharp mind, he moved slowly but his mind moved quickly. I found him to be very insightful, very interested and curious in regard to not only my background but what I wanted to do, and why I wanted to do it, you know, he, he you know, and I only had a couple of conversations with him, but every, every statement I had he had another question I remember that you, know. "Why do you want to be a lawyer? Why did you come to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]? And if he didn't think your answers were satisfactory you know, he wanted, he suggested I think more about them because that would be the pathway to my success. Story_ID: 116191 Speaker 1: Okay, so, you were at, at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] until '84 [1984] I guess. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And then you went to Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Now was it hard to decide which law school you were going to or did you pretty much know you wanted to go to Howard? Speaker 2: Well, I was on the wait list at the University of Illinois Law School [University of Illinois College of Law, Champaign, Illinois] which made my dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] real mad 'cause he wanted me to go there. The goal was to go to the University of Illinois Law School and then come home and practice with him. I had an offer I believe from NYU [New York University, New York, New York], from Marquette [University Law School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and I was on the wait-list, I got an offer but I was on the wait list at U of I [University of Illinois, Champaign, Illinois], I think. I can't remember, but I went to Howard 'cause I wanted to work on the Hill [Capitol Hill] and go to school at night. I couldn't get a job on the Hill so I went to school at Howard full-time. That wasn't the brightest decision I made, but it, I mean it worked out and I say that because I never believed I needed a second black college experience. I had one, I never thought, I really didn't think I needed another one, but I, but I didn't think it was, it was the worst thing by any means, you know, and it's helped me a great deal being at Howard and the training I got there. Story_ID: 116192 Speaker 1: The President of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] right now although he's, he hasn't left yet, he's leaving, Dr.-- Speaker 2: Swygert? Speaker 1: Dr. [HM H. Patrick] Swygert, Dr. Swygert you know who I see, I've seen often during my tenure as a lawyer here in the city, and Dr. Swygert always says to me when he sees me, you know, 'cause you know the Morehouse/Howard combination, I mean you know I'm giving money all the time to something or trying to 'cause they really hit you up. I'm a lifetime member of the Morehouse Alumni Club--Association and I'm not a lifetime member of Howard yet, but I've supported them over the years but Dr. Swygert always says, "Scott, Morehouse taught you how to be a leader, but Howard taught you how to make money," and he just looks at me and says, I feel like he's gonna open his hand and say we need you to give more (laughter), but and I do need to do more with Howard but, you know Howard, you know I should've taken a year off before I went to Howard 'cause I still had that party in me you know. I--my first year I threw some parties at my house with some fraternity brothers of mine that were like college parties, I was just so not ready, so not serious my first year, I wasn't-- Story_ID: 116193 Speaker 1: I- Speaker 2: So, so was the first year real rough? Speaker 1: Yeah, I flunked contracts my first year, I got serious then. Before the first semester and a half I just partied. I had a group called the Pep Boys, P-E-P and I tell you, every two or three months we threw these incredible parties at a house that I was renting with some other frat brothers and you know it was so not serious, I was so not serious. I don't know what happened, I just, I just was not ready for law school [at Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.] and I got that F and everything changed. No more parties. There's one thing about me is you know I know when I'm getting a kick in the head and so again, how you define, how you respond. So I had to take contracts over again, and so I was embarrassed 'cause I flunked it so I had to take it again. Speaker 2: Was it the same instructor? Speaker 1: No, it was a different instructor, but the kids who were taking it, I think I had to take a second year, so I'm in there with first years, that's embarrassing. I don't care how big or small your ego is, it's just embarrassing. So I did it, I got an A, B+ and then but I was serious after that, no more drinking, no more partying and Howard, my second year I took trial advocacy 'cause I always wanted to be a litigator. I'd watch my dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] try cases and try some incredible cases, he was an incredible lawyer, his presence, his oratory skills and for me I'm gonna add another layer to what I told you about growing up. My father to me as I grew up was the most powerful man, the most powerful African American man that I'd ever seen, that I knew you know I could see [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse Jackson and [HM] Reverend [Dr. Joseph] Lowery and others on TV and Senator Ed Brooke [HM Edward Brooke] and Adam Clayton Powell, I think maybe, I think he was still around, but for people who I knew in Joliet [Illinois], most of the black folks in Joliet worked at a mill and didn't have positions of power. They weren't elected officials, they weren't the mayor, they weren't on the school board, they weren't, you know there was no, I mean we had community activists, you know the ministers were leaders you know, the hustlers you know were leaders in a way, I mean but even back then the neighborhood kind of looked up to the biggest hustlers we had. My father represented the biggest hustlers (laughter) in Joliet so you know they would be, you know they would come to our house for Christmas to pay honor to him and my mother [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] or they would have dinner if they were out of jail and my father would, if people were in trouble and didn't have anywhere to eat and they were a client, they'd--my mother would set up a table for them in another part of the house you know depending on who they were, or the front porch you know. She'd set up a meal, they'd eat there if they had nowhere to go, I mean, but so my father was very powerful and why--the reason I say that is because I would go to court and I would watch him and he was the only black man I knew in my young life who could stand up in a room full of people who didn't look like him and be allowed to speak with some authority, advocate you know, the judge would listen to him, the jury would be spellbound by you know his advocacy, you know the police and the sheriff respected him and so forth and so on and so to me he was the most powerful. Story_ID: 116768 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe, I am the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir could you please give us your full name? Speaker 2: A. Scott Bolden. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney with Reed Smith, I'm a litigation partner here at the firm in D.C. and I'm managing partner of the [Washington] D.C. office of Reed Smith. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is September 10, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we? Speaker 2: 2012. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: Forgive me I'm getting ahead of myself. Speaker 1: That's right you have to think ahead I guess, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're presently at Reed Smith at 1301 K Street, NW, Suite 1100, East Tower, Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 116769 Speaker 1: All right now we're finishing today an interview that we started in 2008. Speaker 2: Yep, in a minute. Speaker 1: All right so we, we had you at Howard University Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and so we were talking about what happened in law school and I think we, we discussed a lot of social aspects of Howard as well as Morehouse [College, Atlanta Georgia] before. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And we--there are some specific things I wanna ask you about Howard that we didn't cover, and one is the, the Howard Law Journal, now what--were you the editor or? Speaker 2: You know, I was not and actually I was not on the Howard Law Journal at the time when I was there between '84 [1984] and '87 [1987] you had to grade on to the Howard Law Journal and to grade on you had to have an 80 percent average or not and after my first year I did not have that 80 percent average. In fact I actually had to repeat a contracts law class to my disappointment, but I didn't let that stop me and so during the summer writing program where you anticipated having a B-average you could what they call "write on," so you wrote a case note based on a, a U.S. Supreme Court case that had come out let's say within the last year or two and you wrote a case note. It was an analysis of the case note. You explained the case and then you provided some analysis, and there were several people at Howard University School of Law who were first year who were writing as well, and even some second years I think during that summer. My case note that I drafted that summer was the one selected to be published in the Howard Law Journal. That being said I still didn't have the grades to be on; and to my great protest and chagrin, I was not allowed to be on the Journal, but that case note was published and I think it had a, it said a lot about not only the system, the academic system--the rigorous academic system at Howard at that time continues to be, but also kind of represented my torn priorities because on one hand I clearly wrote at a level that was publishable, if that's a word. At the same time I still had some undergrad socializing that seemed to be important to me in my first year, and so those kind of tortured realities contributed to me having a published case note, but not being allowed to be on the Law Journal which is kind of the standard bearer of legal academic excellence. Story_ID: 116770 Speaker 1: What was the case note about and who published it? Speaker 2: Well it was Howard Law Journal published it, the name of the case was 'Tennessee v. Garner' [1985], it was a leading case that's often cited now in regard to the use of excessive force by municipal, city and state police departments. That is that there was a young man in Memphis, Tennessee who was running from the police, he hit a wall, he climbed that wall and was shot in the back by the Memphis police off--by a Memphis police officer. The family sued and the case ultimately went up to the [U.S.] Supreme Court where essentially the ruling on 'Tennessee v. Garner' was that the, that the state action or police action against a fleeing felon was illegal, unless, unless that suspect was armed and two, he was in the commission of a felony and three, was a danger to the community and others if he were allowed to escape. In this case with 'Tennessee v. Garner,' the facts simply didn't support that. The facts were that this was a young kid, I believe he had stolen a vehicle or stolen something and was running from the police. He never showed a firearm or brandished it, never threatened the police or the public, he simply wanted to get away from the police and the police used deadly force to stop him from escaping. The Supreme Court said that, that should not be the standard in connection to fleeing felons and it is often cited now since I think 1984 or 1985 when that case came out. Speaker 1: Now this is a, this case is emblematic of cases all over the country like (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: There were riots caused in Cincinnati [Ohio] because of the same type thing and Chicago [Illinois], West Side and South Side back in those days. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: All over the country-- Speaker 2: And continues to today. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And so and, and the exposure to city governments and state governments because of this deadly force if brought by the plaintiffs' attorneys is more than problematic, it is, it is a tragedy. There are no winners in it and yet, I think that training of the police departments have gotten better, but not perfect but in the end it is all rooted in the human condition, and we know to, to err is human and so given the level of intensity that's involved with the Police and not only in investigating crime but trying to stop crime or to make an arrest after a crime is committed, most police officers will tell you that adrenalin takes over, and adrenalin is imperfect in and of itself, because you have--in survival mode you want to perform in an excellent manner and very often times in those situations the use of deadly force, the decision to use it takes seconds. It's no easy place for any of us to be in as a police officer, at the same you hope, you believe you want them to be trained to be the best at that position and to make the right decision. The use of deadly force should be a last resort in all cases and I think that's what 'Tennessee v. Garner' stood for and I think most municipal police departments strive for that. It's just very easy, it's very hard rather to attain. Story_ID: 116771 Speaker 1: Well, a lot of people know that Howard University Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] was a pioneering civil rights law school, in fact the, the strategy for civil rights was developed in the Howard University Law School. When you were there were there, was it, did that still reverberate, was that still the theme of? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean Howard's Law School is still a icon and leading, excuse me, leading civil rights institution even now. I mean I think Howard if you, most students who go to Howard have a public servant bent to them, they have a--they, they want to be civil rights lawyers, criminal defense lawyers. At the time in '84 [1984] to '87 [1987] you had some leading lawyers that trained there, that taught there or, or taught and trained us there and, and quite frankly the system of, a system of justice or righteousness still reverberated not only the training and the teaching manuals but also in the history and always in the history of the Law School there. I mean I, from a trial advocacy standpoint I was taught by some of the leading lawyers, civil rights lawyers in the Country. You had Judge William H. Bryant who was the first black Federal District Court Judge in the District of Columbia who on Saturday mornings taught us trial advocacy. Judge Luke C. Moore and several others who a former dean of the Howard Law School and a leading civil rights lawyer from Arkansas taught us all trial advocacy on Saturday mornings and so in many respects it was a training ground, it was a laboratory because we were expected to achieve, we were expected to lead when we left Howard's Law School much like at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. The really distinction between historical black colleges [and universities, HBCU] and other colleges is that we really are, they really are a training ground for leadership. You--we were never expected to leave Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Howard Law to get a job. We were expected to lead our communities to change this country and this world, that's why we were being educated, not to get just a job and I for one believe that and so part of my mission, part of my motivation from day one having spent twenty-five, twenty-six years in this legal profession was to lead and to be excellent and be the best at what I could do while changing this world for better by improving the quality of life of my colleagues in, in the broader community and in my own community, in the law firm space and the legal space. Quite frankly if I don't do that then I failed in that mission and I failed every law professor, every political science professor, every administrator, whoever took an interest in me, whoever taught me, whoever mentored me at Morehouse or Howard Law School and I think most of my colleagues who finished up at historical black colleges believe that or they should believe it 'cause I believed it and I stand on their shoulders and I'm comfortable in that space. Speaker 1: Well I see it really seems like that you all were working and, and studying in the, you know in the, in a space that was I guess sanctified by the likes of Charles Hamilton Houston (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Of course the architect of the Civil Rights Movement (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Thurgood Marshall, Constance Baker Motley, all those, all those great heroes. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So that's good, did, did they talk about that lineage when you were in school? Speaker 2: Sure, sure we're constantly reminded of those leading lawyers and I say leading lawyers, not leading black lawyers because they were excellent across the board. They just happened to be African American and that's a really critical distinction. Because when you separate greatness like those lawyers that you mentioned, you, you really devalue their excellence and their intelligence and their contribution to the legal field and to this country and so they were excellent lawyers period. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. There's one white one I think was a Senator from Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: You know who I'm--. Speaker 2: Went to Howard actually. Speaker 1: Yeah, went to Howard. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: He could have gone anywhere. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh it'll come to me when the camera stops rolling (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: He was the head of VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America], back in the '90s [1990] under [President Bill] Clinton. Speaker 2: Wolford. Speaker 1: Yeah, Harris Wolford. Speaker 2: He-- Walford, absolutely. Speaker 1: Harris Walford [sic, Harris Wofford]. Speaker 2: Um-hum, it was a great training ground no matter who you were. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay well that's great, I mean I love that (laughter). It's a good reason to go to a black law school. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Like Howard (laughter). Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 116772 Speaker 1: So, okay so, now you were on the National Moot Court Team for Howard [University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] I guess right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well what was that experience like? Speaker 2: You didn't have to grade on that one (laughter), you just had to compete with your colleagues and be one of the best advocators in the school at the time and I was proud to serve on that committee, or that, that trial advocacy team. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, what did that consist of for those, I mean for youth while watching, they may not know what that is. Speaker 2: Well you get, you get a case, a example of a case, you're required to brief it and prepare an oral argument to be presented at competitions around the county and other law schools. I think we may have competed four or five times a year at various mock trial competitions and you were then graded and scored by the judges who are listening to the case. You're scored on things such as presence, you're scored on effectiveness of the argument, scored on whether you're on the right side or the wrong side of law--the law, you, you're graded on the analysis and things of that nature and so that really was the sweet spot of my law school career and what I ultimately wanted to do. I told you in the earlier interview that I became a lawyer because my father [Raymond Allen Bolden] was a, just an incredibly gifted civil rights and criminal defense lawyer in the State of Illinois. I grew up watching him try those cases and that was really the first time I could even in a training and teaching space, begin to develop, hone, and nurture my craft which was standing on my feet and arguing before a judge or judges, advocating and operating and performing in the well of the courtroom which is every trial lawyer's ultimate dream that they live every day or as often as possible. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was really the beginning. Story_ID: 116773 Speaker 1: I know law students, it's really important to find a good mentor and you, you were clerk for Judge Luke C. Moore. Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, well Judge Moore taught trial advocacy, he sat on the [Washington] D.C. Superior Court, he was a legendary jurist and history maker himself in that he was the first black Marshall, U.S. Marshall in the history of the County. If not in the history of the country in Washington, D.C., but I think in the history of the county in the '70s [1970s] and he was a--more than a mentor, he was a father-like figure to me in a professional way and in an academic way. We worked closely primarily in prepping the second-year students after I finished my second year when you take trial advocacy with him. I became a teaching assistant of his, so we, we wrote the programs, we wrote the mock trials, we, we provided great assistance to he, to Judge Moore and his various--and his colleagues who were there. Judge [William B.] Bryant and others and so it was just a great working experience and it was Judge Moore who along with my father [Raymond Allen Bolden] who counseled me on going to the District Attorney's office in New York, you know as opposed to going into private practice or some other form--part of the government because they knew, you know one thing about trying cases and litigating is that you, you know you learn by trial and error. You know it's, it's like throwing the baby and the water and allowing the baby to swim by their instincts. That's not really the best example 'cause you shouldn't do that but, you know trial work you know you make your mistakes in front of a lot of people and in front of a judge and the opposition and when you make it you, you never make it again, 'cause you always remember the embarrassment and the, and the difficulty you have because it's on display. They both knew that, that I would have to go through that. My father didn't want me to come back to Joliet [Illinois] right away and practice with him and if he did--he may have, but I didn't because I didn't want to be compared to him after finishing law school because I would nowhere near, be anywhere near his talent of experience and level of talent, and so that coupled with their urging to get some experience in the government I went to the New York District Attorney's office. Story_ID: 116774 Speaker 1: Well, well now what was that experience like, now this is 19-- Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] and '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987] and '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Sure, the DA's [District Attorney's] office in New York was an interesting place. It was led by Bob Morgenthau [Robert Morgenthau] who had been there for thirty or forty years maybe longer. He was a democratic icon from an iconic family. His father [Henry Morgenthau, Jr.] was the Treasurer, the United States Treasurer under, under [President Theodore] Roosevelt, a skeion [ph., sic, scion] democratic family, liberal and really ran the office with a iron fist, a gloved iron fist if you will (laughter). Speaker 1: I thought you said the liberal democratic ran off. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right if you can believe that, and so I owe them a great deal for the training ground, for understanding the importance of the power of being a prosecutor, the justice meant you prosecute it and, and putting people away, bad people away, but just as important that justice was deciding not to prosecute and the use of prosecutorial discussion and really that justice meant both, justice meant that you can, can reach justice and have justice by prosecuting and you could have equal justice by not prosecuting. During my time there though, the racial strife in New York was significant. You had the Tawana Bromley [sic, Tawana Brawley] trials [1987] you had the Howard Beach trials [1986], you had, you had the Central Park killing or rape and assault [Central Park jogger case, 1989] on the young woman [Trisha Meili], where the five or eight black young people [Raymond Santana, Kevin Richardson, Antron McCray, Yusef Salaam, and Korey Wise] were tried and convicted. Those convictions would later be overturned five to ten years later in part based on racial profiling or how the investigation was handled or even how the case was prosecuted. And, and so you know you had significant civil rights lawyers like [Alton] Maddox, and C. Vernon Mason and Mike Warn, who, who defended the least, the lost and the left out and the wrongfully accused and so despite Morgenthau's leadership, this was a time in the office where the, the racial impact of criminal prosecutions was front and center and the battle grounds were set in the, in the late '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s] and the strife was apparent. As an African American prosecutor, you know I felt torn between supporting what I knew happened in types of communities having grown up in them, and wanting to do justice and so the challenge was great. On the flip side of that, you know the, the office itself was fairly segregated when it came to the decisions being made by the executive branch of the office. Eighty percent of the people we prosecuted were black or brown folks and 80 or 90 percent of the people making the prosecutorial decisions, the policy-making positions didn't look like anybody we were prosecuting, and so I raised that issue both publicly and privately with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] with the [Metropolitan] Black Bar Association [MBBA] in New York and with the office internally and that I think made me as a young lawyer right out of law school pretty unique and to some extent controversial. I would comment publicly and privately on my concern about it. I would work with civil rights organizations to try to make the office more integrated at the senior level positions. That made me popular with some, that made me unpopular with a lot of folks at the office, but I never--that never bothered me because these were mutually exclusive issues and to me wanting the best for the office 'cause I thought a great deal of the office. I thought a great deal of my colleagues, but I didn't think a great deal of the racial disparity between the policy-making positions in the office and those who we were prosecuting. I thought we could better in that regard and I feel obligated to speak to the issue. Speaker 1: That's an interesting contradiction and I think it speaks what's going on in New York, not only what's going on there, but what goes on around the country. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You've got liberal or Robert Morgenthau as a DA [district attorney] right, and then but you've got an office that is overwhelmingly white and a clientele of, I mean a population of people being prosecuted they are 80 percent black. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Which is a--now how do you? Speaker 2: Well I mean you look at the criminal justice system, those in jail around the country mirror those same numbers so it was, you know it was a difficult juxtaposition but it was one that I was comfortable in because I, I owed that office a lot but I wanted them to be better quite frankly and so at one time, at one point, and you know one space I'm comfortable with that, that tortured piece at the same time though as I thought about it, it was as consistent as, as--it was as consistent as, and as complicated as everything else on the race issue in this country. Speaker 1: Wow. Story_ID: 116775 Speaker 1: And, now, I wanna ask you about the Tawana Brawley [1987] case too, that is, that is such a quagmire. It is still something that seems to be. Speaker 2: Unresolved. Speaker 1: Yeah, unresolved and a puzzlement to people today. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have any thoughts about what was, what actually happened? Speaker 2: Well I had, I had thoughts about but it, that was not one of the cases that we prosecuted. That was an upstate prosecutorial issue and stuff, so. Can we take a break right now? Speaker 1: Okay, so, so that was an Upstate issue, it just Sharpton and others, [HM] Al Sharpton as a minister and before he became a presidential candidate and a talking head for the Democratic left, was a signature protest of his. I think it's unclear all that occurred, and it had many sordid chapters to it. The facts were, were not egregious, but, but difficult to really stomach or listen to in regard to what reportedly happened to Tawana Brawley. I don't think anyone was ever prosecuted for that case, and I think the left and the right, the government and the community have pointed fingers at each other for years. In many respects it probably, we'll probably never know what really happened 'cause only Tawana Brawley and her brother and some of the other folks that were there actually know what happened. It's hard to believe that this was a story that could be made up. It's also hard to believe that no one could ever be prosecuted for it and it's harder to believe that, that the factually of true, how someone as part of the human condition could rape and beat and leave feces and marks on a young woman's body. The racial viciousness it, it's, it suggests just seems to be from a time of the past which I think is why what triggered so much attention to that case, and you know that case I think will be one of the mysterious that at some point somebody's gonna resolve. Somebody's gonna write a book, somebody's gonna take a lie detector test and somebody's gonna tell us the real deal because it needs to be resolved. Story_ID: 116776 Speaker 1: Now what about the famous Central Park "wilding" [1989] case, were you part of that? Speaker 2: The prosecutor who, who worked that case and who tried that case was in Trial Bureau 40 with me. She was a senior prosecutor and so while she was--it was a case that was handled in the Bureau a lot of activity, a lot of investigations, I was not personally involved in that case, but I knew the prosecutor. I knew a lot of some of the investigators, and they were incredibly hard-working people. I don't believe that they had any negative view of the world or of the young men they were prosecuting. I think we all--and I think they were fair and just and honorable in my dealings with them and everything I observed. I do think that people--the most difficult part of being a prosecutor is recognizing that you bring your own prejudices to a case. I do, others do whether they look like me or not and how you sort through and manage those prejudices and what's justice and what's right and what needs to be done that those prejudices can color your view of right and wrong. I'm not sure how you resolve that, but it's a fact and prosecutors struggle and sort through that every day. I don't think that Trial Bureau 40 or the DA [District Attorney]'s Office had any interest in prosecuting the wrong people in the Central Park "wilding" case. You know, others will disagree with that, but having been in Trial Bureau 40, knowing that prosecuting, prosecutor, knowing the head of Trial Bureau 40 and quite frankly knowing [Robert] Morgenthau and the, the executive committee they have zero interest in that, and that being said clearly mistakes were made. Probably the most interesting mistake after the fact is when the convictions were, were thrown, the convictions were thrown out against everyone and they were never--and there were, there were some convictions, some people had been convicted had not protested, had served their time and those convictions were thrown out. That to me probably merited more scrutiny but given the political nature and the political tone of the review of these cases some ten years later or more, I'm not surprised that occurred; second mystery because the victim in that case doesn't have much memory of what occurred, she wasn't-- couldn't be very helpful but more importantly no one's ever been prosecuted for it. Somebody clearly, something clearly happened to her, somebody or somebodies clearly did it. I did see a report on this a few weeks ago earlier this year. I don't know whether anyone was prosecuted or not, I know there was a suspect that was in jail already and I don't know if that individual had been prosecuted or not, but second mystery of New York's criminal history. Story_ID: 116777 Speaker 1: Yeah, there are very high profile cases. Now what case were you involved in during that period of time that you have, that you can tell us about? Speaker 2: Well, there were several, none that I could talk about in any great detail, I mean it's not privileged information but I'd, I, prefer to respect the privacy of those individuals. I did prosecute one high-profile individual family member of a black political family in New York, a dispute between him and his girlfriend. I was convinced, as a sex crimes prosecutor and there's a, there's a--that the assault, not sexual, but the assault that took place actually did occur. We charged that individual with a misdemeanor and that trial had a parade (laughter) of various witnesses who were high-profile politicians, African American leaders from New York who testified in favor of the defendant and that was kind of my first foray into a high profile prosecution even though it was a misdemeanor and really that case taught me a lot about juries and about male/female relationships and about how we as people or juries process it, and it, it the mistakes I made in that case, I never forgot, and I, I use those, that information even now in defending people before juries and judges when there is a sexual component to it or a prior relationship and things of that nature. So I learned a lot from it, the individual the defendant was acquitted actually and as I often say we learn more from our losses than we do from wins especially as a prosecutor. Story_ID: 116778 Speaker 1: Any other cases from the New York [County] District Attorney's Office? Speaker 2: Just a lot of, a lot of misdemeanors, a lot of felonies and a lot of fun trying them and learning my craft. It was really a training ground and while I don't remember all of them, I just know that everything I learned those four years in New York at the DA's [district attorney's] office are the foundation for my trial work as a defense lawyer here in Washington [D.C.], and I thanked them for that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 116779 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Reed Smith? Now you joined Reed Smith in '91 [1991]? Speaker 2: I did, June 17, 1991 or was it the 19th? It's one of those. I was, I was working as counsel to the Committee on the Judiciary for the Council for the District of Columbia which is part of the state legislative branch of, of [Washington] D.C. D.C.'s not a state but it does have a city council and a mayor and we vote in the presidential elections and we elect and vote those individuals. Bill Lightfoot [William Lightfoot] had recommended me for a position with council member [HM] Wilhelmina Rolark who's no longer with us. She represented Ward 8 for several years, her husband was a civil rights advocate and ran a leading civil rights organization here in D.C. who, both of them who had, who mentored me and became friendly with me. Bill was an independent-at-large council member and now is running Koonz and McKenney [LLP], which is a leading personal injury law firm, but, be that as it may, I digress, but I--Weldon Latham, who is a senior partner, here in, here in the District of Columbia was a partner at the time at Reed Smith. They were looking for a mid-level litigator. I was still looking for a job even though I was working at the council, the [Washington] D.C. Council. I was looking for a job 'cause, one, I wanted to make more money, but, two, I was a litigator by trade. I had tried some twenty-five or fifty cases in New York and I was trying to get on with a law firm who needed a seasoned litigator who had tried cases and, and, and an organization that I could add value to and I could begin my law practice whether it was a big firm or a small firm, and so a friend of a friend of a friend was a headhunter and contacted him about me and we were--he was trying to schedule an interview with me. The times never worked out for his schedule and mine. We did a telephone interview, actually, and based on that telephone interview and my experience, he invited me back to meet with more people at Reed Smith and so I met with John Wood, who's the managing partner, David Evans, who just recently retired from Reed Smith and several other people, and I was offered the job. I think the offer was for about $55,000at the time. I was ready to start immediately 'cause in New York I'd had only been making $30,000and so that was a pretty big jump and but they asked me to take time to think about it. I thought about it and gave 'em my response, which was yes. I was really concerned about joining a large law firm. We only had 300 or 400 lawyers at the time but that was a big law firm back then in, in I guess what was it, not--'86 [1986], '87 [1987] in--. Speaker 1: 1991. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: In 1991, rather. Story_ID: 116780 Speaker 1: But I was excited about it, you know, I hadn't written a lot in the last three years so I was concerned about that. You know there weren't a lot of people at Reed Smith--there weren't a lot of black lawyers at Reed Smith at the time. I was concerned about that, but more importantly I really thought Reed Smith was going to a way station. I'd work for two or three years, make a lot of money and then go do something else, with either the government or a smaller firm or run for office or something like that, because I didn't have a lot of confidence in, in having a long-term career with Reed Smith because I didn't have many examples. And you know Weldon Latham was here, [HM] Singleton McAllister was here and they recruited me, they helped train me but they trained me to develop business, quite frankly. The litigation skill-set was there, folks like Doug Spaulding and Bernie Casey honed my litigation skills when I first got here as an associate 'cause I had never done anything on the civil side, and it was like walking into a new world but the skills were transferrable and so I was grateful to all of them for working with me, but I started getting good reviews. I took a writing class when I first got here, no one ever knew that, but I did because it would take me twice as long to write a great brief or great motion, it would take me twice as longer than my colleagues and you could only bill for so much so I used to always ask the partners, "how long should this take?" and they would say, "Eight hours or ten hours." It would take me twice as long and so I always figured that they didn't--either, I was taking too long to write or, you know, they just didn't want me to bill more than eight to ten hours, but, be that as it may, it was, it was tough going the first year or two, but I got great reviews, I was well thought of, and then I realized I had a skill-set and that I could, I could sell that skill-set to the public companies to high-end individuals. I thought that was important because there were 77,000 lawyers in Washington, D.C. How I am gonna have a legal career, how are they gonna pick up the phone, I know I don't wanna work for anybody at Reed Smith vis-a-vis be tied to a partner that just feeds me work because that can be fleeting, quite frankly, and I wanted to stand on my own. I wanted--I decided I wanted to have a law practice at a big law firm and so I wanted to develop business. I wanted to make it rain if you will. We call it rainmaking. I knew that as an associate you know that was kind of difficult but you know you start baby steps and then you take larger steps and stuff, and so, I really focused after a year or two on trying to develop a book of business that would keep me either here or I could take wherever I went in the large law firm practice because I really liked working at a large law firm. I had a lot of freedom, you made good money, you worked on some interesting cases, you had some high profile cases, you would represent large corporations, you could do pro bono, I could you know do kind of the civil rights piece of what I loved to do, and, and so it gave me a lot of freedom and liberty to really operate on a broad legal space and that was important, you know, and it kept me busy so I had, you know, I could, I could chase business or try to develop a book of business. I was doing substantive legal work for some great clients and some great partners and then I was so I had my pro bono stuff was over here where I was working with the civil rights organizations on pro bono cases and so, you know, my name recognition began to grow because on the pro bono side I would represent elected officials or their such as [HM] Marion Barry or [HM] Sharon Pratt Kelly and their, their political actions committees that were under scrutiny at the time by the government. We had a lot of resources to bring to the table and so I started to represent folks like that, one, because they were high-profile, two, because I thought I we could help them, and three, it would broaden my name recognition. We would have meetings here at Reed Smith, we you know we, we, you know, anything that was gonna broaden my exposure as a young lawyer, I was willing to do because I figured that if I, if they knew who I was then they might call, but if no one knew who I was nobody's gonna call, quite frankly-- Story_ID: 116781 Speaker 1: Between, you know, representing elected officials and their organizations pro bono, I got into political fundraising when I first got here. And (laughter) the funny thing is, you know, I went to my first fundraiser when I worked for [HM] Wilhelmina Rolark and she had raised $5,000or $10,000 from leading businessmen and they had written checks for $1,000 or $500 on the hope of access and the hope of, of kinship with her and perhaps they had business with the City that they wanted her help on and what I realized that they were giving those--they were writing those type of checks to a politician on, on a maybe, then it was clear that they could write larger checks to Reed Smith on a definitive retention basis and I could help them. So I thought it was a better deal for them. So I got into political fundraising at the local level and the federal level simply because I believed that that's where the business was. That if you give to a politician, federal or local, you can surely afford a large law firm to represent you on the promise that we can give you, get you a great result and on those two fronts I was able to not only kind of do great work for the firm, but also get some name recognition out there and get the firm recognized out in the community, broader community, and develop a book of business that would sustain me for the last twenty-one years or so. Story_ID: 116782 Speaker 1: Now there--I have a kind of, a sort of list of the some of the cases that you're involved in and I don't know how much you can say about them, but you can give--I always ask lawyers and judges. Speaker 2: The public version. Speaker 1: Yeah, the public version of cases you know, I think it's going to add some flavor to our discussion. You are involved in a--an, an embezzlement case involving the largest African American sorority in the country I believe, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: So can you tell us something about that? Speaker 2: Sure, that case is still pending, actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In [Washington] D.C. Superior Court, we were. Speaker 1: That's gotta be AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], anybody knows it-- Speaker 2: That's right, that was the AKA organization (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --in the black community knows it's AKA. Speaker 2: It's the AKA organization, eight plaintiffs have sued the organization and a number of individuals including Barbara McKinzie, the former basileus [president], alleging various nefarious things and embezzlement and stealing in violation of their by-laws and that essentially were wrongfully terminated as part of a retaliation scheme. The lawsuit itself isn't for the eight plaintiffs to recover money for themselves, a small portion of it is, but the majority of it is a derivative lawsuit to collect and, and go after $2 or $3 million dollars worth of funds that have been embezzled from the organization over the last say three to five years and to assure the membership that the organization is gonna follow its bylaws and follow the recommendations of several audits that uncovered much of this malfeasance and misfeasance, and so the case is pending in the D.C. Superior Court. We're in discovery right now and that's the public version. The case ought to be resolved. I'm a member of a fraternity, Kappa Alpha Psi. Several of the fraternities and sororities have these internal issues that they're working on. This is not anything new, I just think it's the AKA organization and the activism of the eight plaintiffs that has sustained the exposure, the press has covered it. The, you know there is a website that covers it. Many bloggers cover it and it really goes to the heart and soul of the greatness of our organization. The AKA organization is a great organization. These eight plaintiffs wanna make it greater. There's some resistance there, or has been some resistance there, which is why the litigation continues, but in the end these eight plaintiffs, you know, want compliance and want the organization to be great. They obviously wanna be reinstated 'cause they were wrongfully suspended, okay, and they obviously wanna be compensated some small amount of money in connection with the fact that they've had to take up legal resources in order to try right their wrongful termination, and so the case continues and that's the public version of it. It is my hope that it gets resolved, though, for the betterment of the organization and for the betterment of all black Greek letter organizations. Speaker 1: Okay, now is it the good faith of a lot of people, people at stake, I guess. Speaker 2: Sure, absolutely, absolutely and it can be difficult because you have personalities, you have history and, you know, when families get to fighting (laughter) you know the level of reasonableness kind of (laughter) is just put to the side, so, hopefully, we can find some common ground and resolve it. If not, a jury will resolve it and you know if it gets to that, it gets to that. Speaker 1: Yeah there's-I think recently there've been similar struggles in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and in CLC and even the Episcopal churches and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: It's not a black organization they have similar struggles. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 116783 Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Okay, another case is the, let's see what's this --there is a, a media libel case, a libel case, a media personality you know I can only go from-I'm looking at this list and I don't know who is (unclear)-- maybe you can tell us about that case or we can move on to another? Speaker 1: Well, the, the media libel case was a columnist, who, here in Washington [D.C.], a very well-known columnist who wrote several pieces and does write pieces, you know, looking at the United--looking at the local government and local issues. This particular writer wrote four or five columns about the Department of Parks and Recs. [Recreation] and its leadership essentially and when the administrations changed, and when the individual who was kind of the subject of these editorials or subject of these columns stopped being in a leadership position at the Department of Parks and Recs., then that person believed that she had been wronged and believed that she had, that she had been slandered and libeled and we represented and defended the columnist's right to write her opinion and she was connected with a radio and TV station as well as a print organization and, eventually, that case would resolve it, resolve itself through the insurance companies and not the parties themselves, actually, 'cause there was no settlement or resolution between the plaintiff and the named defendant. It was a First Amendment case with the first right. You have public officials who don't like what's being written about them, they don't believe that they're public officials but most are, especially if you're a government executive, whether you believe it or not, and the columnist's right to write opinions, as opposed to reporting on facts, and so it was a really interesting case that, that resolved itself, but had it been litigated would have put those issues front and center in a D.C. Superior Court jury and I think we would've been successful. Story_ID: 116784 Speaker 1: Tell us something about--now you were counsel for some of the appointees of President [William "Bill"] Clinton-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: As they appeared before congressional investigation. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of those? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know it was, it was, they were so politically driven, you know, during the Clinton years, the Republicans on the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and [U.S.] Senate side had several investigations going on, separate and apart from Monica Lewinsky and, and the other issues that the [United States Office of] Independent Counsel were looking in regard to Clinton. They were separate and apart from his impeachment trial, they had to do with Whitewater [1992], they had to do with the Department of Education, Department of Energy, they had to do with various business deals, or political deals, that the administration had done, had to do with fundraising, primarily, and whether the fundraising was done appropriately and many of these people, who were in the government as appointees, were being investigated by the House Republicans and the House--I'm sorry the Senate Republicans and it involved depositions being taken as part of those legislative investigations. It involved appear--it involved appearing before congressional investigators for interviews and in some cases involved appearing before various committees and subcommittees who took a broad view of their investigatory powers. These were long-time Democrats who were supporters of Clinton, some were--worked with cabinet officials in various agencies and so if you were to, if you narrow it down to kind of what their defense was, it really had to do with allegations of improper fundraising activities and, and other type of financial schemes that the House Republicans, the Senate Republicans believed went outside of the law and so you had the main investigation by the Independent Counsel and then you had various branches of investigations that covered a broad swath of the Clinton government, and I represented many of them by referral from various individuals by referral from the White House Counsel's Office to provide them pro bono independent counsel just to be on the safe side, as opposed to the government representing and defending all of these witnesses essentially who were DNC [Democratic National Committee] officials, who were Clinton appointees and so forth and so on, and so it was a fascinating time for a young lawyer like me to be able to operate on the edges of the main investigation. I was more than happy to, more pro bono but each of those relationships, each of those representations turned into great relationships with a lot of Clinton appointees, not so much with Clinton or with, with Hillary [Clinton], but I got to know them, too, in a professional way and their lawyers and it was just a really excellent time to be a part of that and a real training ground. Story_ID: 116785 Speaker 1: Now did, did you participate in a Whitewater [1992] case as a counsel? Speaker 2: I did not, I did not. These were tangential, these had to do with DNC [Democratic National Committee] and [President William "Bill"] Clinton fundraising mechanisms, they had to do with accepting contributions and these witnesses' involvement, and accepting contributions from foreign organizations from around the world. Speaker 1: I remember there was a charge about that-- Speaker 2: From Taiwan, from Japan, I think, and from China and the like and the bundlers and the people who were, who were networking and who were bundling these funds or accepting these funds or perhaps were doing business with these individuals after they had made significant contributions to the Clinton campaign. They were witnesses to these investigations and so we were not part of Whitewater or the core part, but for an associate or a young partner at the time, this was pretty heavy stuff and a good way to support the Clinton Administration and a good way to defend witnesses who really could've been targets or subjects but had not reached that level yet. Speaker 1: Yeah, oh the Clinton Administration was a really a legal battleground. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Especially after the Republican Revolution of 1994. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: You know, with Kenneth Starr as the special investigator. Speaker 2: He was the independent prosecutor, sure. Speaker 1: Who fished for years for something in-- (laughter) (unclear). Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: So I often wondered how that's--those, how the government deals with those kinds of cases so they, they actually can, can contract with outside-they can get counsel from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, our contract was with the individual but it was a pro bono piece but it was referred by the White House Counsel's office. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they were witnesses, they, they weren't targets or subjects, they couldn't afford counsel, and I don't think the government had the resources to give all of them government lawyers but quite frankly because they were witnesses versus targets or subjects, they needed their own independent counsel, they needed their own counsel, quite frankly, to avoid any appearance of conflict or possible direct conflict. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the time of a deluge of investigations. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, you know, I often say the only difference between the Clinton years and the [HM Barack] Obama years given the economy and given the jobs issue, you know, that Clinton did an incredible job with the economy and probably one of our greatest presidents of all time, at least when you look closely at his record despite the impeachment, despite the investigations. The only difference between Clinton and Obama right now is the Republicans have taken a different tact, they, they haven't, launched several different investigations now. Maybe Obama hasn't given them a reason to, but I believe that, that given how the attack has been on the Democratic administration whenever they're in the White House, if there was something to investigate, and I guess I say this to Obama's credit, Barack Obama's credit, you know, there would be on top of all of the other attacks that he's had to endure with a tough economy, they'd be investigating him also in his government. Speaker 1: That's right, if there is any reason. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Would, yeah. Speaker 2: The Republicans tend to do that. The Democrats when Republicans are in the White House (laughter) don't tend to do all those investigations. Story_ID: 116786 Speaker 1: There's a case here, there are number of ones, I won't ask you about all these, but these that appear on your (unclear) here, there's a NFL [National Football League] player who's accused of assault, can you tell us who it was and what they did and what happened? Speaker 2: Well, it's a, it's a, it was a very public case and while I can't talk about what happened because the case is still pending through a deferred sentencing agreement, I think it's clear that the individual because of the public nature of it was Albert Haynesworth, a very fine defensive player. He's not in the NFL right now, but I expect him to return to the NFL at some point. He's just an incredible athlete and an incredible person who used to play with the Washington Redskins, and while he was here late in the summer or early or mid-summer or spring rather, I'm sorry forgive me, a few years back was wrongfully accused or allegedly accused of improperly touching a waitress at a, at the, at a hotel downtown, at a downtown hotel in [Washington] D.C. I got involved because his business manager and I were friends and you know the federal government, the [U.S.] Department of Justice wanted to prosecute him and did prosecute him, bring charges, indict--an indictment against him for inappropriately touching a waitress at this hotel. Speaker 1: Okay so that's still in litigation? Speaker 2: Well we, we did a, a really interesting deal on that case, the first of its kind whereby Mr. Haynesworth, again this is all public information, Mr. Haynesworth took what we call an Alford plea, where he didn't have to admit or deny the allegations. He wanted to get the matter behind him and then he participated in what we call a deferred sentencing agreement, whereby he did community service and he did some assessments required under the agreement and once he completes the community service piece the case will be dismissed outright. I think it's set to be dismissed in February of 2013. It was the first of its kind, that type of deal that was done. The case was problematic for both sides. Obviously, I believed that we had a very strong defense in connection to whether he was given permission or not which is a full defense. There were several witnesses, including from the hotel that would--that we had by affidavit saying it was, that this young woman gave him permission to do this. That's not exactly--that's a great defense but that's just awful PR [public relations] for him and the NFL and, and the team that he was playing with at the time, the New England Patriots. On the other hand, the government was forcing the young woman to come forward. We believe that she was hesitant to come forward, even though she had filed a claim and she had gone onto the grand jury and so forth and so on and so the government was in a bit of a tight spot as well, notwithstanding the flurry of motions that had been filed, the accusations that had gone back and forth between both sides, including an allegation that she was--that, that she offered money to a witness to, to support her testimony and that he or through his lawyer, yours truly, had offered money to the complaining witness in connection to some type of deal to resolve. The fact of the matter is that, from our end, we wanted a global settlement, a potential civil suit to be settled and a, the criminal case to be resolved and both sides including the government and his defense team and the young woman's lawyer were working towards that goal, no matter what. That did not occur, the deferred sentencing agreement will be completed soon and his case will be dismissed. Albert was never sued civilly for that piece, God willing, the creek don't rise, it gets dismissed and he doesn't have a criminal record and all parties can move forward separately in their lives. Story_ID: 116787 Speaker 1: Now tell us about--you defended the third White House party dinner crasher. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Who, who is this and I've, I've lost track, I told my first-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Carlos Allen. Speaker 1: Carlos Allen? Speaker 2: Carlos Allen looks like you and me, he's a good brother. He, you know, is the alleged third White House party crasher behind the Salahis [Tareq and Michaele Salahi]. He was a friend and someone who owned Hush magazine, an online magazine that, excuse me, online magazine that really chronicled wealthy people, celebrities and their charitable contributions. And so Carlos [Allen] was alleged to have illegally entered this state dinner and state celebration for the Indian president [Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh], you know that the Salahis were--before Carlos Allen, the Salahis, that same night, did not go to the dinner but went to the photo session and had the--reception and took pictures with [Bill] Clinton, allegedly with no invitation. Carlos was a little different. Carlos actually went to the reception, went to the dinner, went to the Willard Hotel and came in with the Indian business delegation. This is all public information as I've said before in this case, for sure, 'cause it's been heavily reported. He would go to the dinner, take pictures with several leading government officials, celebrities, athletes, entertainers. He would sit with I believe the Peruvian ambassador and his wife, Robin Roberts, the co-host of "Good Morning America" and others, and would leave that dinner at the end, ask the Secret Service or White House personnel how he should get out and they showed him how to get out of the White House. There was nothing nefarious or undercover about Carlos Allen. He was there covering the dinner and believed that he had an invite and that he had been sent an invite that turned out not to be an invite but an announcement. In fact, when he got to the White House, he did not have a table setting, never showed ID [identification], merely asked, "Where do I sit?" and a White House Personnel directed him to a seat, an open seat at this table and he sat there. He happened to be sitting with a number of dignitaries, as I said before, and he spent the evening enjoying the music, enjoying the food, taking pictures with various people, taking pictures of people, took pictures of the table and had a rousing good time, never once showing his ID. Now he would subsequently post these pictures on his blog site and say that he had been at the dinner and the counter bloggers or others would say, you know, "Your name wasn't on the list, you crashed this dinner, too." The Secret Service would later investigate him, a couple of days later, would investigate him, interview him twice. He had nothing to hide, he described his whole evening to them, they didn't believe him the first time. He told them to check their video cameras. They check their videos, and sure enough, there was a video of him walking in with the Indian business delegation. He would do a second interview and when a, and when a congressional staffer leaked his name to the press that, in fact, there was a third legitimate White House alleged party crasher, let's just say, all heck broke loose. We got media inquiries from around the, the world. The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations] and others wanted to investigate and interview him. He called me because I had a talk with him the night he was going to the White House, actually, and he had told me that he was going and I had done some charitable stuff with him, some other stuff that Hush magazine does and so we had been friends for several years and he called me and said he needed my help, that he had several media outlets and he came in, we talked and it was my strategy that in order to not beat back the media requests because there were several. Speaker 1: Every major media outlet around the world wanted to interview him but I was more concerned about the investigation going further, and so part of our strategy was to do three and four interviews, but part of those interviews were to say that, one, he believed that he had an invitation, but, two, that he, he had a right to be there, and three, when he asked where to sit and the White House personnel showed him where to sit, that he in fact was not a trespasser, he became an invitee under the law. We had to get that message out because Carlos could have been subject to several investigations including grand jury investigations and others and, and I wanted the government agencies to know what our defense would be 'cause I wanted them to spend some time looking at it. Okay, we were able to do those three or four interviews and it worked out. Story_ID: 116788 Speaker 1: Could Mr. [Carlos] Allen have done serious time, you know, if he were convicted of--? Speaker 2: Well, I think Carlos Allen represented the political embarrassment to the [U.S.] Secret Service and the White House entering a building under--a government building under false pretenses is a misdemeanor. They have some--it could have been a felony. I know that they did, there was a grand jury investigation but nothing came of it, but (laughter) either Mr. Allen had a lot of chutzpah, okay, or he was just incredibly naive. I assume--I had talked to Carlos Allen and often he talk--we talk about that night and it was just an incredible night for him, no matter what, and I think it's an open question in regard to whether he was just naive, had chutzpah, or he just beat the system, but no matter what it was a great night for him, he meant no harm to, obviously, the president [HM Barack Obama] and his family and it's just another interesting case, one of my most fascinating cases. We did "Good Morning America," we did Larry King ["Larry King Live], we did National Black Radio, and it was a sizeable expose on Carlos Allen in the style section of the Washington Post and he was a media fascination. The media was fascinated with him, not as much as with the [Tareq and Michaele] Salahis because the Salahis had a lot of baggage with them. Carlos didn't have any baggage with him; he just had Hush magazine. Story_ID: 116789 Speaker 1: Okay, all right and now, there's another case which is historic in the sense it's the largest tax fraud case in the history of the nation's capital, $50 million [Washington] D.C. tax theft case [2008]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So tell us about that? Speaker 2: Well, you remember three or four years ago that there was a, a 50 million dollar heist over ten years from the [Washington] D.C. Tax and Finance Office involving a lead defendant, Harriette Walters. The second defendant, this is all public information, the second defendant in that case was a young woman by the name of Diane Gustus, who was her right hand, part secretary, part tax clerk, but someone who was honest, genuine and, quite frankly, just not sophisticated enough to pull off a 50 million dollar heist. The allegations are that they were falsified tax, property tax protests that were filed, that they were falsified refunds to false companies over the years, that these, these refunds were going to false companies or fake companies and that the network of individuals outside the government were cashing these checks over ten years to a tune of $25 and $50 million. All the money really hadn't been recovered but at least, the last estimation was about $50 million over ten years and that the inside job were done by two or three people within the tax and finance section of the real estate property refund section. My client, Diane Gustus, was the only defendant who was arrested and charged, but never prosecuted. The government declined to prosecute. The other ten defendants all went to jail, were prosecuted and all pled guilty, including Harriette Walters, who, I think, got nineteen to twenty-five years. What was fascinating about Diane Gustus was that her name had been forged on several documents. They had, the, the wrongdoers or alleged wrongdoers had not only falsified documents, forged her name, they had stolen her password, and but all the while kept this fraud from her, kept this fraudulent scheme from her. Many of the defendants would tell the government that they kept it from her for two reasons. One, they didn't think she was sophisticated enough to go to do it, and two, that she was too honest to do it, which helped a great deal. Diane never cooperated with the government; she was debriefed as she told her story. She did get gifts from Harriette Walters, but hundreds of people got gifts from Harriette Walters over several years and so she was in no different position then those other individuals other than she had been charged, she lost her job, she lost early retirement and possible early pension and yet she was absolved of any wrongdoing. She is now currently suing the District [of Columbia] for back pay, her early pension and, and her for her wrongful termination, even though, at least on its face, it was enough to charge her according to the government. Her case was dismissed and so she continues to fight for the civil side of justice. The government did a great deal of justice in that case because, you know, they could've of charged her and prosecuted her. I'm not convinced we could've won with a jury and so we worked really hard to give the government as much reason not to prosecute her as possible and, in the end, they didn't, and I think that was--it took a lot of work on our part, but I think it took a real, a lot of real hard work on the government's part for both of us to reach that conclusion and Diane Gustus is a great-grandmother now. She's working in the retail industry and as her case makes its way through the civil justice system, and I think on the civil side she'll get what she is entitled to. She should. Story_ID: 116790 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. I know you're active in a lot of civic activities here in the District [of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] can you tell us about some of those? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my, you know the, the, the most active organizations I'm involved in the District are the Recreation Wish List Committee and the [D.C.] Chamber of Commerce. The Recreation Wish List Committee I chaired when we built a $10 or $15 million dollar facility in Southeast Washington [D.C.] for the kids and families of Southeast Washington to, excuse me, play tennis, compete in tennis, learn tennis, and to be tutored and to have educational programs for young people who and their families, who historically have been denied access to just either of those, quite frankly. The founder is [HM] Cora Masters Barry, former first lady and wife of [HM] Marion Barry. She is just an incredible person and visionary and continues to run the center through the Recreation Wish List Committee. The name of the, the building is the Southeast Tennis and Learning Center. She built it through a private partnership. I was chair of the board when we built it and then we gave it to the District of Columbia and we continued to manage, operate it and to be a friend to the [Southeast Tennis and Learning] Center with all that is inside that space and just really--earlier this year they named the activity room this large activity room called the Round Room at the Center. They named it the Bolden Room, if you will, in honor of my contributions over the years and, and in honor of my leadership and my representation of the Recreation Wish List Committee that the prior mayoral administration, the prior mayor [Adrian Fenty] of this city, attempted to evict them for some unknown reason. Story_ID: 116791 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about that, what was the mayor's name again? Speaker 2: Adrian Fenty. Speaker 1: Adrian Fenty, right and I, I heard her discuss this case. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Were you involved in the--? Speaker 2: I was the lead, I was the lead lawyer. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --for the Recreation Wish List Committee. Speaker 1: What was this about? Speaker 2: Against the District [of Columbia, Washington D.C.]. Speaker 1: Just kind of set this up and tell us what happened? Speaker 2: Well the government had contended, literally out of the blue that the lease that the Wish List Committee had executed was void or voidable or void ab initio, meaning no force and effect because at the time the Wish List Committee signed the lease with the city, you only talking about 250 square feet, that's what their space is there, although everything in the [Southeast Tennis and Learning] Center has been given to them by the Recreation Wish List Committee, out of the blue, determined that the lease was void or voidable and as a result that they gave the Wish List Committee and Ms. [HM Cora Masters] Barry notice to vacate the premises immediately or within thirty days saying that they didn't have a valid lease, out of the blue. I mean there was no, there was no, there was no run up to this thing and so, excuse me, obviously that center is supported by the Williams sisters [Venus and Serena Williams], several athletes, entertainers, celebrities, political leaders across the country and supported by international leaders from Ghana and other African countries because South--because the Recreation Wish List Committee they do goodwill tours there with the kids, they send tennis equipment to Ghana and other African countries. The Williams sisters are there even when you don't know the Williams sisters are there, no PR [public relations], working with the kids on tennis and education, just an incredible organization and out of the blue we're told to get out, supported by the [National] Council of Negro Women [NCNW], [HM] Dorothy Height, who is no longer with us, supported by political leaders on the [Capitol] Hill who are part of the Congressional Black Caucus, Maxine Waters and, and others, and so the eviction notice put them in a real difficult position. Speaker 1: So, but this is a question that, after I heard this story I, we even discussed it on the way driving back to the hotel. What, the question was, what in the world could Adrian Fenty have been thinking about to want to evict a program like this from the city of Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: Um-hum you have to him that, I've always thought it was politically driven. Ms. Barry probably has her view of the world, but you know this wasn't something that was causing some crisis in the government, this was something that the government came up with, the lawyers for the government came up with. So it was an affirmative attack. It wasn't that our, you know our hands are tied and you gotta get out, we apologize, and so, Ms. Barry and the board retained me and Reed Smith [LLP] 'cause I knew their story and so what better--when you needed someone you didn't have to get up to speed with, but you also wanted somebody who knew the story who would provide a passionate defense, and so, what we did was, we filed a temporary restraining order a day or two before the eviction notice was to be implemented, that they were gonna come and remove them from the center and the government agreed to hold off on eviction. We had a TRO [temporary restraining order] hearing before Judge [Judith N.] Macaluso in the D.C. Superior Court and the judge ruled in our favor. Subsequently, the government settled the case because you, what they were hanging their hat on was that the lease was void because the Recreation Wish List Committee's corporate documents, corporate registration papers were not in full effect or had not been filed at the time- Story_ID: 116792 Speaker 1: They hadn't filed their annual report (unclear). Speaker 2: They hadn't filed their annual report and at the time and so therefore under the law there is some law that says, if you haven't filed your annual report then you are not a corporate entity in the eyes of the law and the government, so any contracts that you execute can't, you know can't be enforced if you will. There's nothing to contract with so those contracts are void ab initio, so the government was using that to force them out, again, another affirmative act. Well, the law also says that once you file your corporate papers as late as they may be then it reverts back to the date they should have been filed and so you're in good standing and considered to be in good standing during that, you know, period of time when they weren't filed, so from a legal standpoint it simply didn't make a whole lot of sense because all the [Recreation] Wish List Committee did, all we did for them was file their paperwork, file their annual report, file their corporate documents and under the law, it, it reverted back and so that period that they were looking at, the government was hanging its hat on, hanging it's case on was wiped out, okay, nunc pro tunc [now for then], as we say in the law, as if it were, and so, the government still wouldn't back down though and, and the government went to court and argued a, a position that was just not rooted in a strong foundation of the law. Judge [Judith N.] Macaluso agreed with us and the TRO [temporary restraining order] was, was granted, which barred the District from throwing them out. The government would subsequently negotiate a new MOU [memorandum of understanding] with the Wish List Committee that did not have one negative paragraph in it other than to say that they would continue to work closely with the Wish List Committee. The government came out and toured the facility and the, and, and the ninety percent of everything in that center is from the Recreation Wish List Committee and had you thrown the Recreation Wish List Committee out, the Wish List Committee would've taken ninety percent of everything in that center. I mean ninety percent of everything in the [Southeast Tennis and Learning] Center to the detriment and to the prejudice of the black families and young people who come there every day to learn, and to play tennis, and this is an organization that transforms the lives of young people in Southeast Washington, you know, "The least, the lost and the left out," as [HM] Marion Barry says. And so, the government's position was really the antithesis of what it ought to be doing with, with young people and poor people in, in challenged parts of [Washington] D.C. and any other urban center, and so it made no sense and the judge did the right thing and for that work and that defense, work of ours for, you know, contributions reached, but not made over the years, they named the Round Room, renamed the Round Room the Bolden Room and so I was embarrassed and pleased, but embarrassed about it, and, you know, I continue to support them and, and work with them. I continue to be close to Ms. [Cora Masters] Barry who is a friend and a, a mother of sorts and surely political godmother of mine. It's hard to be that to me, but she's hung in there so (laughter), interesting case. Speaker 1: Not being from D.C. I, I but just hearing this I just can't, I still just wonder what in the world Mayor [Adrian] Fenty could have been thinking if he'd of won? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He would have--his political career would have been shattered in D.C. Story_ID: 116793 Speaker 1: Well, you know a side note to all of that, on top of, side-note, tangential, all of that, is that [HM] Maya Angelou, and [HM] Dorothy Height and others sought a meeting with him [Mayor Adrian Fenty] to discuss how this could be resolved outside of the courtroom. I had that covered as, as they said, but that they believed that just didn't make any sense and for leadership of that quality and that tenor to step in and ask for a meeting with the mayor on behalf of the kids, the families and the [Recreation] Wish List Committee, was phenomenal, actually, you know 'cause they didn't have to do that and that meeting never took place. Now, you know the mayor says you know the schedules didn't work out, you know, the Maya Angelou and others, I don't want to put words in their mouth, but the way the public perceived it was that he refused to meet with them, essentially. Dorothy Height was at the hearing, the TRO [temporary restraining order] hearing in the front row. Speaker 2: In a wheel chair. Speaker 1: And you know of all my cases that I've tried, cases we've talked about probably the--my best moment in my career was the honor of arguing this case in her presence. She didn't have to be there, I'm arguing on behalf of a good issue, a--an important issue for black people all around this country, quite frankly, for the work that, that [Southeast Tennis and Learning] Center was doing, whether, you know, take the politics out of it, but she was there because she believed in it. She believed in the righteousness of our argument and it was, it was a great day for the center and I'll never forget during the hearing you know I looked back at Ms. [HM Cora Masters] Barry who was there animated (word?) as ever 'cause she wanted to, she wanted to testify. I kept telling her you can't testify, I got this, you know, so, but she was sitting there with Dorothy Height and, you know, Dorothy Height--I'd look back a few times and she was just nodding, and one time it looked like she was just nodding at me in approval and it was just an awesome feeling when an icon like that seems to be approving of your presentation and your performance and she--after we won, you know, I greeted her and she told me to come closer and she gave me a hug and thanked me and just said, you know, "Y,ou did a wonderful job" and, you know, man, when Dorothy Height tells you something like that, you know, you get goose bumps and you say, yeah, this is what it's all about, and you know I was prepared for the argument. A lot of pressure on me, but and all of us, the other lawyers here at the firm, Larry [Lawrence S.] Sher and others who worked with me, but you know her approval and her hug made it all worth it, it really did and so to me that was really a highlight of my litigation career so far, notwithstanding all the other cases that are high-profile and, you know, and we've gotten great results on. Speaker 2: Okay, I just. Speaker 1: You could imagine (laughter) you know. Speaker 2: Yes, I mean just the story is incredible and. Speaker 1: I'm getting goose bumps now (laughter) talking to you about it and remembering her, Dorothy Irene Height. She was a, just a powerhouse in so many ways you know, and I was pleased that I was able to, to argue in front of her and that she approved of my argument, doesn't get better than that. Story_ID: 116794 Speaker 1: On the opposite side of this, what happened to--I'm not from [Washington] D.C. and I really don't know-- I haven't followed this that closely, but what happened to former Mayor [Adrian] Fenty as a result of any of this, or I don't know if it's causal or what, but I-- (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, some political observers would say it was a part of it. I tend to think that it could have been one of many things, but it was one of many things but you know Mayor Fenty didn't win re-election, Vincent Gray did. The numbers, his popularity was very, was way down, not just because of this but a broader swath of issues, community issues. Ironically, his, his numbers for doing a good job were up, they were in the sixties and seventy percent, but if you, if you ask the public, as the polls did, "Would you vote for him again?" the answer was no, and so, there's great irony in that poll but, you know, his leadership, his connective-ness, he clearly lost a connection to the public across the board, east of the river, west of the park you name it and so some would argue that this [Recreation] Wish List Committee piece was a big part of that. I tend to think not, that's just my opinion, I think it was one of many things that contributed to his demise. Now, you know, you know Adrian had a view of the world and it worked for him and he was a, a political giant killer when he, when he would run for office. He defeated some icons, no matter what, no matter who he, you know, ran against for the Council [of the District of Columbia] or the mayor's office and so this was his first political defeat and you know he has gone to lecture at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] and he works with a firm. He's still big on education and revitalizing our cities and making our public education system better, and so, he's thriving in the private sector right now. No word on whether he's gonna come back to the public sector anytime soon. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's an incredible story. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yep. Story_ID: 116795 Speaker 1: So, now, what we always ask attorneys this, what is your legal philosophy? Speaker 2: What is my legal philosophy, in what, in, in regard to what (laughter)? Speaker 1: That's a good question, but I've always been asked to ask that and, and that's-- (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: It's just, it's just (laughter). Speaker 1: And that's, that's (laughter) (unclear) to be in a, a--you're basically (simultaneous) (unclear) a corporate lawyer I guess? Speaker 2: Well, no, I'm, I'm a corporate litigator. Speaker 1: Litigator. Speaker 2: So I operate in the courtroom, essentially. You know, when you asked me my legal philosophy it's far too simple to say, "I believe in justice, equality and fairness," (laughter), every lawyer and judge will tell you that, but you know my job is to help people, you know we're problem solvers. If I can't solve your problem I probably won't take your case because at my billable hour rate, as significant as it is, I don't like wasting people's money, whether they're rich or poor and I'll represent you whether you're rich or poor. You know everyone pays something, you know people who can't afford my legal fees at Reed Smith [LLP], I may represent them pro bono, I may represent them partially pro bono but they gotta have some skin in the game because we're partners. I can't win a case if your liberty or money is at issue, I can't win for you if you're not fully engaged with me. You know, facts win cases, lawyers don't. No matter how good I am, no matter how good people say I am, no matter how good I think I am, okay. None of that really matters if I don't have a strong set of facts that support your innocence or support your righteousness, and if you're gonna pay a lot of money for me to represent you, I ought to have a pretty good sense on whether--how this thing is gon' work out or not. You never know, but you ought to have a pretty good sense. If I can't help you, if I can't make a difference in your life, if I can't, can't give you your money's worth as I say, I probably won't take your case, I'll refer it to someone just as good in my opinion, but less expensive because I think I owe that to you. I don't believe that I am worth 800 bucks an hour, I believe the market says I am, but I'm only worth the value that I add to your liberty and your money, receiving or whatever you've been wronged as far as collecting money. That's the only value, you know if I'm adding value to your, your case in that regard then, then there's no price for that, but I gotta be convinced based on the facts that I can do that, 'cause if I'm not, I'm not, I'm not in this for the money. I'm in this to leave this place, my community, this world, this country a better place than I found it. I believe that, that's my mission. We all have a mission from, from our higher being, and, you know, you, you know, you can believe that or not believe that but I believe that. I believe that my mission is to leave this place in a better, a better, better than it was, and if I don't or I'm not trying to, then I'm only living fifty percent of the life God gave me, you know. [HM] Louis Farrakhan often says, "I have no problem with brothers and sisters making money, I have a problem with them taking and not giving back to the community while they make that money." You gotta give back, you know, we standing on shoulders, you know. My favorite painting is the one where you've got one hand lifting up and the other one strong African American brother reaching down and he's pulling up ["He Ain't Heavy" by Gilbert Young]. That's my favorite painting. Speaker 1: Yes that's a Hughie Lee-Smith painting [sic, Gilbert Young painting, "He Ain't Heavy"]. Speaker 2: That's my favorite painting 'cause that's what it's all about. I was taught that at home, I was taught that at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] I was taught that at Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. I'm teaching young brothers and sisters that right now, when they come to see me and they say they want to be like me or they say they want to have my career. I tell them I don't want--you don't want to have my career, you want to have your career, okay, you want to chart your own course. You need to pull and take and--from, from a lot of different people including me, but there's a lot of pain with my story, you know, you know, you see the glory but you don't see the story. If I was to tell you my story you, you may not want my career because every, every career out here, every success, every leadership, every greatness is, is marked with failure. I've had my share but it's what you do with it and what you do with, and what you do with you know that pain is there, that failure is there for a reason. He only gives you that because he's got greater things for you and he's preparing you to do those great things before he brings you home. I believe that and so all of that is my, that's, that's beyond my legal philosophy. That's my personal philosophy, you know, I am not what I do, but I love what I do, so it permeates everything, you know the rest of my life. It just really does, whether I'm managing lawyers, whether I'm leading my family, or my fraternity or young or mentoring young people, you know, all that is rooted in decency and the will to do good for others as a part of my broader success financial and professional, 'cause you can't have one with the other, it all comes, it's all in the pot, you mix it all up. Story_ID: 116796 Speaker 1: What I didn't ask you which I'd be remiss for not, not asking is that what your duties as a managing partner with Reed, Reed Smith [LLP]? Speaker 2: Well we've got about ninety lawyers here, sometimes 100, depending on how you count. As the office managing partner, my job is to lead the office, to expand the brand in this region, Washington D.C. and Maryland, to market our various practices and our various lawyers around the world, around the country and around this region, administratively. You know, I'm active in recruiting lawyers and the lateral market, partners and counsel. I'm active in hiring associates, and active in kind of the day-to-day administrative stuff. I also have my own law practice that I litigate and a lot of times have to delegate because of my managing partner duties, but generally it's a combination of all three of those things on any given day. Speaker 1: Okay, okay now you've been called I think by the Washington Post--the top white-collar crime lawyer in the D.C. area? Speaker 2: Well the--in 2009, the Washington Business Journal awarded me the White-Collar Criminal Defense Lawyer of the Year for the result and for the case of Diane Gustus, the 50 million dollar heist where she was the only one that was absolved of wrongdoing and, and not prosecuted. So, always pleased with recognition and awards. That was a fun case, we got a great result and again the facts had a lot to do with that. It's nice to be recognized by your peers and you know I'm happy to have won that award, but I must tell you it's 2012 now and you're only as good as what you've done lately and so I'm, I'm still working hard and looking for the next big case that I could have impact on. Story_ID: 116223 Speaker 1: All right, it was the--correction it was the Washington Post that called you "super lawyer" three years ago. Speaker 2: Yep, they did. Speaker 1: You told us during the break that they also called you the ubiquitous power lawyer. Speaker 2: Most recently the--Washington's ubiquitous power lawyer, and as I was telling you off-line, I had to ask my colleagues and I asked my fiance [now wife, Erika Martin Bolden] you know, is that a good thing or bad thing? I don't know what ubiquitous means and you know I use words in my profession, my, my job is speaking and so I had to look it up. It means omnipresent, everywhere, and I said, "I guess that's a good thing," but we got a good chuckle out of that, so. You know those, those words are great and nice and I'm not gonna turn them down, quite frankly. I work for hard for them whether it's the [Washington] Business Journal lawyer of the year award [top lawyer in the white collar crime category] or, or you know the [Washington] Post in describing who I'm representing or me as a lawyer, but, you know, it's always, what have you done for me lately? And I'm always looking for the next big case and quite frankly, you know, those compliments (laughter) in some respects make life a lot harder 'cause when the other side sees me coming they work a lot harder because I'm on the other side, I think, or it's far more--I think it's far more difficult to settle or resolve a case because they're either young lawyers or senior lawyers who see that as a means of working harder, fighting harder, or being more difficult. I wish it wasn't like that, but that's kind of my sense of it, so. I take the compliments but, I know my job gets a lot harder whenever that's published in the media. Story_ID: 116224 Speaker 1: What, what would you consider to be your, your lowest point where you just, you know--something that you were involved in a case or something that happened that just you know seemed to--? Speaker 2: Well, in, in my career, it wouldn't be a case 'cause I'm always fighting to win. You know, I ran for office in 2006, you know I, I have, I had a political career up to 2006 that I really believed was gonna be my second career. You know, I chaired the D.C. Democratic Party. I had chaired the D.C. Chamber of Commerce, I had chaired the [Recreation] Wish List Committee, and I'd always wanted to run for office and serve and provide political leadership to the city or to a community in the city, and in 2007, we ran for D.C. [city] council at-large. We lost and I really didn't have a game plan after that. I never expected to come back to the firm, at least not as a litigation partner, perhaps as counsel and I was gonna serve on the D.C. City Council. Losing that night, standing on stage with my family and supporters who were extremely disappointed, sad, emotional. In giving the speech with no preparation and trying to console, trying to be strong and to say the fight continues as well as to congratulate and support the incumbent who we, who we had lost to was the toughest speech of my life. My dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] was there was there, my brothers[Joey Bolden] and sisters [Kathryn Marie Bolden] as well, flown in from Chicago [Illinois] and I was terribly disappointed in myself and the electorate for not (laughter) making the right choice. At least, that's what I told myself. I think everything happens for a reason, though, and the good Lord put me back where he wanted me and that was part of my core mission is practicing law and being the lawyer that I am today. That was a low point, though, because two other things were going on. I wasn't sure I wanted to come back and practice law. Two of my largest clients had sold, I had sold them that year before so my revenues were not gonna be what they had been for the last two or three years. My daughter of nineteen, at nineteen--I had met my nineteen-year-old daughter for the first time, Shayla, and that was just a powerful piece for me. It was my soap opera moment-- Story_ID: 116225 Speaker 1: Well tell us about that, and I know when we last talked about your social life you were college frat man having a big time and--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And enjoying the social life at, at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard [University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, my daughter, Shayla, who I love dearly and who's thirty years old now, I met her at nineteen, when she was pregnant with my granddaughter, Ashanti, who is a wonderful, smart granddaughter of mine and I had recently met my daughter and me and her mom had, had a not a relationship but a liaison, ongoing liaison in my college years, my sophomore year. She had left school, apparently had, had the--my daughter, had indicated that she had, had Shayla, but there were a lot of factors that, that went into, you know, whether we had to confirm that in fact I was the father or not. It took us nineteen years to do that, that's my fault, that's her mom's fault, that's our fault okay, and standing up and having to say good, bad, right or wrong, or ugly, you know, I could have done better in making, determining whether in fact she was my child versus either doing nothing or raising questions about that, 'cause nobody suffers but your daughter in that regard. I met her at nineteen at the NBA [National Basketball Association] All-Star Game in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Her mom had called me a few months before we had had the DNA test done at that time, and it was ninety-nine percent positive that Shayla was my daughter. I immediately called my dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] and, who I care deeply about, and who is my best friend, and who I still care about what he thinks about me and my life, (laughter) and, you know, he said, you know, "Bolden men don't leave their families, so you gotta go get your daughter," and you know, "I'll go with you 'cause I wanna go see my, my granddaughter and my great-granddaughter," and so, I say that was a high point for meeting my daughter but it was a low point, too, because I could have been better and I was ashamed of myself in some respects. I could have done a lot differently, but when I met my daughter for the first time, I knew she was mine. She wanted to spend time with me, there was no anger or angst, although we had many difficult conversations. We've worked through those every day over the last eleven or twelve years. She's an active part of my life, she is your typical oldest daughter. She's friends and a great sister to my twin daughters, McKenzie [Bolden] and McKay [Bolden]. They all live in Atlanta [Georgia], and I would come to write about becoming Shayla's father. I did an essay in 2007, 2008 that appeared in the Washington Post magazine. It was called, "Becoming Shayla's Father." It was a low point for me because I had lost the election. I had taken three months off from practicing and I really wasn't sure about what I wanted to do next, and I wasn't feeling great about being an absent father for nineteen years, but I convinced myself after many sleepless nights and doing nothing during the day, as I tell my friends, I was drinking Jack Daniels and scrambled eggs in the morning. That's not true, but that's what I told them, but you get the point, right? And so you know my daughter helped me get through that period of time. You know she never said it was okay, she said we could all be better, we gonna be better, "Daddy, I love you and I want you to, I wanna spend the next," you know, "nineteen years with you and we gonna be okay together, and so that really got me through that tough time and I came back to the office in 2007. I was out from September to December of 2006 and it was tough year business-wise. But 2008, I became managing partner and that gave me a great foundation for developing business. I see my daughter, all of my daughters, two, three, four times a year now. The twins more, but with Shayla two, three, four times a year and we are great friends. She's a great daughter and we continue to strengthen our relationship, it's not always easy-- Speaker 1: I struggle with, with trying to tell her what to do or to how to live her life, because while my value system is important and I want her to have it, she didn't get that value system until nineteen years into her life. Not fair to her, it wasn't fair for me, but be that as it may we got a strong bond with one another and it just gets stronger every day, and so it was both a low point for me, but it was also a high point. I talked about pain and failure before, pain and failure--if you, if you got the right stuff and, and you understand why these things are happening to you, you know and that whatever God's mission is for you, there's a message in that pain and in that failure. You can move forward and good things happen after you move forward from it 'cause I think that's what he wants you to do. Surely with my daughter, surely with the election lost, low points, but great things came from it, including the incredible relationship with Shayla, a greater bond with all three of my daughters [McKay and McKenzie Bolden] and a stronger leadership position at the firm, stronger law practice at the firm and an early retirement from politics. Story_ID: 116226 Speaker 1: Okay, now here's a good time, maybe, I didn't, we did not cover you getting married along the line, can you tell us about that, how that happened? I take it you're no longer with your, your first wife? Speaker 2: No, I'm not. The twins' mom, we married in '88 [1988], 1988 she was from Birmingham, Alabama and went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and from Joliet [Illinois]. We were married for about twelve years, the twins we had two beautiful daughters, McKenzie and McKay, and you know, we continue to work at raising them and you know Lisa is probably, you know, one of the brightest women I know, but she wanted to do something different after about ten years or so. It was a good marriage, but not a great one, it had its challenges and so you know we decided to separate and part ways about ten years into the marriage, so '88 [1988], so '98 [1998] or 2000. I think my divorce was final in 2001, but, you know, I credit Lisa with pushing me into--deeper into my law practice. That is before I, I wanted to do politics and have my own shop like my dad [Raymond Allen Bolden]. Lisa really urged me to go to a larger law firm to make more money to handle bigger cases. She believed in my talent, I believe. I believe she believed in my talent and saw things that I, you know, I don't really think I saw or didn't have great confidence in, and so in that way she was very supportive in that regard. She was an investment banker, she continues to be an entrepreneur. You know, we have had several challenges (laughter) post-divorce, but, you know, she's been an incredible mother to the twins, she loves them to death and, and I value her, I value her for that and the twins and I value her for that, but it hasn't been easy for her as a single mom but she's been an incredible mother and she's got physical custody of them in Atlanta [Georgia] and there's no greater trust with my babies than that, so she, you know, we keep moving forward. The twins are graduating from high school in June of next year in 2013, and you know they're great kids, they've been in no trouble, knock wood, and in that regard it's been a, it's been a solid partnership, you know. I'm actually engaged now to be remarried to Erika Martin, who's just an incredible lady and a great partner and you know life-long [Washington] D.C. resident and we got engaged in June and she's incredibly supportive and just is a loving and lovely person and I'm looking forward to that marriage and making that last forever. Story_ID: 116227 Speaker 1: Now you're part of a group called The Family that I know is an important group of black professionals. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: I think Reverend [Tom] Skinner and Dr., [HM] Dr. Barbara [Williams-Skinner]. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Is, leads that group. Tell us about that and what that--the significance of that? Speaker 2: Well, I got invited to join The Family, I wanna say ten or fifteen years ago. Dr. Skinner is just an incredible religious leader and, and world leader quite frankly, has advised presidents from around the world and just is not only spiritual, but a great mentor to so many young black women and men around the country. And The Family, you know, is an invitation, at least it used to be invitation only of, of black folks from every field of human endeavor from around the world, quite frankly, looking at how we can better this country, better this world, in each of these walks of life. You know, its part coaching, its part empowerment, its part leadership, but it's all about us. We learn from each other. You have leaders from business, politics, social, 501(c)(3)s, the religious community, you name it and it's a, it's a combination of black folks who leaders in their field, corporate, legal, you name it, who are coming together sharing ideas, learning from one another, and addressing emerging issues or leading issues affecting this county, and, and in focus affecting black people in our communities. And it goes beyond the gather--, the annual gatherings, it, it is, there are mentorship and workshops throughout the year, there are receptions and you know Family members keep in touch with one another and so it's a wonderful vehicle for you know communicating and staying connected. You know, one thing about black people is, man we got black folks doing incredible things around this country and around this world and we don't, we don't know it, you know. You know, we are so, you know-Reverend Barrows [HM Reverend Willie T. Barrow] who is a leading member of The Family out of Chicago [Illinois] says it all the time, "We're not connected. We're more disconnected than disaffected," or something like she says, and we gotta get connected and stay together and build on the strengths of our accomplishments of our relationships and, and respect ourselves and make others respect our communities and who we are. We could learn a lot from other organ--from other groups who form a melting pot in this country, whether they're Jewish, Irish, Catholic, Italians, you name it. You know, each of those immigrant groups, you know, or cultural groups you know, they respect each other and they make others respect their traditions and cultures and, and what's important to them here in America. Now we, we came here in chains and those other groups didn't but at the same time, we still got to respect ourselves and make others respect our traditions and what's important to us regardless of whether they were taken from us when we came here, whether we got them back or we're still learning about ourselves 200-plus years later and so, The Family is a big part of that and you know it gets bigger and bigger 'cause more people become a part of it and that's really what it's about. Speaker 1: About how, how many members are in it? Speaker 2: Oh, I couldn't tell you, hundreds though, a couple hundred, I think, it could be more, don't quote me on that. Speaker 1: And you meet like periodically? Speaker 2: Yeah, once a year. Speaker 1: Once a year. Speaker 2: Um-hum, at gatherings and then there are, there's an on-going mentor piece that she's doing now and I'm a mentor to various, you know, business, political leaders from around the country that I do and others do, so Dr. Skinner's got a lot going on. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I guess the group addresses ongoing need that people have. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: That we interview at least, and say we need to be more--we need more unity and more--. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Need more cohesion around the issues that directly affect us as a people. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Story_ID: 116228 Speaker 1: Okay, so now we always ask this question: When you look at everything that you've done to this point what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: What, say that again now? Speaker 1: What, today, would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Um-hum, well, you know, I think my legacy is evolving, isn't it? And you know I'd hate for, for to say what the legacy should be now. You know, it's hard for me to say what my legacy is or what I want it to be. I think others kind of define it based on your work, you know. You know, I'd like for people to say that I was a strong, charismatic leader and lawyer, that I was a wonderful father who loved his children, all of them, and provided for them, and I helped somebody. I helped people, you know, that I did pro bono, great pro bono work. I gave back to the community. I live life at 100 percent, 1,000 percent, and that I tried to be excellent every day and that I was excellent at my profession. I respected it, I respected people and that I left this place better than I found it, whatever those spaces are, wherever, whatever space I'm in, you know. I wanna leave it a better place and I had a big hand in doing that, you know. My contributions, I want them to be remembered. I don't want anybody to forget them, you know. It's never guaranteed but they can forget me, but I don't ever want them to forget my contributions to organizations, to this firm, to my family, to outside organizations, to my clients. You know, I think that would be, I mean while I'm gone, I guess it doesn't matter, but I think that if I were alive to see it, it'd be painful to me if, if all that was, was forgotten, 'cause it would that, you know, I didn't have any impact or, you know, I didn't do much while I was here and you know to me that's kind of sinful, that would be sinful not them forgetting, but the fact that I perhaps didn't do enough. Story_ID: 116229 Speaker 1: Okay, okay now you mentioned--I know your father, I, I can't remember if your--are your parents still alive, are they both still alive? Speaker 2: My mom [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden] passed away about eighteen years ago, my dad [Raymond Allen Bolden] is still with us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Were they--they basically had a chance to see you achieve success and-- (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yep, I think so, yep, absolutely. Speaker 1: And. Speaker 2: I think they're proud of me. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) we all want our parents to be proud of us, I certainly do and walking in my father's footsteps, man, I, I certainly hope so 'cause I've worked so hard to be successful, and to have an impact and to live, live a righteous life and I stand on his shoulders. I certainly hope he is proud of me. Speaker 1: All right, and you say he lives in Chicago [Illinois] now? Speaker 2: In Joliet, Illinois. Speaker 1: Oh, in Joliet, he's still in Joliet. Speaker 2: Yep, he's still in Joliet, he's a retired judge there. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right. Now is there anything we ask, else we have not asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't think so I think we covered everything, we covered a lot. I don't know if it's everything, but we covered a lot. Story_ID: 116230 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy and sometimes the way the answer is given it's almost indistinguishable, but, sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, I just gave that to you (laughter). All of that, that I gave to you in the prior answer, you know. I couldn't say it better, you know, that I helped somebody, that I left this place better than it was, I lived 1,000 percent. That I helped organizations and my clients, you know. The organizations, I helped the [D.C.] Chamber [of Commerce] and the [Recreation] Wish List Committee and, you know, the district, and the community as a whole and this country, you know, have an impact that, that my mission for Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], my parents [Ina Kathleen Whitfield Bolden and Raymond Allen Bolden] and from the good Lord to leave this place a better place, you know, that I, I did that. That I had impact, that I improved the quality of life for others, you know, and that, you know, I'd like for people to say it was a job well done. I wish the Lord would say that, too, when I see Him (laughter) or if, when I get to the gate (laughter). Story_ID: 116231 Speaker 1: Do you have advice for young men and women who, who want to become lawyers today? Speaker 2: Know what you wanna, research and know what you wanna do in practicing law. Do you wanna be a litigator and why? Do you want to be a health care lawyer and why? Do you wanna be a finance lawyer and why? and then take a rifle-shot approach to becoming that lawyer--that type of lawyer. Do your research, find your mentors, make them mentor you, okay, and do what you wanna do, all right? If you wanna be a litigator don't go to the government and do IP [intellectual property] patent work for three or four years. That's a job, have a career, and stay focused and disciplined, okay, and think about excellence every day along the way and when you get there think about excellence, 'cause if you don't think about excellence every day somebody else is and you don't wanna do anything that people won't say or that you can't say to yourself, "I did that in an excellent manner." I think about it every day, it drives my life. I'm not saying I'm excellent every day, I'm saying I think about it, it's my goal and I drive toward excellence every day in every aspect of my life whether, whether I get coaching, whether it's mentorship, whatever the case, who helps me go along the one thing I ask everyone is about making me a more excellent person, and then, lastly, our young people need to be thinking about adding value to their lives or to the lives of others, to their clients or to their organizations that they work for or with. They ought to talk about it in the interviews, they ought to talk about it when they are in their positions, okay, and they ought to know what value they're adding for, they ought to get paid for that value, okay, and then they have to be leaders. You're trained for leadership through your academic experience, hopefully at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], if not wherever, but be leaders in your space. If you do those things, success will be yours, and, and if you do those things that you have passion for, the money will come all right, but you've gotta be, you've gotta add value, you gotta be excellent, you gotta lead and all of that equals success...