 Story_ID: 2810 Speaker 1: My name is Regina Harris Baiocchi and I am forty-three years old. My birthday is July 16, 1956, so I'll be forty-four in a month or so. Speaker 2: You have to spell your full name. Speaker 1: Oh! Regina, R-E-G-I-N-A. Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S. Baiocchi, B, as in boy, A-I-O-C, as in cat, C, as in Charlie, H-I. No hyphen between Harris and Baiocchi. Story_ID: 2811 Speaker 1: Now, so I want to ask you what your favorite--your. I think I start out with favorite food. Speaker 2: My favorite food, singular. My favorite food, plural, is a better question that I can answer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Pizza and popcorn (laughs). I love popcorn, air-popped. My favorite is Garrett's [popcorn shop] cashew caramel corn. I really like that--mixed with cheese. You can tell I'm--I'm an eater, right? And I love pizza. Most of the pizza I like is pizza without sauce because I'm allergic to tomatoes, but I can still do that--but any kind of pizza. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So you have pesto pizza? Speaker 2: No, because I don't really like olive oil, but anyway I can still do the regular stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. What is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is changing as I get older. I think I'm still a summer person, but spring and fall are running a real tight second. Probably leaning more towards spring, but--. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color to wear is black. It depends, if you asked me tomorrow, it might be blue or yellow. Despite the fact that I wore blue all through grammar school and said, "When I grow up I'm never going to wear anything blue." But I still love it, especially indigo. Speaker 1: And favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Mexico, hands down. Cabo San Lucas, Baja Penisula. I'm there. Oh God (laughs)! Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying (pauses). Probably something that my mother [Lanzie Moselle Harris] told me as a kid. "Be the best that you can be at what you're doing." And of course we always said, "Well, what if I want to be a prostitute?" And she said, "Well, just make sure that your customers are happy and, you know, that you do a good job." "What if I want to be a janitor?" "Well make sure your floor is shinier than anyone else's, that, you know, it's spic and span, and not slippery that someone will fall and get hurt." So just be the best that you can be at what you--at what you do--wherever--whatever your station in life. Story_ID: 2812 Speaker 1: We like starting at a person's childhood. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A lot of the people that we're interviewing--you're probably the second one that's in their forties. A lot of the people that we've interviewed to date are, you know, much older, but we'd like to--you know, I'd like to have you start out by just describing--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Excuse me. Speaker 1: You know, telling us about, you know, your family, mother, father, sisters, brothers--that type of thing. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I come from a fairly large family. I have seven siblings. My mother and father both migrated to Chicago [Illinois]. My mother was born and raised in Tennessee. My father was born and raised in Kentucky on the Tennessee/Kentucky border. And I'm the middle daughter. There are five daughters--five surviving daughters--and three surviving sons [Marilyn Diann Allen, Angela Ubasonye, Vicky Harris, Cynthia Jeschke, Elgie Harris, Jr., James Harris, and Raheem Abdullah Shabazz]. We're a very closely knit family. At this point, everyone is living at home in Chicago except for my niece who's in Atlanta [Georgia] going to school. Grew up on the South Side of Chicago. Started out in Chicago public schools and then went to parochial schools. Graduated from Chicago public high school. Speaker 1: Okay. You're going too fast. Speaker 2: Too fast? Okay. Speaker 1: When you--let's go back to your mother [Lanzie Moselle Harris]. If you would just sort of describe what--you know, give me her name, you know, and what--you know, describe what she was like and, you know, where--you said from Tennessee? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. My mother--. Speaker 1: Okay. Where in Tennessee? And what you know about her background. Speaker 2: Sure. My mother's name is Lanzie Moselle Harris. And her maiden name is Lanzie Moselle Belmont, and I love that name because it sounds so exotic and so French and, to my knowledge, she doesn't have any French roots. Perhaps her mother just liked those names. Our mother is the oldest of thirteen children so she has this spirit where I think she's always been a mother. And I think that she feels, even on some intuitive level, definitely, overtly, that that's her calling in life, to mother. She's mothered all of her siblings. There are very few people in the neighborhood that I grew up who did not call my mother 'Mother,' as we did. She's an extremely organized person, as you might imagine. You would have to be to have--to bear ten children and to raise eight of them. We were always on a schedule. I knew at any given moment in time what I was going to be doing and how I was going to do it, and she was just a very organized person. My father is Elgie Harris, Sr. and he was born in Hickman, Kentucky. He comes from a relatively small family. He has four--there are four brothers in the family, all told. And his mother is probably the person that I can say I'm more closely related to in terms of my, quote unquote, career, because she was an organist in the Church of God in Christ. Her last job was at Roberts Temple here in Chicago. Before she came to Chicago she lived in South Bend, Indiana and she worked as an organist at Notre Dame [University]. My parents went to high school together and they actually got married in the state of Mississippi because they could get married at age eighteen whereas in the states of Kentucky and Tennessee, they could not. So they've been together for a long time. As a matter of fact, they will celebrate their fiftieth wedding anniversary next year. The one thing that I think I'm most grateful to my parents for is that we never had a babysitter. At any given time in my life when I think about--from my earliest memories through high school, I was always with one of my parents. Now growing up, that was really a pain because you can't do anything because they're always watching you and, you know, they're always there guiding you, or whatever they--whatever parents do. But when I look back, I'm really happy for that because I have grand-nieces and nephews who--you know, whose parents put them in day-care two weeks after they were born, and that's really kind of a tragedy because that means someone else is raising your children. But my father has a philosophy and he still tries to pass it on to my younger siblings: that it was his responsibility to raise his children. And if he did not have the time or the interest, then he would not have done that. So he and my mother were working together. She started out working as a homemaker basically, and then she went back to school while we were in school and got her teaching certificate and worked at Chicago public schools. My father is a visual artist who worked as a truck driver and so we always had art and music in the home. My mother listened to a radio station, WSDM [FM, Chicago] and they had all female disc jockeys. And I remember they had a jingle, "The station with the jazz--the girls and all that jazz". And so I remember listening to people like Yvonne Daniels and some of the earlier disc jockeys. And so I got a nice dose of jazz on a commercial radio station. And then my father was a big jazz buff so he had all the Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington. So there was always music in the house. My mother sang in church choirs and she immediately involved us. I can remember singing in the church choir from the time I was four years old. And I'm sure she did it because she needed time, down time away from us. So while we were in the choir rehearsal or whatever, you know, she was able to maybe take care of one of the smaller ones or take a bubble bath or whatever it is that she needed to do. So that's really kind of like a portrait of my parents and my family. Story_ID: 2813 Speaker 1: Share some of your childhood memories. I mean, you've talked about the influences of your parents, but I'd like to--you know, share--you to share some of your memories of your childhood. Speaker 2: Well, I think one of the earliest memories I have as a child is being in Rutherford, Tennessee, in the town where my mother was born. And there was a house at the end of a road that seemed--the road was kind of curved. And looking back, I thought it was a haunted house because it was sitting up on a hill and had these huge gables, and the hill was kind of like this dusty, I don't know, ungrassed area, if you can describe something that way. That's one of the memories I have. And walking down the road--because I don't remember it being paved--with one of my mother's sisters. My mother is the oldest person in her family, so some of her siblings are only a few years older than my older sisters and I, and so we would go places with them. I think my youngest aunt is probably about--maybe six years older than I am. So if I were maybe three or four--you know, she was about ten years old. Just walking down the road holding her hand and picking up pecans on the ground, eating them. We also used to eat this beautiful red clay that had a really like sweet taste. And I just--I remember that--it was almost like a ritual thing, you know, eat--my mother and father, of course, didn't like me doing that. But even till this day, I have to--when I see some beautiful red clay, the first thing I want to do is taste it. And so that's one of my earliest memories. Just walking--. Speaker 1: And you said you were about three--you said you were--. Speaker 2: Probably about three or four. Story_ID: 2814 Speaker 1: And, what other--what other--can you share a couple others? Speaker 2: Well I remember when I wrote my first poem. I remember at a very--(pauses). Is it [the microphone] picking up the el [elevated train]? Sorry about that. I remember writing my first poem. I must have been about maybe six or seven years old. And I read it to my mother and it was typical young child--a child's poem, rhyming. It was about food because she was cooking in the kitchen and I had finished my homework and so she said, "Well, just sit at the table and, you know, maybe write something." So I said, "Oh, okay." So I wrote a poem about the food that she was cooking and I read it to her and, as bad as it was, she made me feel like it was just the greatest thing in the world. Oh, you know, she said, "If you really like doing that, you know, you can be a poet if you want to be." So I just started reciting some poetry to her, the things that she had been reading to me. I was very lucky because the grammar school that I went to was--the grammar school that I graduated from [St. Elizabeth's School, Chicago, Illinois] was run by the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament. And their mission in the United States is to educate African Americans and Native Americans. And so when I went to grammar school, the history classes that we had, the poetry classes that we had were taught from an African American and Native American point of view. So I was very lucky that we learned Langston Hughes [poet]. We were introduced to people like Zora Neale Hurston [anthropologist and author]. So I was very lucky. The Harlem Renaissance was something that I just assumed everyone learned in grammar school because that's when we learned it. Story_ID: 2815 Speaker 1: Now, how did your parents end up coming to Chicago [Illinois]? That's what I don't--. You know, I know they married at eighteen. That was something that--. Speaker 2: I think it was a plan that my father had. The town that he was born and raised in, Hickman, Kentucky, is so small that they don't even have a high school and that's how he and my mother met, because he went to high school in Tennessee. So they were probably at the tail end of that Great Migration from the South to the North--people looking for work, looking for opportunities. Because when I look at the town now--Rutherford, Tennessee--I don't even know what the economy is based on. I know that they had a factory. (Pauses) Okay. Sorry about that. Speaker 1: "When I look at the town--." Speaker 2: When I look at the town that my mother was raised in, Rutherford, Tennessee, I'm not sure what the economy is based on. I know they have a factory there that's owned by a subsidiary of Sears, and so they probably make some Sears [retail and mail order company] products or assemble something for Sears. But not really anything where large numbers of people would be attracted to the town or would stay there. So I'm sure he came--my father came to Chicago looking for work. And so it was a great opportunity for both of them. Speaker 1: Do they ever--did they ever talk about their--you know, the whole thing of coming from small towns and coming north? Did they ever talk about, you know, what it was like to grow up where they grew up? I mean, I know you went back there, you know, in one of your earliest memories you recounted (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, it was very interesting, when Walter Payton [professional football player] died earlier this year [2000. date of death, November 1, 1999]--my mother was a big Walter Payton fan--and so she was very saddened by the entire experience. And she was talking about how he was young enough to have been her son and, you know, he could have easily been in the line of siblings--my siblings. And he went to Mississippi, I think, Mississippi Valley State or Mississippi--the University of Mississippi--probably Mississippi Valley State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]. And just hearing the word 'Mississippi' on TV when she was watching a documentary about his life--she was very emotional and she was crying and she was saying, you know, "Mississippi was a very painful place to be." And so she started talking about how she and my father would often go there because, you know, they had less stringent laws than in the state of Tennessee and Kentucky, and I guess the drinking age was lower. She talked about how in Tennessee, in her hometown, how they often were not made welcome to the school buses. So she had to walk so many miles to school every day (pauses). Okay, where should I start? Speaker 1: Going to school. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. So because she was discriminated against for being a black person and growing up in Tennessee and not given the same opportunities that white students had to take a school bus, that meant that she had to get up five, six o'clock in the morning to be at classes at nine. And when her high school teacher--one of her high school teachers--realized what she was doing, he would drive from another town in Tennessee and pick her up during inclement weather. And she was saying that she never forgot him. His name was Mr. Chris. She was saying, "He made sure that I got to school. He knew how important my education was to me. He knew that I wanted to finish high school and that I wanted to go to college," and he took an interest in her. And so that's my mother's memory of Tennessee. I think my father remembers it more from a laborer's perspective because as a young man, he was expected to work. And he talked about how, you know, he too had some problems with racial discrimination, and I think it was that type of atmosphere that inspired them to leave because, you know, you always hear these great stories about the North and how it's so much better. And he said that he knew he did not want to spend the rest of his life driving someone else's tractor, or working on a farm, or doing, you know, just manual labor where he would be cut off from any possibility of being an artist. So--. Story_ID: 2816 Speaker 1: Now, where did his [father, Elgie Harris, Sr.] love of the arts come from? Do you know? I mean you said that he was, you know, a lover of jazz. Do you know where that came from? Speaker 2: Well, my father plays harmonica and blue grass fiddle, not to be confused with violin at all because even though they look the same and probably the same instrument could be used by two different artists, they're very, very different instruments. And I think it was one of those things where just as a pastime, you know, you always have people in the community who are musicians, and he was just attracted to that and sort of picked up the harmonica. As a musician, he's self-taught. He also would hang around some of the older men who did whittling and that's how he got involved in the Arts because, of course, whittling is a more, quote unquote, folk version of sculpting (pause). He was involved as a whittler, and then from whittling he started studying art in high school. When he came to Chicago [Illinois] he also took classes in art, art history, et cetera. Story_ID: 2817 Speaker 1: Do they talk much about their parents, or did you--you know, and that whole--. You know, what sort of helped shape them? That's what I'm trying to say. Speaker 2: My mother's [Lanzie Moselle Harris] mother is still alive. She's eighty-five years old and her name is Dannie Belmont. My mother's father is Walter Belmont, Jr.. My grandparents were separated when my youngest aunt was probably a year or two old. So here's my grandmother with these thirteen children. Well, I guess, eleven of them had survived at that point. And she married my grandfather when she was thirteen and when he was seventeen. And so she was probably pregnant from the time she got married until the time he left her. Because most of my aunts and uncles are a year or two apart. And he basically had to leave town because he was accused of killing a white woman. Now, as you know, a black man being accused of killing a white woman in the fifties [1950s] in Tennessee is guilty until proven innocent. And he was not going to wait around to get a fair trial and so he left and was basically living underground under aliases, assumed names. And he was afraid to contact my grandmother because, of course, the authorities were, you know, watching her daily. If she had gotten--well I'm sure they didn't have a phone, but if she had gotten a letter or if there was a phone call at the neighborhood store, then they would have been able to trace him. And so my grandmother led a very difficult life. On occasion she would get a letter, you know, from various states--generally a place where he had not been, but maybe if he had a friend in Wyoming, he'd say, "Could you mail--? Here's fifty bucks. Could you mail this to my wife in Tennessee?" Or she might get a letter from Utah or Vermont or some place. And so that was how he kept contact with her. But at the same time, they never really--he never wrote a letter or made a phone call or anything. Sometimes when people would come to Indianapolis [Indiana]--which is where he spent most of his time--he would get a word back to her, but by then, she was so bitter about the entire experience because, regardless of what happened, her husband abandoned her with eleven children. So my grandmother worked as a cook. And she doesn't really talk very much about her past if you ask her questions. But if you just let her talk--then you can get a lot of information. And I understand that it was, being in Tennessee, was a very painful experience for her. Story_ID: 2818 Speaker 1: My grandmother [Dannie Belmont] told me a story about what happened after she delivered one of my youngest aunts. And this was in November--right around Thanksgiving. And so she had my aunt like in the mid-morning, and the white woman that she cooked for said, "You've got to get up and get dinner ready because I have guests coming. People will be here. You know, they're going to start arriving at noon." And so she sent word back that, you know, well, Dannie--my grandmother--had just delivered her baby. And she says, "Well, I don't care. I mean I have got all these people coming over for dinner." So my grandmother was saying how she was standing in this woman's kitchen with blood dripping down her legs, and all this woman could say is, "How can you get the floor dirty when you know I have company. You know, you should have done something. You know, you should, you know, you should have heavier tampons or whatever." I mean, you know, 'cause she had a white floor and that was all that she was concerned about. And she said that story really sort of typified that era for her. She can remember, you know, being in labor while she was picking cotton or working in a strawberry patch--and she just went into squatting position--just kind of to relieve the pain. And so one of the overseers or whatever, the foreman, walked by and said, "Why are you resting? You know you're going to get behind in your work." And she was saying, "Well, I think I'm in labor." And they said, "Well, thinking you're in labor and not--and being in labor is two different things. Either you are or you aren't." So I mean, that's the kind of stories that I've heard from her. Story_ID: 2819 Speaker 1: Very similar stories from my grandfather [Walter Belmont, Jr.]. Probably a lot more brutal because he was male, and oppressive white people felt that he could take more and so they dished more out to him. But my grandfather was a very, very strong and very defiant person, and he often told us how he went to school. It was a one-room schoolhouse and he left when he was about twelve years old because the teacher hit him, and he knew that he could not retaliate and so he left. Because he said, "I'm not going to be beat on in school. You know, it's bad enough the knocks and blows that I'll have to take in my everyday life." So despite the fact that he did not have a grammar school education, he was a very proud man and, you know, took care of himself and was able to, on occasion, send money back to his family. So that was my mother's parents. We actually did not meet my grandfather until I was eleven years old, and I remember that so vividly because I wrote a poem called 'Grandfather's Epitaph' because he became a really important person in my life. I was with him every Saturday morning. He would come to--this was after he had moved from Indianapolis [Indiana] to Chicago [Illinois] and I guess things had cooled off and I don't know, maybe they weren't looking for him anymore, or they found the one person who murdered this white woman [he had been a fugitive for years after learning he was a suspect]. But (pauses)--. I hope this doesn't put you behind schedule. But I had a very close relationship with my grandfather--every Saturday--he lived either across the street or around the corner from us when he finally moved to Chicago, and every morning we would come downtown to Chicago and he would pay on his accounts. Like he had a clothing account with a clothing store called Leo Rose and he had a furniture account. And so he would pay on his accounts and we would either go out for lunch or dinner, and he would take me to Garrett's Popcorn and buy me popcorn. So he has a really, really special place in my heart. And I would work for him to earn money, ironing his clothes mostly because my mother and her family, they iron everything, everything, underwear, linens. And that's why to this day, I'm happy to say that I do not iron. I hate it, hate it, hate it (makes gesture of celebration)! But, you know, it was a way to earn money as a child when I was too young to--to be hired for a job outside the home. But I got to know my grandfather because I spent a lot of time with him and he took me everywhere. I would go into taverns with him and some of the characters that I met there are now characters in my poetry and my short stories. And my mother didn't know all this at the time. You know, she knew that I was with him, but she never knew that I went to like taverns and bars and stuff like that. But he would always, you know, make sure that I was where he could watch me. And I loved it, because I love blues music and that was basically what they played in those places. The only thing I didn't like about it was the smell. But--and I just--I went everywhere, all over the city. And he did not own a car so we took public transportation everywhere. And as a result, people in my family call me and say, "How do you get to so and so, or how far hundred north is this or that?" Because I really know the city well, and can move around on the trains and buses in my sleep. Story_ID: 2820 Speaker 1: My father's parents [Cecil Harris and Evalena Jordan Harris] were--spent most of their time in Kentucky and some time in South Bend, Indiana when they finally--I think they came here [Chicago, Illinois] shortly after my grandfather retired and I don't even know what he did for a living. I'll have to ask my father that 'cause it's actually quite embarrassing. But anyway, my grandmother, my paternal grandmother, was primarily a homemaker and a seamstress so she took in sewing and made things for people--mostly quilts, choir robes, nurse's outfits for the women in the church. And she was very dedicated to her church (pauses). My paternal grandmother was very dedicated to her church. She was a member of the Church of God in Christ [Inc.]. Her name is Evalena Jordan Harris. She often said that she was related to Michael Jordan [professional basketball player]. I doubt that very seriously. But anyway, she liked to say that. And she was married to my grandfather, Cecil Harris. And my grandfather said he remembered his great-grandparents--and he remembered that one of them was part Cherokee Indian. And he could not remember the African tribe that his grandfather belonged to, but he knew that his grandfather had some memories of Africa. He was very proud of that. And on the other side of his family were Jewish slave owners, and he was not very proud of that, of course. And my paternal grandmother comes from a family of very, very tall and dark skinned people. And so it's always fascinating when I think about my grandparents. My mother's father, Walter Belmont, Jr., was very, very proud to say that he was Geechee. And the Ogeechees in America generally settled around the Carolinas, Georgia, and later moved inland to places like Tennessee. And so it's made for some sources of fascination with me and I had this theory that I have Ghanaian roots because they're more closely related to some of the Ogeechees. And so I'm exploring that now through Ghanaian language, most specifically Twi because that sounds very much how my grandmother speaks. Story_ID: 2821 Speaker 1: My mother's [Lanzie Moselle Harris] mother [Dannie Belmont] [mother's grandmother], who remembers being a slave. Very, very sad. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah, very sad. Speaker 2: Well, what about that? Speaker 1: Well, my maternal great-grandmother, she would be, her name was Beulah Howard. My grandmother's maiden name--Dannie Belmont's maiden name--was Dannie Howard. And her mother was Beulah. Her father was--oh my God, Papa, what was his name? It'll come to me, it'll come to me. I know one of my uncles is named after him, so it's his--Papa's name would be Dan Howard. And I don't know--and I'll have to ask my grandmother about this, or my father [Elgie Harris, Sr.], he'd probably know--I have pictures of Mama and Papa and I do know that Mama looks very, very West African. My [great?] grandfather was what my grandmother describes as a black dago. Now when I think of the word 'dago,' it's kind of a derogatory term for Italians. But I don't think it meant the same thing in the black community. And when I look at Papa, he has a very distinctive look. My guess is it's probably some mixture of Native American, Italian and African. But I'm not really very sure. But I just remember Papa having this very--I don't know--very low tone speaking voice and sort of a patois that I heard a lot when I was in Jamaica. And I know that there are a lot of Ghanaians and a lot of speakers of Twi who moved to Jamaica, and so I was kind of surprised when I was able to understand Jamaican patois. But I told my husband, "They sound just like Gran," and they definitely sounded like Papa. And you have to listen to them (pauses)--you have to listen closely to the patois because--because the intonation is so low and because a lot of the speaking is sort of--it's like a mixture of grunts and simultaneous diaphragmatic and nasal, if you can imagine that. But almost like from way, way back in your throat and very low thing. I can't even imitate it, but when I'm around them, I can understand it. And rapid-fire speed, I mean, very, very fast. I have nieces who when you put them in a room with my grandmother and my mother it's like (trilling). You know, and I can't even--I don't know. Just a lot of it is slurred. And if you slow it down, it doesn't really sound the same. I mean I can tell you in slow motion how it sounds, but, you know, if I were around them and I could speak, you would get the gist of it. But one of my favorite things with my grandmother is--it sounds like "summer tea." And you know, basically, she's asking you, "Do you want something to eat?" But, you know, you come in and you've been out maybe on a date and she would say, "Did you have summer tea?" You know, my friends are around and saying, "Why is she asking you about 'summer tea' in the winter time?" And I said, "No, she asked me 'Did I have something to eat?'" It's that kind of thing, "summer tea" from a growl. I can't even do it and maybe that's why my voice is so naturally low. I just thought about that, you know, but when you hear them and when you talk to them, you can hear, you can definitely hear that it's something that's going on underneath. Story_ID: 2822 Speaker 1: You had also started to mention your great-grandmother and how she was a slave and how it was very sad? Speaker 2: My great-grandmother [Beulah Howard], 'Mama Beulah,' was how we referred to her. I remember as a child, probably maybe three or four years old, because I'm sure she died in the'60s [1960s] before I was ten. I remember her telling us a story of how as a young girl she was a slave and how she was locked in a closet at night and that's where she slept. And it was like a broom closet really. I mean something that was probably, maybe a foot and a half deep and not much wider than that. So she was expected to sleep in a standing position just as punishment and as a way to make her stronger. And she remembers not understanding the language of the people who owned her (pauses). And because my great-grandmother did not understand the language of the slave owners who, quote unquote, owned her, she was beaten a lot. You know, like "Didn't you hear me. I gave you a command and you didn't respond." She was given some advice by one of the other older black women who worked there. And the woman basically said, "You have to learn how to live in your mind. You have to learn how to live in your heart because this is, quote unquote, their world. This is not really your world. And if you want to survive, you'll go inside yourself and live there." And so my great-grandmother, despite the fact that she did not marry Papa [Dan Howard] until she was forty years old, willed herself barren. She said, "Regardless of how many times I'm raped, I will not bear a white child," and that's some pretty strong stuff. I mean I have nieces and nephews that I see now and I said, "I know where they got that from," because anyone who can--whose body is violated and who's brutalized and sexually raped and harassed like she is, and there was nothing wrong with her. I mean when she married her husband, she was able to conceive. She had three daughters. But she said, "I will not get pregnant by someone who is going to violate my body." And that is a great inspiration to me because if someone can withstand that, I think I can get through whatever it is I'm--that's going to face me. [Beulah Howard must have lived to over 110 if she was of childbearing age during slavery and lived until the 1960s. It may also be possible that some of the events she passed down happened after she was technically "free" but was still living in a condition of virtual slavery.] Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story just now. Speaker 2: It's mind boggling. Can you imagine that? I just--but the good thing about that story is that--and my mother [Lanzie Moselle Belmont Harris], the ultimate diplomat, she says that anyone who has that kind of strength is also strong enough not to stoop to being a racist. You know, because the fear of living in a situation like that is that you become the thing or the person that you hate. And that's the thing that my mother was saying my great-grandmother did not want to do. She wanted to make sure that each white person she met was someone that she looked at from the moment she met them and not like here is another white person or here's potential harm. I don't know too many people who can do that. Not too many people in my family. You know, as a matter of fact, younger people often say, "There's no way I could have survived that. I would have killed someone. And I would have--I would have died and I would have taken someone with me," is the attitude now. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Story_ID: 2823 Speaker 1: Okay, now. What about your siblings? What was that--you know--what--who are they, you know? I mean, I don't want--you have a lot. You have--there are six of you, right? Speaker 2: (Laughs) Eight. Speaker 1: Eight. You know, but what are their names, you know? What was--what were they like? How do you fit in? Speaker 2: Okay. I'll give you the forty-five version of my siblings. I have eight [seven] siblings. My mother's first-born was Ricky and he died of polio when he was very young. And basically the same old story, a young black child denied health care in Tennessee. You know, "He'll be fine," they said. "He probably will have trouble walking, but, you know, he'll be fine." And my mother tells the story of her memory of Ricky as having him die in her arms and, you know, just sitting there with him. And so when my sister was born--her name is Marilyn, Marilyn Diann, and she hates that name because she says 'Marilyn' sounds like a white person's name. She's going to kill me for telling you that. But anyway, so people whom she likes--people in her family--call her 'Diann,' and Marilyn is her official name. And she's now Marilyn Allen, married to Manuel Allen, who is a pastry chef, and she's in managed health care. So she's the person who translates all the madness in the family. I'm probably the worst person in the world to talk to about insurance and medical situation in the U.S. because I have such disdain for those people and for the whole industry. I just--. But anyway, so she keeps my feet on the ground where insurance is concerned. And she's my best friend. She was my maid of honor at my wedding. She's the person that I remember giving me the earliest picture [photograph] of myself, because I was very surprised when I saw a picture of myself. And I said, "Who is that?" She said, "That's you." I said, "That's not me. She said, "That is you. Who do you think it is?" I said, "That's not me. I'm darker. I'm dark skin. I'm very dark skin." She said, "No. No, you're not." She took me over to the mirror. And she was standing on one side of me and my sister, who is darker skin than I am, was standing on the other side. And she said, "Why would you say that--? I mean what is it about this picture that makes you think it's not you?" And I said, "Well, I saw other pictures of me and I was like really, really black." And she said, "That's the way white people want black people to look. That's not your real color." Well, you know, four year old, if you see a photograph--I didn't realize that black people came in shades until she told me that. Then I started looking at people and I noticed that my father was lighter skin than my mother, and that my mother, you know, was darker skin than so and so. Anyway, but Diann has always been so cool about stuff like that. She's one of those people who just was born intelligent and she's just the ultimate diplomat. Anything you want to know she could sort it out for you and still has a human side. I mean, you know, she cries on my shoulder also. Story_ID: 2824 Speaker 1: Then my second sister is Angie. Angie is probably the most traveled in the family. She's literally lived all over the world, she's a gypsy. She feels most comfortable in Africa. Hates the States [the United States of America]--hates the whole political climate of the United States--and she's home now. And she says the only reason she's able to stomach America is because of the Black Church; she's a member of Apostolic Church. And she's lived in Sierra Leone, she's lived in Ghana, she's lived in Nigeria, London [England]. Very--I don't know, I don't want to say unsettled, but I don't think her soul has found rest yet. And I don't think this is the first lifetime that she's looked for it. And then I fit in and my full name is Regina Theresa Ann Harris Baiocchi, if you include my confirmation name and all of the other names that I got. And my family calls me 'Ginann' because we have a tradition in my family that we call people by a fusion of their first and second names. So Regina Ann is 'Ginann,' and so that's the name that I use when I write poetry. And so like, for instance, my sister, Angela Gail, her name is 'Angail,' which if you fuse all of these different languages and dialects together, that's how it sounds. Then my sister who is younger than I am is Vicky Lynn, Vicky Lynn Harris. She was going to make a career in the [United States] Navy and she changed her mind. And then she thought she had a vocation to be a nun, which we thought was a little strange, but, you know, different strokes for different folks. She was a drummer, percussionist. And I should say each of us learned to play an instrument. It was one of those ways that my mother kept us busy. My two older sisters [Marilyn Diann Allen and Angela Ubasonye] learned to play guitar, and I also took guitar lessons. Vicky and I, though, were in the same bands in high school. She was in the percussion section and I was in the brass section, playing trumpet/French horn. And then my youngest sister, Cynthia, Cynthia Marie--. She's now Cynthia Jeschke. She's married, she has two children, Lauren and Ricky. And I forgot to say, Angie, my sister who's two years older than I, also has two children, Angelique and Lanzie. Lanzie was named after my mother, but we call her 'Pebbles.' So my youngest sister, Cynthia, and Cynthia's--her childhood was probably the most interesting of all of ours because this was the clumsiest child on the globe. I mean she was constantly being hurt and at any given time you saw her there was a bandage on her chin, or a scrape on her face, or, you know, a sprained arm or whatever (pauses). And we discovered that one of the reasons that my younger sister, Cyn, Cynthia--one of the reasons Cyn was sustaining so many injuries is because she was running with her eyes closed. And this is a girl who was born in 1960. And we asked her, "Why do you run with your eyes closed?" She said, "Because that's the way people on TV run. So she thought when you were running that your eyes should be closed. So you got this little kid who's always running and she was running into things. I mean, I can't tell you--we've been in situations where she ran into the wall, knocked herself out cold, we had to go to the hospital. And you have to picture my family. Whenever anything happened--like when she went to the hospital, which was quite often--we all went because my father did not believe in babysitters. So at any given moment, we had to, you know, pick up and move. So I just think that is the funniest thing. When we finally settled that, she was like, "Man! You know, when you're running, you can see this and that?" "Yeah, that's the idea." But we tease her about it now. And her nickname, even though we called her Cyn, her nickname was 'Banju.' I don't know where we got that from. It kind of sounds like 'banjo.' But anyway, when I write it, like in a story or something, I spell it B-A-N-J-U. Sort of like banjo. But, anyway. Story_ID: 2825 Speaker 1: My three surviving brothers are all younger. My mother had a brother [son] between myself and Angela [sister, Angela Ubasonye] and he died. I don't know that he lived long enough for her to name him. My oldest brother is Elgie Harris, Jr., and he was working in marketing, was tired of the rat race, quit his job and went to school and became a chef, and that's what he's doing now. And he has a son--he's a single parent raising his son, Hameed, who is nine, going on nine thousand. He's--you owe it to yourself to meet Hameed Louis Harris before you die. He's just one of those people. When he met some of my mother's relatives from Tennessee, he asked them, "Where did you get that funny accent? I'm trying to place that accent." So for a nine year old to tell someone he's trying to place an accent, I just got a thrill out of listening to him. And he was at my last concert, and I have this tradition that I always ask my family to stand when they're at the concert. And I let people know that I'm grateful for the experiences that I've had with them and how they influence my music. And Hameed stood up like he was my teacher--like: "This is someone that I mentored and look how far she's gone." And he had this little suit on, and just the way he stood up. And so when I finished, everyone else sat down and he sort of walked up to me and shook my hand. And I can remember at nine years old, there's no way I would do that. As a matter of fact, I made my debut as a musician. I'll have to tell you that story, quite traumatic. But anyway, so that's my oldest brother and his son. My middle brother is James Phillip Harris, and James played guitar and Elgie played drums. He and Vicky [sister, Vicky Harris] played drums, I forgot his instrument. And Cynthia [sister, Cynthia Jeschke] actually played recorder, recorder flute. She didn't like it all, not at all. But, you know, something that we, quote unquote, had to do. My middle brother, James, plays guitar, plays well, and he also has a singing group. He and his wife are the group, Anointed Voices. James has four children and, you know, today, to have four children, that's quite a lot. Four beautiful children. His oldest daughter, Catherine, also plays flute, a great singer, dynamite ear. His son is Cecil Harris, named after my paternal grandfather (pauses). So James has four children: Catherine, Cecil,--they're the 'C' family--Cara, Cara Mia, whom I named. Actually, they call her Cara Lynn, but, you know, they asked me to name her. I said, "'Cara Mia'" and they didn't like the 'Mia' part. So I still call her 'Cara Mia.' And their youngest daughter, Camille, whom I call 'Miss Beulah,' because my mother says she looks like my grandmother looked when she was younger. And her nickname is 'Baby Dee' because she looks exactly like my older sister, Diann. And Baby Dee is also a character. Despite the fact that she's three years old and very articulate, she's very quiet and refuses to talk unless it's absolutely necessary. And such a quiet child that I've written a poem about, you know, whether or not you can hear her if she's talking in the forest. But just character for days, character, character. I mean I haven't seen so many kids with character (pauses). So that's my middle brother, James. And then my youngest brother was born John Francis Harris. And you can tell from his name that he was born in the '60s [1960s], in 1968, named after [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy and I think Robert Kennedy, whose middle name was Francis. But he has since changed his name to Raheem. His name is Raheem Shabazz, and Raheem is married to Manetti, his second wife. His daughter, Kamari is by his first wife, Krishna, and they all live in Chicago [Illinois]. He works for a magazine company. Oh, I forgot, James works with computers. He is like--and I should know this, my husband [Greg Baiocchi] is an electrical engineer, but I don't--anyway, he does something in the computer world. My youngest brother works--he's regional sales manager for a magazine. So he does magazine sales. So those are my siblings. And I just mentioned my husband, Greg. He also has seven siblings, so our holidays are pretty zoo-y. My mother-in-law generally rents a hall for Thanksgiving and we all meet there. And then at Christmas, a small group meets here, and then we rotate for other holidays. Story_ID: 2826 Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back to your, you know, I know that you went to elementary school at this, well--minority-centric school [St. Elizabeth's School, Chicago, Illinois]. You know, where you were taught (unclear)--. Now, did you go there until eighth grade or was it--. Speaker 2: The first school I went to was Burnside Elementary School which is somewhere like in 95th [Street] and [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr] King Drive [Chicago, Illinois]. Our house was torn down to build Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois]. So when we moved from 95th [Street] and [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] King Drive, we moved to 40th [Street] and Federal [Street], 4037 South Federal [Chicago, Illinois], which is now the Robert Taylor--well, it was then too, the Robert Taylor Homes [public housing complex]. And so when I--when I lived at 4037 and went to Hartigan public school [The Hartigan Community Arts Specialty School] for maybe a year or so, and then I transferred to St. Elizabeth School. St. Elizabeth School is the oldest black Catholic parish in Chicago, and that's where I got the Afrocentric curriculum from the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament [for Indians and Colored People] and the [The Society of the] Divine Word Fathers, S.B.S. Sisters and S.V.D. Fathers. And so I graduated from St. Elizabeth School in 1970. Speaker 1: You were talking about--. Speaker 2: Oh, St. Mary Springs Academy (laughs). I'm sorry I got off on that tangent. So I came home and I went to Richards Vocational High School [Ellen H. Richards Career Academy High School], which is an all girls school in Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois]. Hated it, absolutely hated it--another culture shock. Bridgeport, as you know, is the neighborhood where many mayors and aldermen have come--the Daleys [Richard J. Daley and Richard M. Daley], Bilandics [Michael Bilandic], et cetera. Not a very friendly neighborhood for black people to go into. We were given leeway to come to school so people in the neighborhood were pretty cool between seven-thirty and three-thirty. But three-thirty, four o'clock, you were not in Bridgeport. And I'm a walker. My mother walks. We walked everywhere we went. I'm used to walking around. I felt like a prisoner in my own city, and I just didn't like it. A lot of drugs in the school. I remember for the first time seeing I.V. [intravenous] drug users in the bathroom in grammar school. I was fourteen years old. People were shooting up between their toes. I didn't like that at all because it just was not a good environment. Story_ID: 2827 Speaker 1: And from St. Elizabeth's I went to St. Mary's Springs Academy in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin. Then it was a boarding school run by the Sisters of St. Agnes. Hated it, hated it, hated it. Big culture shock. My two sisters went there and that's why, you know, my father thought that I would be happy there 'cause they were very happy there. I hated it. I had all mini skirts in my luggage. We had to wear black skirts and white blouses. And this nun wrapped this heavy, itchy piece of wool, that had to be about three inches thick, around the bottom of my skirt on the first day of school and said that I could not wear a mini skirt because I lived in the convent. I was an aspirant (makes quotation mark gesture with hands), which--an aspirant is the first stage for being a nun. Well, I had no intentions of being a nun. And I was just--I was--I hated it, hated it, hated it. I loved being at the school when I was at St. Mary Springs Academy, but going home with the nuns and--we had these outrageous chores to do. And my first chore--my task was to mop the three-story building that we lived in. Well, I never mopped at home because my mother [Lanzie Moselle Harris] did not believe that young girls could mop, especially her daughters because we all have hourglass figures that she personally shaped with her hands when our bones were small enough to be molded and shaped (laughs). And so, as a result, you know, that's not a back that supports work. That's a back for being a beautiful young woman. And so to mop, it was like--my brother mopped, my father [Elgie Harris, Sr.] mopped. And so I said, "Well, how am I going to mop this three-story building?" So I saw a case of Pledge sitting around and I just said, "Well, you know, I'm supposed to mop and wax." Well, I couldn't even pick up the mop when it was wet because I didn't weigh a hundred pounds until I was well out of high school or college. And so I took this Pledge [cleaning product] and just sprayed it over this dust mop and I dust mopped the entire building and people were slipping and sliding all over the place. So I was in detention for that. Not to mention that they were out of Pledge. So I was in detention for that. I stayed in detention and unfortunately, cultivated my drug period in my life. My mother's going to kill me for saying that publicly. But anyway, and it was not my first experience with drugs. Unfortunately, I was probably about twelve years old when I first started sniffing glue. And I remember reading--because my father was--is an avid reader. Even now, he's had glaucoma surgery and even at seventy years old he still reads a lot. And so I was reading James Baldwin when I was in grammar school. So I was reading this article about how glue kills brain cells. Well, I was high as a kite when I was reading it, and I thought, "Okay. I better stop that because I won't be able to function. I won't be able to do the things that I like to do." And reading was very important to me because I remember growing up as a child and my mother would say to me, "You have to wear your glasses otherwise you're going to be blind." Well, I would have these nightmares that I would wake up blind and I couldn't read. So I was ferociously reading all the time. I said, "In case I go blind, in case I ever lose my sight, I want to have read everything that I possibly can." But anyway, so the reading thing was very, very important to me (pauses). And I don't remember--. Story_ID: 2828 Speaker 1: So I came home [to Chicago] and I went to Richards Vocational High School [Ellen H. Richards Career Academy High School], which is an all girls school in Bridgeport [white working class neighborhood, Chicago, Illinois]. Hated it, absolutely hated it--another culture shock. Bridgeport, as you know, is the neighborhood where many mayors and aldermen have come--the Daleys [Richard J. Daley and Richard M. Daley], Bilandics [Michael Bilandic], et cetera. Not a very friendly neighborhood for black people to go into. We were given leeway to come to school so people in the neighborhood were pretty cool between seven-thirty and three-thirty. But three-thirty, four o'clock, you were not in Bridgeport. And I'm a walker. My mother walks. We walked everywhere we went. I'm used to walking around. I felt like a prisoner in my own city, and I just didn't like it. A lot of drugs in the school. I remember for the first time seeing I.V. [intravenous] drug users in the bathroom in grammar school. I was fourteen years old. People were shooting up between their toes. I didn't like that at all because it just was not a good environment.So here I was, a straight 'A' student. I was actually number two in my grammar school class when I graduated and I was ditching school. I would ditch Richards and go to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Vocational Career Academyl, Chicago, Illinois] with one of my older sisters who had come home from St. Mary's [St. Mary's Springs Academy, Fond du Lac, Wisconsin] the year before. And I went to Dunbar because it was a cooler place. Most of the people there were black. Richards was probably about thirty percent black, maybe thirty percent Latino, the other percentage different Eastern European, Western European ethnic groups. But very Eurocentric-based school. Even though they had black teachers, we all knew that we were--we were tolerated there. And I just didn't like that. So coming from this school where, you know, your Africanism and your--is celebrated--coming from St. Elizabeth['s] School [Chicago, Illinois] where, you know, to be black was cool. I mean, I was in the girl's choir. We had this beautiful choir director. Everything we did was perfect and we were just praised to high heaven. And going to those two environments, I didn't like it at all. So my parents [Elgie Harris, Sr. and Lanzie Moselle Belmont Harris] were very upset that I was cutting school, but I'm still passing all the exams. That was another thing, I wasn't challenged at all. So they said, "Well, if you're going to cut school and go to Dunbar, you may as well transfer there." Story_ID: 2829 Speaker 1: And--very nurturing environment [at Paul Laurence Dunbar Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I studied music with Dr. Willie Naylor, who's now at Dunbar's rival, CVS, Chicago Vocational School [Chicago, Illinois]. And just being in a school named after Paul Laurence Dunbar, it was--the teachers there made it important to know who Dunbar was, why he was a significant poet, and where he fit into the whole scheme of things. And I spent most of my time in the music school. I was very excited about being there. Played trumpet and French horn, wrote for jazz band, wrote for string orchestra, concert band. I would write something on Monday, on Wednesday I would hear it. And the teachers made sure that students played it the way they played [Ludwig van] Beethoven or [Johann Sebastian] Bach or some of the other marching band stuff we did. I was in marching band. Dr. Naylor graduated from Grambling University [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], so we were like a little miniature Grambling, you know, dancing. I was twirling my trumpet like a baton (imitates twirling), when we had measures out, all these choreographed moves. Just, I mean, perfect place for an artist to be. And I studied counterpoint which is almost unheard of in a public school anywhere or in high school, period. Studied counterpoint with a man, Nathaniel Green. Had two wonderful--actually, three wonderful trumpet teachers. Dr. Naylor played trumpet. There was another guy, Lionel Borderlone who really influenced me to go to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]. And another man, Stanley Pollock, who was one of the original members of the group Chicago. So even though I had these wonderful trumpet teachers, I knew very early in the game that I was not going to be a performer, even though I had studied guitar in grammar school. Story_ID: 2830 Speaker 1: When I made my debut I was ten years old at the Tiki Room on 24th Street between Michigan [Avenue] and Indiana [Avenue] [Chicago, Illinois], around the corner from the [Chicago] 'Defender,' [black Chicago newspaper]. And I walked out on stage. It was for my mother's sodality. They were having a tea, the Ladies Sodality of St. Elizabeth's Church. Walked out on stage. I saw these ladies and I thought, "Oh, my God! What if I make a mistake? You know, they're going to hear it," not realizing they wouldn't know. Walked out, I sat down and, you know, as a musician, you're taught all these disciplines, tuned up my guitar. The first chord I played, I broke my G string, and I just thought, "Oh, this is horrible." I just started crying, I wanted to jump into the floor. Well, these ladies started clapping and said, "Oh, no, baby, no, no, no. You're not going to cry. You have to play. We're paying you and you have to play" (laughs). And I looked at my mother and she looked away. And I just felt so alone because she just, she looked away. You know, she said, "No I can't help you. You're on stage. You're performing." And I think I was paid like twenty, twenty-five dollars. That's a lot of money in 1966, but that was how much they had budgeted for the job. And they kept clapping until I played. And I had played a piece that I wrote--this horrible piece about ringing bells. But I was really infatuated with dominant seventh chords when I was in grammar school (laughs). So everything I wrote had these dominant seventh chords in it. Story_ID: 2831 Speaker 1: I was my mother's [Lanzie Moselle Harris] favorite and she worked so hard to hide it from the other kids because she just said, "I don't think it's a healthy thing to do." Now, because she's seventy years old, she says that she can say whatever she wants to. She says it more openly, but then, you know, she tried to make sure that my other siblings--. Speaker 2: Why do you think you were her favorite? Speaker 1: Probably because I look like her. Probably because I was, I don't know, a very melancholy child, very introspective. A lot of times people think because you're thinking that you're sad or that there's something wrong. I did cry a lot. Some of the photographs that you see of me as a child, I'm crying because I hated taking photographs. And it was like every Sunday. My father [Elgie Harris, Sr.], who was an artist, he would take these photographs and then he would snap them and then he'd go in the kitchen and develop them. So if something didn't work out, we had to go back and take them again. So it's like--I always felt like I was sitting some place posing, and I didn't like that at all. Not to mention that sometimes he would say, "Okay, pick up the phone." Well, our phone was cut off most of the time because we couldn't afford it. I'm thinking to myself, "Why am I holding this stupid phone," you know, or other props that he had. So I don't know. And they always say, "Oh, God!" You know, "She's crying again." You know. They still tease--my sisters [Marilyn Diann Allen, Angela Ubasonye, Vicky Harris, and Cynthia Jeschke] tease me about it now. And I just remember enjoying crying. And even now, you know, when I feel really sad, I feel saddest when I can't cry about something that I feel sad about. I don't know, it sounds a little weird. But anyway, I think my mother probably hired me for that job at the Tiki Room [Chicago, Illinois] because of that. And knowing her, she probably--she knew that I wanted to be a writer and a composer because I would tell her that all the time. And she probably felt that it would help me in some way, and that's why she put me in the choir when I was four years old. And my other sisters were also choir members, and they enjoyed it. They were very good at it. But it wasn't really the same--didn't have really the same appeal. But I don't know. I can remember, you know, at a very early--I remember when I went to get my glasses--excuse me--for the first time. I was four years old and the optometrist insulted me. He said, "I'm going to show you some letters and you tell me if the 'E' is going this way, this way, this way, or this way (gestures the directions of the various E's)." Well, I was reading when I was four years old, so to have an optometrist say is the 'E' going this way, this way, this way, or that way, I found it very insulting. And so I didn't say anything to him because it would have been disrespectful, but I just turned to my mother and said, "Would you please tell him that I can read." And well, of course, he heard her--I mean, he heard me say that to her. So he said, "Oh!" And he was white and so she told me later that he just assumed because I was black and because I was young that I couldn't read. And so he took out the chart and, you know, I read the chart and everything. And so I guess he didn't really want to accept that I could read, so he handed me the newspaper and asked me to read it. And so I read it for him and I love to read so I didn't think anything of it. But later, she told me that he was probably just testing me because he didn't think I could read. But I think when you're four years old and you can read, and if you tell someone you're going to be a writer and a composer, they believe you. So that's probably why they hired me for that job. Story_ID: 2832 Speaker 1: Now, so you graduate from Laurence--I mean, from Dunbar High School [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. From Paul Laurence Dunbar [Vocational] High School. Speaker 1: And then what is your decision at that point? I mean are you thinking automatically college? Are you--? Speaker 2: (Pauses) Most of the music students in high school, like, I guess other students, are pretty much on a track. Dunbar is a college--they call themselves a vocational high school, but it really was a college prep program. Because there is very little that you can do with a high school diploma in instrumental music; whereas the kids who are in brick masonry can get a job as an apprentice to a brick mason or the foundry students can get an apprenticeship, there were very few students who were talented enough to start gigging after high school. I was definitely not one of them. Now, what I did do in high school was work as a copyist because I used to spend hours and hours copying music, practicing penmanship--part of the whole Catholic upbringing. So I knew from a junior in high school, I was applying for all these music programs and I was offered scholarships to schools, mostly historically black schools in the South. And thank God, my father suggested junior year that I go to one of the schools. I went to Grambling University [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] because they offered me the most money, and I was there for two weeks in the summer, probably '72 [1972], '73 [1973]. Absolutely hated it. Culture shock. Too many mosquitoes. I'm one of those people that is bitten by mosquitoes year round. They find me, even in Chicago. No one else is getting mosquito bites, I'm getting them. Well to be in Louisiana in August, they were just literally all over me. But the thing I absolutely hated about Grambling University is that I picked up the phone to order a pizza and they would not come to the college because we were black. That just--that knocked that school out for me. I know it sounds shallow, but that was an indication to me that I would not be happy there. And I had gone through an experience at St. Mary's [St. Mary's Springs High School, Fond du Lac, Wisconsin] where I knew that I could not function in a small town because I'm a walker and I like to do things. I mean, I probably don't do it now as much as I used to as a kid, but I would walk along the railroad tracks, you know. And I like to be by myself. You can't do that in a place where people are not happy with your skin color. At least I didn't feel comfortable doing it. And I knew that I wanted to be a composer, and the program at Grambling University is really for music ed. [education] and for people who are going to be band directors and that was not the track that I wanted to be on. Story_ID: 2833 Speaker 1: I had this teacher [at Paul Laurence Dunbar Vocational High School, Chicago] whom I mentioned earlier, Lionel Borderlone, who was--Borderline, excuse me. No, Borderlone, L-O-N-E, who was a trumpet player. He went to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] and he had a double major in trumpet performance and theory, and I was very, very interested in music theory. And Stanley Pollock [another Dunbar teacher] went to DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois]. He's the guy who played with Chicago [musical group]. And so I was looking at one of those two schools because I was very interested in those teachers and I decided on Roosevelt University because it really--it's more an urban school. I mean it's a vertical campus (motions upward) . It's not like Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] where everything is spread out and it's surrounded by countryside. And I was very, very happy at Roosevelt University in terms of the curriculum. I didn't like being the only black person and the only female in my department. After I had been there a year or so there were other young ladies who were in the program, all of whom were white, and then there was a black woman who was a few years ahead of me. And it's interesting because she and I met up again later when I went to DePaul to get a second masters degree. But the thing that I liked the most about Roosevelt was the theory program. It was very thorough and just everything that I wanted in the program. The thing I disliked about it is that they had no respect for popular music, no respect for jazz, no respect for gospel music. And I remember when I took my music in--the idea was that you studied composition privately with a teacher. So you're in a room basically one hour a week for four or five years with this person one on one. You bring a piece of music in that you've written. He or she critiques it. They tell you where you may have gone wrong, what you can do to enhance. You discuss the music, et cetera, et cetera. I put my music on the piano, and my teacher was an excellent pianist, he looked at it, picked it up, whirled it on the floor and said, "This is pop shit. We do not teach this at Roosevelt University." Well, I was absolutely crushed and so I went home and I mentioned it to my father [Elgie Harris, Sr.] and he said, "Reg, what you're going to have to do is learn how to write music for yourself and how to write music for your grade." There is a term in vocal music where you sing in your head voice or your throat voice, or your chest voice. And so I learned to write head music. Because I was great at theory, I followed all the rules. So when I had an assignment to do, I would write head music, hand it in and wrote my real music and left it at home. And it wasn't until I was away from Roosevelt University and doing an interview with 'The [Chicago] Reader' that I realized how much I disliked that particular experience (pauses). And I think that particular experience sort of typified my composition life at Roosevelt. And I still see my teacher, we've become better friends. He realizes the error of his ways. I'm not saying anything now that I haven't said to him as an adult. And I think he's probably sorry, but, you know, he was taught in the European tradition and that was the tradition that he was teaching. He is Sicilian by birth, spent all of his summers in Sicily [Italy] and, you know, Sicilians--. My husband is Italian. He's from northern Italy. And if you know the relationship between northern Italians and Sicilians--very similar to northerners and southerners in America. He wasn't really considered high on the Italian totem pole so he did not want to really align himself with his only black student. And he probably didn't expect me to finish the program. I remember experiencing the first trauma in my life when I flunked aural skills. That was the first time I ever flunked a class in my life and it was just very traumatic. It was part of the theory program. And I went to my teacher and I asked him, "Why did you fail me?" And he said, "Because you can do better. You came from a school with a much better program." And at the time, I could not hear what has grown to become my favorite interval, a tri-tone. And he said, "Unless you learn to live with that tri-tone, you're never going to be a musician. And, you know, you have to be able to pick it out of thin air. Someone should be able to awaken you from a deep sleep and ask you to sing a tri-tone from any note and you should be able to do that. And until you do that, I'm going to continue to flunk you." And that was probably the best thing that happened to me at Roosevelt University until I experienced my next trauma, which was flunking (laughs) abnormal psychology. And I had a double major in psychology and music. But it made me stronger. Story_ID: 2834 Speaker 1: I was very lucky that I could go home and talk to my parents [Elgie Harris, Sr. and Lanzie Moselle Harris]. And despite the fact that they had never gone through the music program, they just gave me some very practical advice. My father's always been like that. My sister is like he is. Just great horse sense. I mean, you could ask them about anything and something that you would not think they wouldn't know anything about. And my college life was--all of the good things were there because of my father. 'Cause even when I was in high school, I came home and I said, "My teacher asked me to bring these to you, these are applications for student loans." He said, "You take those back to the teacher and you tell the teacher that you're not borrowing any money to go to school. You are a straight 'A' student and you want the scholarship application." And his--my father's motto in life is: "If I don't have the money, I can't afford it." He got his first credit card when he was sixty-five years old, and he bought his first car on credit when he was sixty-eight years old because he just said, "I'm not going to have ten people standing with their hands out on payday because I have too many mouths to feed." So as a result, I've never borrowed any money to go to school. Never had any student loans. I haven't been as lucky with my credit cards as he is. But just that whole work ethic and the idea of owing people and not owing people, and being able to go through life without borrowing money. That has been a great help to me, and I see some of my friends are not that lucky. Story_ID: 2835 Speaker 1: Now, so you graduate from Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: What is the decision at that point? Where are you at in your life now? Speaker 2: I graduate--. Speaker 1: And how does someone make a living at that point? Speaker 2: That's another thing. You know, I remember when I told my parents I was going to get a music degree and they said, "Oh, okay", knowing that, you know, I'd probably starve. But anyway, after I went through the undergrad program, I knew that I could not work in the field of psychology. So even though I had this double major, I didn't make it through the internship because they wanted to send me to a place where the people were actually crazy. And I thought that they were going to send me like to an outpatient where the people were just like disturbed, you know, like we are (laughs). And I was like, "These people are like--I mean, you know, they're like schizophrenic and they're like really crazy, and I can't do this because I'm too sensitive, and when I leave here I'm going to be crazy. I cannot do this." So I said, "Okay, you know. Why did I spend all this time getting this degree?" (Pauses) Anyway, so the music program, again, it's designed so that you go on to get a masters and a Ph.D. So I started the masters program at Roosevelt and I realized that I was very unhappy with my teacher. Tried to switch private composition teachers and politically that's just not something you can do. None of the other teachers wanted to touch me because I was Robert Lombardo's student. I finally talked to Don Malone who was another teacher there. And he would teach me during the summers because that was safe. But he said, "In the fall, you have to go back to Bob." And I didn't like that. I didn't like the fact that they were all afraid to--you know, academicians are like that. They respect each other's turf. And finally, there was a woman there, the only woman in the theater department, Lucia Santini, a beautiful person. And she was brave enough to let me study with her. Well, we were such close friends that my lesson was almost like--it was more like a--I don't know, sister gab session or something. And I think we were too close. We were too close as friends for me to really get anything done. I wasn't that productive. And so I was looking for work because I married, by the way, freshman year in college--the summer between freshman and sophomore year in college. And so my husband [Greg Baiocchi] was working and the idea was that I would get my degree and then when I had gotten my degree he would go back to school. Story_ID: 2836 Speaker 1: And so I needed a job, and my father [Elgie Harris, Sr.] is responsible for most of the work that I've gotten. He said, "You know, St. Bride's [St. Bride's Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] is looking for a math teacher." And I said, "Dad, my degree is in psychology and music. They're not going to hire me." He said, "But you're great in math. You've always been good in math. You're good at it. Just apply for the job." I said, "They're not going to hire me. I don't even have an education degree." And he said, "But you've been--." And I had been working over the summers. As a matter of fact, teaching at Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Chicago, Illinois], teaching music. That was actually my first teaching job. So I applied for this job at St. Bride's, and you have to understand the dynamics. When you apply for a job anywhere in the world, teaching, and it's April 15th, they'll hire anybody to teach anything because, you know, it's the eleventh hour (pauses). And I'm convinced that St. Bride's hired me because school was opening in a week and they needed a math teacher. And the bad thing about me and teaching is that when I was at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Chicago, Illinois]--I think I started teaching when I was twenty, I looked like I was twelve--. And the first day of class, this kid rode a bike into the school, and I was looking for the room. I said, "Is this--I don't know - music theory, whatever." They said, "Yeah, but the teacher ain't here." I said, "Yes, she is here." They said, "Oh, where is she?" I said, "I'm the teacher." "Oh yeah. Right." Anyway, so they just kept doing what they were doing. You know, this one was riding a bike, this one was playing football, these girls were smoking, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. So I went and got the chairman of the department. He came in, introduced me to the kids, and it was like, "Oh, okay. Whatever." So I had to really work hard at looking old and looking professorial. And to add injury to insult, one of my younger sisters was still at Dunbar High School, and she would--she did not respect me as a teacher. She looked at me as an older sister. She was selling the exams to students. She was Xeroxing my lesson plans and so people had assignments done, you know, before I presented the lesson. So that was kind of tough. And so I said to my mother, "She's either going to have to leave the department or I'm going to start the paperwork for her to be expelled or transferred." So you know that was a lot of tension in the family and a lot of tension at home. Story_ID: 2837 Speaker 1: But anyway, so when I went to St. Bride's [St Bride's Catholic School], I thought, "They're not going to hire me." They hired me and I found out later why they hired me. They neglected to tell me that the vast majority of my students were Haitian and that many of them got to school the day--got to America, the day before school started. Most of them did not speak English at all. And so when I went to take attendance, I noticed that there were a lot of French names. And when I called, I would call their names and they answered. Because they said "here," I made the great assumption that they spoke English (pauses). And I realized that the reason they said "here" or "present" is because that's what the other students were saying. And so, you know, they probably--I'm sure they knew enough to say "here" or "present." So I started talking and people would just--like these blank stares or they were looking at me like, "What is she talking about?" And so finally one of the students who was bilingual said-- "Oh, Mrs. Baiocchi--" I said something to one of the young ladies whose name was Noello, and I said, "Noello, would you please open the window?" And, you know, of course, she just kind of stared at me. She says, "Oh, Mrs. Baiocchi, Noello doesn't speak English." I said, "Oh! Well, what language does she speak?" "Oh, she speaks French." So she turned in French and said, "Noello, Mrs. Baiocchi would like for you to open the window." And so she said, "Oh, and by the way, Stenio doesn't speak French--English. Regine doesn't speak--." And she goes down the list. This is like over half of the roster. And these kids did not speak English. And I'm their homeroom teacher and I'm supposed to teach them math and science. And I just thought, "Okay--so I'm teaching seventh grade math and science and these kids--" And it was basically bilingual. So I go to the office and I say to the principal, "These kids don't speak English." "Oh, yeah. I was going to tell you that," she said, "I meant to tell you that." I said, "But how am I going to teach them?" She said, "Well, have you ever studied French?" And I said, "Well, I've studied ballet. I mean I know how to tell them, you know, how to dance, but that's not studying French." So anyway, I had an English-French dictionary and I had a translator in every class that I taught. And at first, I was very angry about it because I said, "These students are not learning because they're basically my teacher aide." You know and so I just tried to identify the student that I felt was most academically advanced that they could afford to assist me. And it actually worked out because I discovered that children actually learn more from each other than they do from the teacher. But it was an experience, you know. And my French was so horrible. I mean, it was just so bad. My French diction was terrible. But the kids loved me because I really tried to speak French. I really tried to make sure that I was very sensitive to their plight. And that was a great experience for me because the Haitian culture is a very strict culture. The parents expected nothing but the best from them. So consequently, students who came here, who arrived in America in April, graduated number one in the class because they just worked so hard and, you know, it was expected of them. Story_ID: 2838 Speaker 1: Now, what--so this is--so you worked as a teacher. Now, when did you end up going to DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois]? What was that decision? Speaker 2: I went to DePaul-- Speaker 1: And what year are we talking--? I mean how long did you-- Speaker 2: I graduated from Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] in 1979. I taught from 1979 to 1986 (pauses). From 1979 to 1986, I taught basically--excuse me--junior high and high--excuse me--high school math, math from grades seven through twelve. Taught science for a year. Got out of that very quickly. It's one of my weakest subjects, especially to teach. So after teaching, until '86 [1986], I started working at Telaction which is an interactive television, cable television, shopping channel. And I worked there for a few years and then from there I started working in public relations. And when I was Director of Public Relations at Catholic Theological Union [Chicago, Illinois], a graduate school of ministry in Hyde Park, I was working on an opera. And the way this started was I had set an essay by Zora Neale Hurston 'How it Feels to be Colored Me,' an essay that she wrote in 1928. I had set it to music. And it was a commission, American Women Composers, a group that I belonged to, commissioned me to write this for either Black History Month or Women's History Month. And every time people would hear these songs, they would say, "Oh, what opera is that from?" I said, "Oh, no. They're not from an opera. These are just two songs that I set." And people kept asking me and I thought, "I hate opera music. Why do people keep asking me what opera are these from?" Anyway, so I decided that maybe I should write an opera then, you know. Everyone thinks that this is--and so I got this great idea that one of the reasons that I hated opera was because I didn't understand it. And not so much because I didn't understand Italian because I have studied Italian and, you know, read it very well. And can speak it a little. But it was that I didn't understand the diction because a lot of times music--unfortunately, vocal music, operatic music-- it's all about beautiful singing. As a matter of fact, Italian operas, 'bel canto,' which means beautiful sound or beautiful singing--. So you can sound as beautiful as you want to, it doesn't matter if people don't understand it. "They should have read the libretto before they came anyway," is the attitude (pauses). And so I was arrogant enough to feel that I could--that my opera would be different. You know, people would understand it and I'll make sure that it's about real people and not about, you know, some people who live some obscure life. And so I started writing this opera. Story_ID: 2839 Speaker 1: When I was teaching I had had summer projects where I would--. For instance, one summer I said, "I'm going to read everything by Langston Hughes." I didn't make it, but I at least put a dent in it. And the next summer I said, "I'm going to read everything by Zora Neale Hurston, or I'm going to read everything by W.E.B. DuBois." Most of the time it was black writers, African writers, and a lot of the stuff was stuff that I had read as a child. Because I discovered James Baldwin when I was about seven years old. My father was reading 'Giovanni's Room,' and I thought, "Oh, this is a pretty thin book. I can read that." So I asked him if I could read it and he said, "Oh, sure." And I started reading it and I remember thinking that my father might be gay because why is he reading this book about these gay people and he told me it was just such a great book. And I didn't--you know, then I don't think they were saying 'gay,' they probably said he was a 'sissy' or something. And I remember wanting to ask him was he gay. And then I said, "Oh, no." So I asked Diann [eldest sister, Marilyn Diann Allen] and she said, "Are you crazy? He's not gay." And they thought it was really funny. And then later on, I saw his reaction to someone in our family who was gay and I realized that he was not gay. But to a seven year old, first of all, reading James Baldwin's 'Giovanni's Room,' I mean, I can't even imagine how I got through it. Story_ID: 2840 Speaker 1: When I was working in public relations, I started working on the opera. I had read just about everything I could get my hands on by Zora Neale Hurston and Langston Hughes. And I discovered that not only were they contemporaries, but they had the same patron, patroness. And her name was Scarlett Van Der Veer--Charlotte Van Der Veer Quick Mason [Charlotte Osgood Mason], a woman with old money, old, old money. And they lived with her for a time in her Park Avenue apartment. 499 Park Avenue exactly was the address in Manhattan [New York City]. And because I knew so much about their lives and the lives that they had in common with Charlotte Mason, I thought that this would make a good opera. Hughes and Hurston did collaborate and they wrote a piece called 'Mule Bone,' which unfortunately, became the bone of contention (makes quotation mark hand gesture). And that was the joke among critics that this opera, or this play that they wrote, 'Mule Bone,' became a bone of contention. Because what happened was Mrs. Mason was a very--she was a very lonely woman. She supported a lot of blacks in the arts during the Harlem Renaissance. And because she was barren, she requested, or sort of demanded, that her artists call her 'Godmother.' So behind her back, Zora would call her 'Guard Mother.' And so all of these things figure prominently in my opera. And my opera is about Zora and Langston writing a play and so there's a play within a play and there's a ballet. And it was when I sat down to write that opera that I realized how all of the totally unrelated things in my life were totally related. You know, why did I have to--why do I have this degree in psychology? Because there's a psychological story or undercurrent that runs in the opera. And, you know, I have enough information, theoretical information and practical information, from that internship that I did not do, that I still had to write about. And all of this, I can see where just about everything that I've ever done in my life appeared in that opera in more ways than any other musical piece that I've written. An opera has that sort of magic because there's lyrics involved. There's vocal music. This piece is conceived for chamber orchestra. It's never been fully mounted. I've had concert versions and so that means that we've never done it with a full string orchestra. I've done it with piano, cello and some percussion instruments just bare bones because of funding. And I was very lucky. I had a preview of the opera at Harold Washington Library [Chicago, Illinois]. And there was a woman there, Ronnie Hartfield, whom you may know, who was at the time the Executive Director of Education at the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois]. And they were doing--. Arnold Rampersad had just written his two volumes about Langston Hughes and so they were going to have him come from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] to the Art Institute to have him do this Langston Hughes presentation. And so I went to talk to Ronnie about this opera, and she had heard about it and she loved it, and the Art Institute presented it, which, I mean, I'm very blessed. That's almost unheard of for a composer to have two performances of an opera in his or her lifetime in the twentieth century. But through the generosity of Ronnie Hartfield [of the Art Institute, Chicago, Illinois] and Lila Wallace, The Readers Digest Foundation--they basically wrote me a blank check. And believe it or not, I didn't even pay myself. I'm so used to not being paid on these things, it never even dawned on me. I mean I could have easily paid myself as a copyist or whatever. But I went to DePaul University primarily to write that opera because I felt that I would be more disciplined if I did it within the context of an academic environment. So I went back, got another Master's degree, very different degree from the degree at Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois], because the degree at Roosevelt was composition and theory. The degree at DePaul is a Master's--Master of Fine Arts in composition. So I was exclusively concentrating on composition, there was not the theory part that was there. Story_ID: 2841 Speaker 1: [Picks up in the middle of a sentence; Baiocchi is talking about a piece she wrote called 'Against The Odds,' or O.D.S., Operation Desert Storm or Desert Shield] ...performed again in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And then Chicago [Illinois], as Chicago is wont to do, was then interested in me. I mean, "If DePaul--if Detroit [Michigan] and L.A. is interested in you, then, you know, we're interested in you." And so a piece was performed at Chicago Symphony Orchestra [Chicago, Illinois], another traumatic experience. Egos bigger than Texas, but anyway. And very patriarchal environment. And Henry Fogel [President, Chicago Symphony Orchestra Association] and I talked about it. I was very honest with him about it, which is probably why I don't have more things, but anyway. I think the orchestral thing--Detroit Symphony Orchestra [Detroit, Michigan] has been very, very kind to me. They have a program and I understand this program is something that they had to do, otherwise they would lose their funding. They had a program where they had to allow blacks in the symphony orchestra; otherwise, Unisys, the computer people [information technology consultants], were going to pull their funding. So as part of these efforts to be a more diverse orchestra, Detroit Symphony Orchestra set up fellowships where performers played in the orchestra a year, two years or whatever. Unisys paid for it. And they also did a competition where they would send out a call for scores to composers. And I responded and I submitted a piece that I had written. It was the summer before it was performed. So my guess is I probably wrote it in '90 [1990], '91 [1991]. And it was performed in '91 [1991]-'92 [1992] at Detroit Symphony Orchestra. And I had--a friend of mine was teaching at a grammar school that I had just left, St. Thomas [the] Apostle in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and he had gotten these names of students who were in--overseas as part of the Operation Desert Storm. And these were students who had left high school and went directly into the [United States] Armed Forces, many of whom were orphans, had no families. And so they were circulating these names and asked people to write to them and I chose a couple of names of young men whom I obviously did not know. And so I had this pen pal thing going back and forth with these young men. And I got a letter from one of them who was seventeen years old. And his--one of his biggest fears was that he would die a virgin. And he was very upset about that because it was very important to him. He was telling me how he had lied to all of his friends and he told them that, you know, he had slept with someone on prom night or whatever and he really hadn't. And I just--you know, at the time I realized that even though I was very young, I was old enough to be this young man's mother. And so I wrote this poetry about war and how it crushes people's dreams and that there is laughter buried in your throat, you know, people die often times not realizing their personality or--or whatever. And so this poetry grew into this orchestral suite, which was three movements. Story_ID: 2842 Speaker 1: And so Detroit Symphony Orchestra [Detroit, Michigan] had this competition and one of the judges was Dorothy Rudd Moore, who is also a composer. She's living in New York, married to a composer and a cellist, Kermit Moore. And she told me that the reason she chose my piece was because of the poetry (pauses). And of course, Dorothy told me afterwards that she chose my piece because of the poetry, but she is a poet herself and she said it just the poetry was very sensitive. And unlike the other music that was chosen, she was saying, "I like the fact that there was this vocal element." One of the rules they had for this competition [Detroit Symphony Orchestra Unisys African-American Composers Forum] is that if you had written for an instrument other than what was standard in the orchestra, that you would have to provide it. So they called me. Marsha Mabrey, who is now a conductor in Seattle [Seattle Philharmonic Orchestra, Seattle, Washington], and she did some of--conducted some of my other piece. At the time, she was Vice President of Education at Detroit Symphony Orchestra. She called me and said, "I need to ask you a couple of questions about your piece." I said, "Oh, okay." She said, "Is there any way that we could substitute the vocal line for an instrumental--for an instrument?" And I said, "Well, I guess so." And if you know anything about music, all the instruments are designed in replication of the voice. So in other words, a violin imitates the soprano voice. It's the highest string instrument. Viola imitates the alto voice. Cello imitates the tenor voice. Bass imitates the bass singing voice. So I said, "Okay. Well, why don't you use--let the flute read the soprano line and let the bassoon read the baritone line." And this is a phone call that I just--I don't even know how she found me. I was in transit and I gave her these instruments off the top of my head, and it was just--the color combinations were beautiful. You know, just the flute playing with the bassoon because there's a muted trumpet and a double bass. And so you got within the context of this huge orchestra where when they're all playing you've got a hundred people playing. And then you have this section where it--all of that is sort of condensed into those four or five instruments. And it was actually very nice and quite effective, and it was the decision that actually put my piece over the top because it was one of those pieces that they were saying, "If we can work out this vocal thing, this piece will be chosen." And so that year they played pieces by three [other] composers (pauses). Three African American composers: myself; Kevin Scott, who is from Brooklyn--excuse me, from the Bronx [New York]; and Michael Abels, who is from Los Angeles [California], and both of whom are fairly well known as composers in the music world. And so I think the Detroit experience, if anything, sort of, quote unquote, launched my career. I think that is just hilarious considering that at any given year--and this is the joke among black musicians and among women musicians--"I make enough money to sustain myself for a fiscal quarter," because people are going to hire you in February because it's Black History Month. And they're going to hire you in March because it's Women's History Month. And they call you in January because they don't really want you to think that it's just about you being black and female. So January, February and March, I'm busy. And a few in April because I couldn't fit them in to those other two months. But last year was good, financially, but career in music is not the same as a career in other fields. You have to do it for the love and not so much for the money. I've been very blessed. My husband [Greg Baiocchi] is an electrical engineer. He's a systems design engineer and he makes a comfortable living for us. And between my teaching and public relations and freelance writing, I do okay. I'm not going to starve, but I couldn't pay my rent if I wanted to, so--. Story_ID: 2843 Speaker 1: Well, tell me then, what--what are your views about your career and what are your hopes for your career as, you know, as a composer and in music. Speaker 2: Well, one of the things--I just wrote a proposal last night. By the way, I'm a night owl, so I was up til like four-thirty this morning. And, you know, my mother was saying, "Well, just get up early enough and put some cucumbers on your eyes so that they're not red." Well, they are red, but anyway (laughs). I wrote a proposal last night and it really sort of outlines the direction that I want to be in, or the direction that I want to take as a--as a composer. I have written two novels, have written a few volumes of poetry and short stories, and none of them have been published. And I guess I could continue to submit it to publishers. I get enough rejection letters as a musician and I--I can't do that right now. I can't do the--the submission thing. I do it sporadically, but not like I really should. And I just kind of got tired of having so many doors closed in my face. I mean, because, you know, as a creator--oh, that sounds so pompous. As a creative person, you know, you lock yourself in a room or in your thoughts and you come out with this, you know, beautiful poetry or this beautiful music, or maybe it's not so beautiful. Anyway, I enjoy it; my family enjoys it. And then the world says, "No. We don't want to publish that. Not only do we not want to publish it, we're not even going to respond. We're not even going to respond," you know. And so I'm not going to wait around for people to do that. Even many--most of the concerts that I've had, I produced them myself. And I, you know, just learned how to overcome my shyness and go and ask people for money. And now--I've been able to--my goal is always to have at least one concert every year in October and ideally, two to four concerts a year. And so far, since 1990, the past decade or so, I've been able to do that, and we've been very lucky. And when I say we, I started an organization, a group I founded, called Susaami, S-U-S-A-A-M-I. And when I first conceived of the group it was Sisters and Brothers United to Support African American Music, Incorporated. And then I realized that I was doing concerts with visual artists (pauses). So because I was doing so many concerts with visual artists, I adapted Susaami, the acronym, to mean Sisters and Brothers United to Support Art and Music, Incorporated. And Susaami has been very lucky. We've gotten support from the City of Chicago [Illinois] Department of Cultural Affairs, from the State of Illinois, the Illinois Arts Council. We've gotten funding from anonymous sources and I never understood that whole thing about people being respected, or their identity being respected until I got into fundraising. My husband [Greg Baiocchi], my family, they've been very supportive. They put their money where their--their mouths are. People lick envelopes. I have a mailing list of several thousand people. So whenever I do something, you know, we, you know, blanket our area with mailings. And because I worked in public relations, you know, I send out press releases. The '[Chicago] Tribune' [newspaper] has been very nice to me. You know, before you leave, I'll take you in my studio and you can see some of the ink that we've gotten. And so I'd like to take this thing to a new level. But at the same time, I'm not very interested in running an organization. I don't want to be an administrator. I want to continue to write music. I want to continue to write novels. But this year I'm going to publish for the first time and I had been resisting it because I--I don't want to do that because it's so difficult and unless you have a distributor and unless you have marketing and all of those things click, it's very difficult. Story_ID: 2844 Speaker 1: Well I want to ask you what--and--these are--we're about, you know, to start wrapping up. But I want to ask you what music means to you, in your life. You know, what--it's been a very, very predominant theme, you know, for your parents and in your life. And I would say music--I'm going to ask about music and then I want to ask about the--the interaction between music and words. Speaker 2: Okay (pauses). Well, I cannot talk about music in my life unless I talk about one person who's very, very important in my life and that's Hale Smith. Hale Smith is a composer who lives in Freeport, Long Island [New York]. And when I talk about composers and people with whom I studied, it's not disrespectful when I say that Hale is my real composition teacher and the other people were test runs. They really did not understand me as a musician. They did not understand me as a composer, as a black person. Hale Smith's career is very much like I want my career to be in the sense that he is a musician who writes jazz, who writes classical music. He's got recordings on Deutsche Grammophon with Kathleen Battle and Jessye Norman, and his stuff has been recorded by Duke Ellington and Count Basie, Betty Carter, my absolute favorite performer in the whole wide world. And so music to me is something that when I think about what is it that I want to do, that if I could not do it, I would not want to live. And that's what music is for me. If I could not be a musician, I wouldn't want to be bothered. And despite the fact that I'm not really a performer, I get up every day and I practice piano. I still have piano lessons with Alan Swain, who is the best jazz pianist in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. And just working with Hale and working with Alan--Hale suffered a stroke, a series of strokes, at the end of January [2000] and has since, a heart attack, and several other things that have basically paralyzed him and paralyzed his career. But I'm very hopeful that he's going to rally back. But I basically study with him on the phone. I fax my materials to him. He calls me back. I was, after, you know, a year of phone bills, I was smart enough to put in an 800 number. But he's the person who really helped me write that opera even though I was studying at DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois] at the time. When I went in, the guy says, "I've never written an opera. I don't know if I can help you." Hello. You've got a Ph.D. in music and you're telling me that you don't know if you can help me? I was writing a piece for harp. He says, "I've never written a piece for harp. I don't know if I can help you." But that's academia. Story_ID: 2845 Speaker 1: This--what about--I want to go back to this question about the interaction between music and words. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because composers don't use--. I mean that's a different thing that you do. They don't usually--. Speaker 2: One of the reasons that I write my own lyrics and one of the reasons--is because I've been a poet since I was very young, six, seven years old. It was encouraged in grammar school. My parents encouraged me to write. I always kept a diary. And I'm sure my mother probably did it because she wanted to know what was going on in our lives. But also, because she knew how important the written word is. But I knew when I did the research for my opera--which the title is 'Gbeldahoven: No One's Child--' [1996] I knew that I would not spend a lot of time setting other people's music. I had the most difficult time gaining permission from the Langston Hughes estate and the Zora Neale Hurston estate. I had to start rewriting on that opera three times because the Hughes estate said, "We'd like to see the libretto before we give you permission." They did not like the libretto. I was very careful in not addressing his sexuality because in the black community it's a greater stigma than people realize if you're homosexual. I'm not making a statement that Langston Hughes is homosexual. And I purposely did not address it in the opera. As a matter of fact, I went out of my way to make sure that he had--that there were some feelings between Hughes and his stenographer, Louise Thompson, despite the fact that she was interested in someone else. But they just didn't like it and they said, "We'll give you permission. You can set whatever it is you want to set, but not in the context of the opera." Well, I didn't tell them, but I had written so much of the music. So I still use those songs, but I can't use them in the context of the opera. So all of that stuff had to be rewritten. And then the Hurston estate. They didn't ask as many questions, but they were in dialogue with someone else who was setting an opera about her life, and so I was sort of in the way of this other person, and so I just said, you know, "Enough of this." I am a good enough writer--. I am so glad I did it and I will never look back. Even now when people call me for commissions and ask me to write vocal music, or I got a call from Indiana State University [Terre Haute, Indiana], they want me to set some music for Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.]. And as part of my contract now, I say, "You have to secure rights," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And once they started the process, they said, "We'll go with your lyrics." And, I mean, I'm--I'm no slouch as a writer, but it's just too much work, too much work. Story_ID: 2846 Speaker 1: Now, I have a few other questions. What--? You know, African Americans have played a very predominant role with American music and yet, you know, you talked about the organization you're forming [SUSAAMI, Sisters and Brothers United to Support Art and Music, Incorporated] and also your difficulty, you know, as an African American musician. And I just wonder--. This is a love of yours. And, you know, how--? What you feel about the frustrations or whatever about this--you know, this reality as we are in the year 2000. Speaker 2: It's just part of the process. You know, on a good day, I accept it as that. On a bad day, I cuss people, I curse them, I say mean things to them--about them (laughs and pauses). But I just--I realize that it's all part of a system that was established long before I got here, will probably survive long after I'm gone. And I try to concentrate on the music and the art at hand. I mean, I just-- I think the thing that helps me is to make sure that I have a date set. Once I have dates set for concerts, I just start working backwards and woe be unto the person who's in my way because I'm not going to pass up any grant money. If someone is kind enough to give us money, we're going to make good on that money. And I just try to do everything in writing and protect myself, protect the musicians and the artists who work with me. And as a result, I enjoy, you know, loyalty from them. Speaker 1: Who do you--who are your idols in the music world? And I would say, you know, both African American and non, but who are your idols? Speaker 2: I don't know that I have any real idols. My favorite musician in the whole world is Betty Carter, and she died last year, September 25th, 26th [1998], the day after my father's birthday. And I was just crushed because I didn't find out about it until a week later because I was writing and when I'm writing I cannot listen to the radio, can't listen to TV. And I was just so hurt by that whole experience. I've met her several times, talked to her. A lot of my vocal music is written for her, because I can't just write. Like if you call me and commission me to write a piece, you would tell me what instruments you want to use. But if you say, "I want something for voice," I'm going to write for Betty Carter or for Whitney Houston or for Barbara Streisand. I can't just write coldly for any person. There is a voice that I have in mind when I'm writing for them. So Betty Carter is my absolute favorite performer, composer, musician because she's a person who really withstood a lot of the hardships that you eluded to. She started out with The Lionel Hampton Band. When she didn't want to play by the rules and become a musician, or a mold of a musician that was carved out for her, she said, "No. I'm not going to do that," and she walked away from the record industry and started her own label, Bet-Car, and it was very, very difficult. But she said, "I want to do my type of music, my way." She was very lucky that Lionel Hampton and Ray Charles and some of the other people that she cut her teeth with allowed her to experiment. And so once she got that taste of musical freedom, she wasn't going to relinquish it. So, as a result, once the record industry saw that she could make it without them, then they went back to her and, you know, supported her. But I think Betty Carter and definitely, definitely Hale Smith. It has not been easy for him. He's worked as a musical publisher and editor, taught at the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut]. But basically we're--we're hustlers, you have to be a hustler. You know, you have to go and, you know, survive those dog fights. But those are the two people. Story_ID: 2847 Speaker 1: Now, just one last question and it's sort of unrelated to (unclear)--but related to your life. What--? How do you--? You're married to someone who is--is non-black and is white. How does that--you know, with your sort of family background--. How do you--? What is this--your view about interracial marriages? Speaker 2: Well, I have known Greg Baiocchi [husband] since I was thirteen years old and he was fifteen, and so--and we will celebrate our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary next July 15 [2000]. Actually, the anniversary is July 12, but we're going to celebrate on the 15. And I've known him longer than I have not. One of the things that people do, for instance, bilingual families tend to speak their mother tongue when they're away from other people and sometimes, rudely, when they're around other people. But I think one of the favorite pastimes of black people in America is talking about white people. And I know that one of the favorite pastimes of white people in America is talking about black people. Of course, you know, we are never supposed to admit that about each other. But sometimes when we have those conversations that white people should only eavesdrop on, we forget that Greg is in the room. We forget that he's white. And so this is the type of relationship that I have with him. We're both pranksters. And I remember when we were married maybe a year or two and I looked at him and said, "I just discovered something." And he said, "What is that?" And I said, "You're white." And so, you know, we have that kind of little joke going. But, I don't know a non-black person that I ever thought I would be as close to as Greg is. My grandfather, my mother's father, Walter Belmont, Jr., disliked white people immensely. Had absolutely no use for them. I mean they ruined his life, basically. And Greg Baiocchi was the only white person that he has ever liked. And I met my grandfather when I was eleven and he was in my life from the time I was eleven until I was seventeen years old, a senior in high school. And we often talked about Greg and about my relationship. And my grandfather said, "This guy really cares for you," because he would visit me in Robert Taylor Homes [public housing project, Chicago, Illinois]. You know, it's not the Robert Taylor Homes that it was now, but, you know, when these young black kids saw him, you know--. In the beginning, he was like the Pied Piper. They would run behind him. He's a very tall man, very handsome, and they would follow him and say, "Oh, where you going?" And so they would escort him up to the house. After about a week or so, some of the other young men that I grew up with said, "Who you coming to see?" And I'm sure there were gang members there who stopped him. As a matter of fact, he had an experience once where he would take a taxi because he lived on the North Side . Sometimes he would stay till one or two o'clock in the morning and my father would say, "Greg, you have to go home." You know, not to mention that, you know, the spies were all asleep because my younger brothers were strategically placed to make sure that he didn't touch me or, "Okay, mother, he's trying to kiss her now." You know, they would do that kind of stuff. And so my father would say, "Okay, Greg. It's time to go home." And so he--if it was very late, he would take a taxi home. Sometimes he would wait for the State Street bus on 40th [Street] and State [Street] to go to Clark, North Clark Street, where he lived. And this one particular night--one, two o'clock in the morning, rather--a cab picked him up and the guy started going south. He said, "Hey! I'm going north." He said, "No. You're going south." They took him to another building in Robert Taylor. I think it was like 4410 [S. State Street]. Took him up to the sixteenth floor, held him over the banister by his ankles and basically said that if he came back into Robert Taylor again that they were going to kill him. Well, as they were holding him over the banister by the ankle, his guardian angel, a seventy year old black woman, came up to these two young men and said, "If you let him go, I'm going to blow your brains out," and she was standing there with a gun. Well, they scuffled to bring him back because he said he could feel that they were--they were losing him. And so the police came and they said, "Son, you can't come back here. We can't help you." You know. And they--they asked him, "Do you really know where you are?" He said, "Yeah. I know where I am." And they said, "You couldn't possibly know." And my grandfather pointed out to me that: "No one is that stupid, so this man obviously cares something about you because he doesn't have to do that." And he--he was very blunt with me and he said "He can get a black woman anywhere, you know." And once he found out that I was not sleeping with this man and he's still coming to visit me, he said, "You might want to check that out. You know, you might want to investigate this guy. He might be worth your while." So that meant a lot to me. But, you know, oftentimes, when people meet us, they don't realize that we have a twenty-eight year history, thirty year history. They make assumptions and they say things. It was painful in the beginning, but now I don't really care too much about it. If I have any regrets at all, it's that I didn't have children younger, when I was younger or earlier in the marriage. But I remember what my father said and I--it was more important to me to--to investigate this music thing. And I keep saying that, you know, this is my year. I mean, I'll be forty-four years old. I cannot imagine being sixty with a teenager, but now I'm just going to kind of go with the flow of things, you know. If it happens, fine. I just say, "Please, please, I don't want it to be too late." I don't think I could--. And I'm not so worried about it physically 'cause I work out four, five times a week and I do yoga and I mediate and the whole nine. But I just hope that I spiritually, psychologically that I have the stamina to do it, and that, you know, that I am a good mother, otherwise, I don't want to do it. Story_ID: 2848 Speaker 1: Mama Beulah [great-grandmother, Beulah Howard] when she was in the kitchen [family home, Rutherford, Tennessee] and the woman to the right is Annie, her middle daughter. Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi's great-grandmother, 'Mama' Beulah Howard (left) and great-aunt Annie Howard, Rutherford, Tennessee, not dated, from the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2849 Speaker 1: Great--great-grandfather--it's actually Mama's [Beulah Howard] husband, Papa, and his name was [Daniel] Dan Howard. And that photograph looks like a photograph taken on their porch [Rutherford, Tennessee]. And he's just sort of sitting on the chair. Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi's great-grandfather, 'Papa' Dan Howard, Rutherford, Tennessee, not dated, from the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2850 Speaker 1: The young lady on the left with the coat over her arm, I'm not sure who that is, but the photograph on the right is another one of Mama Beulah [great-grandmother, Beulah Howard]. And all three of these photographs were taken in Rutherford, Tennessee. Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi's great-grandmother, 'Mama' Beulah Howard (right), with an unidentified woman, Rutherford, Tennessee, not dated, from the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2851 Speaker 1: Grammar school. If you look--I don't know if you're going to stay tight, but if you pull back a little bit, on my right, which is the left side of the photograph, you'll see the St. Elizabeth's School [Chicago, Illinois] emblem that's sewn on my little Catholic school uniform there. And I was probably in fourth grade, eight or nine years old there. Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi's grammar school photograph from St. Elizabeth School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1964-1965. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2852 Speaker 1: '72-73 [1972-1973] and I would have been a sophomore or junior in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Greg [Baiocchi] actually went to Quigley North High School [later Archbishop Quigley Prepatory Seminary] in Chicago [Illinois]. So he's just a year and six months older than I am. So that was taken in front of our family home. We moved from Robert Taylor Homes [public housing project] to 4035 South Wabash [Avenue], and that was our Wabash home. Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi with her future husband, Greg Baiocchi, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1972-1973. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2853 Speaker 1: This would have been taken around 1975, the year that Greg [Baiocchi] and I were--were married--I almost said the year we were born. So like the fall or winter of '75 [1975] when I was wearing my cool afro puff (laughs). Speaker 2: [Photo portrait of Regina Baiocchi by John Tweedle, 1975. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2854 Speaker 1: This is another John Tweedle photograph. John Tweedle was an excellent photographer. Didn't live very long. As I mentioned before, his widow, Diane Tweedle, to my knowledge, is still in Chicago. This was taken around 1975, the first fall that Greg [Baiocchi] and I were married. And he doesn't like this picture 'cause he says he looks like that 'Grizzly Adams' [television program] guy. (laughs) Speaker 2: [Photo portrait of Regina and her husband, Greg Baiocchi by John Tweedle, Chicago, Illinois, 1975. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2855 Speaker 1: It's now some condo [condominium] development on--whatever that street is, I guess it's South Shore [Drive], a half a block east of Hyde Park Boulevard between 53rd [Street] and 54th [Street, Chicago, Illinois]. That's where Sinai Temple was. When I was Director of Public Relations at Catholic Theological Union [Chicago, Illinois], for seven years or so, between--until 1995. We had our graduations at Sinai Temple. And--so I was probably there preparing for graduation and just took a break to play the piano. Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi relaxes by playing the piano at Sinai Temple in Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988-1995. The temple, located on Hyde Park, was torn down to create condominiums, 1988-1995. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2856 Speaker 1: It was at--my youngest brother--Raheem [Abdullah Shabazz] had taken his girlfriend to a cotillion. So we took that--just across the street at Chicago Hilton and Towers Hotel [Chicago, Illinois]. And I've forgotten the year on this one, but it would have been--my brother was born in '68, [1968] so it had to be '85-ish [1985] that we attended that cotillion. Speaker 2: [Regina and her husband, Greg Baiocchi at a cotillion at Chicago Hilton and Towers, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1985. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2857 Speaker 1: And when I see this photograph, it reminds me of what my sister [Marilyn Diann Allen] says. 'Cause I always thought I had an oval face, but of course Diann corrected me: "No, you have a heart-shaped face." Anyway. And my little witch chin which almost comes down to a perfect point. But this was a photograph that was taken when I was teaching at St. Thomas [the] Apostle [Chicago, Illinois]. So that would have been between '82 [1982] and '86 [1986] or '82 [1982] and '84 [1984], I believe. And I was teaching eighth grade math and had an eighth grade homeroom. I actually taught seventh and eighth grade math. Speaker 2: [Photo portrait of Regina Baiocchi as faculty of St. Thomas the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1982-1986. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2858 Speaker 1: Sinai Temple in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] which is now--since been razed to build condos [condominiums]. And probably in preparation for graduation which is generally what we did at Sinai Temple. I was just taking a break from playing the piano. Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi at the piano at Sinai Temple in Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988-1995. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2859 Speaker 1: It tells a story that I'm a musician. She [mother, Lanzie Moselle Harris] likes the fact that I still look like her little girl. Why would a woman who's had ten children be interested in having a little girl. But anyway-- (laughs). So this is one of my publicity shots that I use. And it was taken in the '90s [1990s] by a local [Chicago, Illinois] photographer, Pete Turrin. Very talented man. And so I actually have some actual scores there of music that I've written. And I use this for promotional material and you'll see it in some of the '[Chicago] Tribune' and '[Chicago] Sun-Times' and '[Chicago] Defender' articles and ads. And I also use it for invitations. Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph of Regina Baiocchi by Pete Turrin, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi] Story_ID: 2860 Speaker 1: Okay, this is another publicity shot. This was taken by [Reginald] Reggie Payton and this was in preparation for a piece that--I actually got National Endowment for the Arts to do a piece for African hand drums and orchestra ['African Hands: Concerto for 4 Drums and Orchestra']. And that piece was played in Seattle [Washington] and in Detroit [Michigan]. Detroit Symphony Orchestra has been very, very good to me. Speaker 2: Payton is spelled, P-A--. Speaker 1: Walter--Walter Payton--Reggie Payton--. It's either P-A-Y or P-E-Y. I'll have to look that up. But he's here in town [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Oh, it's P-A-Y, I see it. Speaker 1: He does a lot of the 'N'DIGO' [Chicago-based African American newspaper] covers. He used to do a lot of that stuff. Speaker 2: We just want to make sure (unclear)--. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. But I'm the copyright holder. Speaker 2: Oh, you are. Speaker 1: Yes I--. Yeah, oh yeah (laughs). Speaker 2: Oh good. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph of Regina Baiocchi by Reggie Payton, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1997-1998. This photograph was taken in preparation for the premiere of her piece 'African Hands: Concerto for 4 Drums and Orchestra,' funded by the National Endowment for the Arts. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2861 Speaker 1: Also a Reggie Payton photograph. And again, every photograph you see of me, I am the copyright holder. But anyway--. And I'll be happy to give them credits, because I think that's very important. That's one of the reasons I said their names. The young man who is responsible for the National Endowment Commission is shown here with me--Craig Williams. He is an incredible ethnomusicologist--learned about African music from Katherine Dunham. When he was a little tyke, I mean three, four years old, he was playing hand drums for her dance troupe. And then went on to study music. And he is known as an expert in West African hand drums. And so the piece that--actually he commissioned it and then the National Endowment funded it--is for four African hand drums: ashiko, bata, conga and the djembe. So all of the research that I did is a result of Craig introducing me to these instruments. And it's been a great boost to my career, because most people ignore percussion instruments. They're considered the least important instrument in the orchestra. And I'm sort of carving out a niche for myself as a composer. Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph of Regina Baiocchi with ethnomusicologist, Craig Williams, by Reggie Payton, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1997-1998. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2862 Speaker 1: --Called 'Mama's Will.' And I have my sister, Diann [Marilyn Diann Allen], to thank for that because she said, "Oh, you know, 'Essence' magazine and McDonald's [Corporation] are sponsoring a competition for a short story." I said, "I'm not going to bother with that, I've had enough rejection for one year." And she said, "No, you should send it in," and you know, blah blah blah. I said, "No." Anyway, she sent some stuff, and a couple of my other siblings--. And she kept after me and finally the day before the deadline--I didn't even print a good copy. I grabbed something, didn't bind it, stapled it together, sent it to them, and I placed second nationally. I was--. And the story is written in dialect and I was really shocked that they went for that. But they loved it. Nikki Giovanni--. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: This was in 1988, I believe. Is that right? No, no, no, no, no, no. That was in 1984. One of the tings McDonald's did--'Essence' magazine published the winning stories. McDonald's, the hamburger people, financed everything. And Toni Morrison was chosen to present me with my award. That was the most important thing to me; I didn't care about any of the other stuff. I wanted to meet Toni Morrison. Two weeks beforehand, I get a call from McDonald's saying, "Toni Morrison is not available." I said, "Of course not." That's the kind of luck that I had. But anyway they said, "So we'll make sure we have someone." So I get there and my husband [Greg Baiocchi] mentioned that Nikki Giovanni was in the lobby and guess who she's presenting the award to? So anyway--and it's so weird because in 1995--I know. In 1995, eleven years later, I did a play at Steppenwolf Theater [Chicago, Illinois] where I was the music director, and the name of the play was 'Nikki Giovanni.' And so I got to work with her again in '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: Oh, that's you. I was having--I was like--(laughs)--. Speaker 1: I should say that Nikki is on the right. Speaker 2: Right, right. I was having all kinds of--. Speaker 1: [Regina Baiocchi (right) with poet Nikki Giovanni after winning a writing award sponsored by the McDonald's Corporation and 'Essence' magazine, 1984. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2863 Speaker 1: Well that's a photograph--when I was Director of Public Relations at Catholic Theological Union [Chicago, Illinois], I had three or four photographers working with me. And one of them was a professional photographer in Canada who had moved to the States [the United States]. And he was hell-bent on training me to become a photographer. And I said, "This is my father all over again. I am not interested, that's what I pay you to do," blah, blah, blah. But this is one of those self-portrait things where he's teaching me how to work the timer. And I also went and developed this. And I'm not remotely interested in photographing or developing. I love photographs that other people take and I love photographs that other people develop. (laughs) Speaker 2: [Self-portrait of Regina Baiocchi, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1988-1995. Regina Baiocchi creates this self-portrait under the tutelage of a professional photographer while she was Director of Public Relations at the Catholic Theological Union. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2864 Speaker 1: This is probably the closest I have to a family photograph. If we look at the back row from the far right is my husband, Greg Baiocchi; and to Greg's left is my middle brother, James Phillip Harris; to James's right is my oldest brother---my oldest living brother--Elgie Harris, Jr.; and then the young man on the far left in the last row is Manuel Allen, who is my sister [Marilyn] Diann's [Allen] husband. And then seated on the far left is my older sister, Marilyn Diann [Allen]; in the center is my father, Elgie Harris, Sr.; and on the far right is my mother, Lanzie Moselle Harris. And this was taken in 1999, in September. My husband's [Greg Baiocchi] uncle, his best friend, and his father's baby brother had a massive coronary in his wife's car and died--unfortunately, he died instantly. And this was at his repast. Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi's family gathers for a photograph after the funeral of husband Greg's uncle; (Seated, L. to R.): sister, Marilyn Diann Allen (ne Harris), father, Elgie Harris, Sr., mother, Lanzie Mosell Harris; (Standing, L. to R.): brother, Elgie Harris, Jr., brother-in-law, Manuel Allen, brother, James Phillip Harris, and husband, Greg Baiocchi, 1999. From the collection of Regina Baiocchi.] Story_ID: 2865 Speaker 1: This is my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, Dannie Belmont. Her maiden name was Howard. And this is one of those photographs that was taken with a facade, a backdrop. Taken in Tennessee, I'm sure. The largest town next to Rutherford, Tennessee is Dyer, Tennessee, which you've probably never heard of either. But anyway--. This was taken when my grandmother had had all of her children and she was raising them all alone. And she kind of has a look on her face like she doesn't want to be messed with. And that's the type of person she is. At eighty-five, eighty-six she still chews tobacco, she cusses and she goes to the hospital every month or two. And we think it's because she does it for attention and to make sure that people visit her regularly, which is actually very sad. But anyway, I go in and I smuggle her tobacco and gum because my sister, who's in the medical profession, says that it doesn't make a damn bit of a difference, she's eighty-five year old, if she asks you for tobacco, just give it to her. So I do it. And she talks to me. She actually--she's taught me a lot of things. I mean, things that people thought were important to little girls, you know. How to please my husband, how to cook, how to, you know--. And, you know, we speak freely about that kind of stuff. She says, " I tried to talk to your mother [Lanzie Moselle Harris], but she's just so shy about everything." And my mother will listen, but she won't respond. My mother is a lady, you know, white gloves, lace. And my grandmother is more like I am, sort of, you know--she can be a lady, but she'd rather--rather have fun (laughs). But anyway--. So that's my grandmother. And we call her 'Gran.' Speaker 2: [Regina Baiocchi's maternal grandmother, Dannie Howard Belmont, Rutherford, Tennessee, not dated, from the collection of Regina Baiocchi.]..