 Story_ID: 656674 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Cecelia Ellen Connally [HistoryMaker C. Ellen Connally], C-E-C-E-L-I-A, E-L-L-E-N, C-O-N-N-A-L-L-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth, birth? Speaker 2: One, twenty-six, forty-five [January 26, 1945], Cleveland, Ohio. And it was snowing. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: It was blizzard. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Currently, I am president of the Cuyahoga County Council. I am elected from District 9 of Cuyahoga County [Ohio], and I was elected by my peers to be president of the council. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're a lawyer by training, and-- Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer. That's correct. Speaker 1: --former judge. Speaker 2: I was a judge of the Cleveland Municipal Court for twenty-four years. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 14, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: All right. Downtown in the-- Speaker 2: Downtown Cleveland, Ohio in-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --the offices of Cuyahoga County Council. Story_ID: 656675 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Potato chips (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Orange. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Maybe fall. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I just like to travel, so I don't really have any favorite vacation destination. I'm trying to catch up on presidential grave sites, so that's my--going to be my favorite destinations. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Not that I can think of. Story_ID: 656676 Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [George L. Connally, Jr.] side of the family, but separately, and then we'll put them together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Gwendolyn Marjorie Johnson Connally [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Aiken, South Carolina, on June the 17th, 1913. She was one of seven children. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how far back can you trace her family, and what, what was her family doing? Speaker 2: My mother's mother [Cecelia Ladeveze Johnson] is from a--it was a Ladeveze, L-A-D-E-V-E-Z-E, from the City of Augusta [Georgia], and they are listed in a number of books on black elites in the turn of the century. They were very, very light skinned people who had descended from some--two women from Santo Domingo [Dominican Republic] and some French ance- ancestry, so they were--you had to convince people that they were black. If you know anything about John Hope who was the first black president of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], John Hope was actually married--his two sisters [Georgia Newton Ladeveze and Anna Hope Ladeveze]--his two, his two brother--no, his two sisters married my grandmother's two uncle--brothers [John Ladeveze and Charles Ladeveze], so we're related to them, so they were all these sort of light and bright people in Augusta, and they were of some means. The one, Mary McKinley [ph.] was my grandmother's great aunt, and she had inherited money from her husband or paramour. We're not sure if they were actually married. He was from France, and this was before the--before Emancipation, and he died and he left all of his money to, essentially, a straw--two straw men, or two, you know, friends of his, so that they would give the money to Mary because you could not leave money to someone who was listed as African American. And the case actually went to the Georgia supreme court [Supreme Court of Georgia]. His name was Gaspard Carrie, and so these people actually came from France and contested, but they actually--she prevailed, and she got the money. Speaker 1: His name was Gaspar-- Speaker 2: Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E. Speaker 1: Okay. All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so, yeah, this case [Gaspard Carrie v. Henry H. Cumming, 1858] is actually reported in the Georgia supreme court, and there were very interesting legal issues because it was a crime to give money to a black person, so the people who left the money to--essentially, in trust for her, they took the fifth [Fifth Amendment] as to what they were going to do with the money, but she must have gotten it, because they all lived very well, and my grand- the Ladeveze family was of some means. They had lots of property, and my grandmother grew up very--sort of a rich girl, and we had the--we had very expensive cemetery plots where, you know, we're still burying people. My grandmother and my aunt still go around and tell us, you know, where different houses were. And my grandmother had brothers who actually--I, I think I gave you the information about this lawsuit, Cummings versus Richmond County [sic. Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education, 1899]. It was actually one of the first desegregation cases in the Supreme Court. I, I think I gave you the article or this--quote. You can get the article. They, they sued the city because we're paying taxes, and we should be entitled to, you know, to a school, and the case went to the United States Supreme Court and they lost. Justice Harlan [John Marshall Harlan] actually ruled against them. And he ruled in Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], so he'd ruled against them. And when they--when this happened, they moved to California and passed for white. So we have all these white descendants and people that pass for white. And John Hope's sisters, although he was president of, of Morehouse, his sisters passed for white. Speaker 1: Okay. This is incredible to me that--well, it's not incredible, but it's just--it just speaks to how crazy the whole race relation thing is in--so what in South Carolina, you--it was against the law to inherit. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Somebody couldn't give you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: If you were black, you couldn't inherit money. Speaker 2: Right, right. And so we have relatives over in the white cemetery, and we have relatives in the black cemetery. And some of the--I've tracked down some of the white relatives. Some have been very nice. Some have been like, "Well, no, this is not me." And I got--"I have your baby picture. Like, this is you." And the really--one, one group of people that we--I tracked down, and I finally convinced the woman that, "Yeah, you are like my third cousin or whatever," and I said-- Speaker 1: These are people who, who think they're white. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And so I'm, I'm talking to them. I says, "Well, I'm a judge, and my--you know, this one is a doctor, and this is one is a principal of a school, and, you know, all these really cool things." And, and she worked for Hustler magazine. So I kind of say, who got the--I mean--who got the better side of this? Speaker 1: I see. I see. Well, Hustler made a lot of money. I don't know what she was doing, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. But she was like a secretary for Hustler magazine, so, I'm like, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I think we were a little bit more successful. Story_ID: 656677 Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So my mother's [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] family, my mother had six brothers and, and so--oh this is an interesting story. So my mother's mother [Cecelia Ladeveze Johnson] was kind of an old maid 'cause I think she was like close to thirty, and she wasn't married, and she was taking care of her mother, and, you know, they had all these properties, and she was always around collecting rents and stuff, and my grandfather was born in like 1865 or something. He was a doctor. He graduated from Howard University. He was very, very good friends with Kelly Miller. Do you remember--do you know Kelly Miller (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. That's right, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Kelly Miller was like, and I need to go to Washington [D.C.]. I guess there's a lot of letters from my grandfather in the Kelly Miller collection. And he had been born in Virginia. He went to medical school, but he really ran the Masons. He had a drugstore, and he was a doctor, but he spent most of his time--he was the grandmaster of the, of the South Carolina Masons for many, many, years. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Charles Catlett Johnson [Charles C. Johnson], C-A-T-L-E-T-T. Speaker 1: Catlett. Speaker 2: And there's a picture of him on that website with the family makers. So, anyway, he graduated from, from Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and I think he also went and got another degree there, but, so he had married, and he was married to a woman who was related to the Wormleys, you know, like in the Wormley hotel [Wormley's Hotel, Washington, D.C.]. And she died. And so then we believe he may have been kind of like down on his luck and not had a lot of money. He had this daughter, and she always passed for white. But I think he heard about my grandmother some kind of way as this--you know--this single lady of a little means, and he went to--had a letter of recommend- had a letter of reference from somebody, and went to meet her, and he went to her house, and she wasn't there, and so they said, "Oh, she's up at the cemetery, you know, tending the graves with her mother," so he got in his horse and wagon, and he went up to the cemetery, and that's where he met my grandmother, and then they had seven children. And I have my--as I told you--my oldest aunt [Mary Jane Johnson Jones] went to pharmacy school at Howard [Howard University College of Pharmacy, Washington, D.C.], and I told you she came in second in the exam in 1929 in the Georgia medical--I mean, the South Carolina medical--pharmacy exam. And then I had an uncle--two uncles that were pharmacists. And my other uncle is a physician. He became a psychiatrist. And then I had an aunt who married and had children, and I think she, she always kind of kicked herself that she didn't go--she went to college for a while. And then my mother went to college at Howard and also at South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. And then I had another uncle that went to South Carolina State, and then went to the [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: Okay. So there are a lot of people going to college, a lot of, a lot college educated people (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm--you know--I'm on, I'm on this council [Cuyahoga County Council], and like there's people that they're the first generation that went to college. I was like, well, my grandparents went to college. So you-- Speaker 1: So we--well, you, you know that's unusual in the black community, I mean, to have that kind of a background. It's not-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --it's not, not the regular thing. Story_ID: 656678 Speaker 1: So the, the family is--your, your mother's [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] family is--you still have family in South Carolina. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In Aiken [South Carolina] and-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. I have still have family in Aiken. My aunt [Cecelia Johnson McGhee] is 102. I spoke to her last night. Her power had gone out because of the storm, but--and then my mother is 100. Speaker 1: Yeah. Aiken and Augusta [Georgia] are close together. Speaker 2: They're seventeen miles apart, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Okay. All right. So, now, did your mother--now, she, she came out of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and-- Speaker 2: She went to Howard, but then she ended up graduating from South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. I don't know if my, my grandmother [Cecelia Ladeveze Johnson]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --couldn't afford it or what, but she ended up, ended up graduating from South Carolina State. Speaker 1: And what was her field again that she, she-- Speaker 2: Home economics. Speaker 1: Home economics, okay. Speaker 2: And then she graduated from college, and she came home, and she was working in my uncle's drugstore, and my father [George L. Connally, Jr.] had gone to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and he was sent to Aiken to be the business manager for the high school, and that's how he met my mom. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. What was it the--Channing Tobias [Channing H. Tobias], I think, was from Aiken or around that area of South Carolina, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know. I know the name, but I don't know too much about him. Speaker 1: Yeah. He was--he worked with the UN [United Nations]. He was director of the 135th Street Y [Harlem YMCA] in New York City [New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Yeah. I know the name. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I, I just don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. He's from that, that area, too. Story_ID: 656679 Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, let me go to your father's side, and then we'll have a story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --about how they met. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) George Luther Connally, Jr. [George L. Connally, Jr.]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Griffin, Georgia. I think he always used the--I--we never could remember. I think it's December 24th, 1916. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His grandmother--his mother [Rossie Connally] could never remember. It was like Christ- it was before midnight or after midnight a Christmas Eve. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Because he was born at home. Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, what can you tell us about his, his side? How far back can you trace his-- Speaker 2: I don't know a whole lot about my father's side of the family. I just know that they were--I think they were probably farmers, and I just don't know a whole lot about my father's side of the family. They, they lived out in Spalding County [Georgia]. That's about all I know. Speaker 1: Did they own their own, their own land? Speaker 2: I think so. Yeah. I think so. And I know they lived in, they lived in Griffin. My grandfather [George L. Connally, Sr.], I think he had a lot of different professions, and at one point, he and my grandmother split up, and then I think he took me father to Chicago [Illinois], and they lived in Chicago, and my father actually went to a Catholic boarding school in Chicago, and that's how he became Catholic. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: Is this for, for high school, no? Speaker 2: No. This was like in elementary school 'cause he-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: My father graduated from high school at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. My grandfa- my father was going to school in Griffin, and he had a teacher. You know, he thought--who thought he was a very, very promising student, and she said--they always called him George Luther--"George Luther, I want you to go to Tuskegee." And his mother was like, "No, you know, I'm--you're not--you're going to be--I'm going to get you a job in the mill. You know, I need the money." And my, my dad was really always kind of a hustler. He sold newspapers. And I remember he won a bicycle like in the 1920s for selling Atlanta Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], so he had saved up some money, and he came with--you know, I guess had like a little suitcase with like, you know, a change of clothes and said that he was going to Tuskegee. And his mother, mother was like, "No, no. You're not going." He goes like, "I'm out of here." And so she sort of reached down in her, her bosom and, you know, took out something like five dollars, which was like a tremendous amount of money, and sort of chased him down the street and gave him this money. Story_ID: 656680 Speaker 1: So he [Connally's father, George L. Connally, Jr.] got on a bus and went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and, and got in line and stood in line with a guy named Andrew Walker [ph.], and he and Andrew Walker were friends forever, roommates all the way through high school and, and college, and we're still friends with the Walkers, so it was kind of chance encounter. So I, dad, like I said, he used to help--he scrubbed floors at night and, you know, went to Tuskegee. He actually knew and met George Washington Carver. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But they had, they had, they had like a work study program which was, was really a good thing. Like, you, you worked and then, you know, paid part of your tuition. Speaker 2: And then in the summertime, they would send the students--so this was in--my dad graduated from college in 1939, so all during the '30s [1930s], they would send the students up to the Adirondacks [Adirondack Mountains], work in these white hotels during the summer. And my dad always tells the story about how, you know, he would budget and, you know, they, they'd go on the bus and they'd go to New York [New York], and, you know, he like a--he had like a friend to stay with, and he always tells the story. He got to New York once and, you know, he didn't know where he was going to go, and then kind of looked in the window of a cafe and was sort of the hungry, and there's another guy from Tuskegee. "Yeah, c'mon in." And, and, you know, I love this story. He says how he went to--he could only--he had like a part of a year that if he worked at this lodge, and then they were off for like two weeks or something, so he knew he only had like fifty cents a day, and so he went to the baseball game, and he got to the baseball game, and it was like more money than he thought it was going to be to get into the baseball game, so he just bought the ticket not knowing how he was going to get home. So he's in the baseball game. He's sitting there. And he starts talking to this white guy, you know, about, you know, this--my, my dad was always a newspaper reader and knew all the baseball statistics. He was going, "Oh, you know, this is this guy, and this is this guy," and the other guy--"Who is this guy, kid?" And so he's telling my, my dad is giving all this information, so when the hotdog vendor comes along, you know, my dad is like, like really hungry. And the guy goes, "You want a hotdog, kid?" He goes, "Yeah." So he gives a hotdog, and he gives him a drink. And they enjoy the baseball game. And so at the end of the game, my dad is kind of like, "Can I ask you one more thing?" He goes, like, "I don't have bus fare to get home." The guy goes, "Here, here's a buck [dollar]." Which was like a lot of money. So I think those are like some of the great story about my dad and baseball, and it was--so it was in New York, so this had to be like in the 19--I don't know somewhere between 1935 and '39 [1939]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Okay. Yeah. That's interesting. So, so your--this is--your father is at Tuskegee during the Great Depression. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: So it was tough down there before. It was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --probably tougher-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --then, so, so he graduated in '39 [1939] just as, as the country is moving out of it but not quite. So, now, what did your father look like? Did he, he-- Speaker 2: Everybody says he looks like me. Everybody says I look just like my dad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I think--my mother [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] was very fair skinned, but my, my--everybody says I look like my dad, so he's my same coloring and, and same hair texture. Speaker 1: So people would know he was black. Speaker 2: Yeah. People would know he's black, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, so at this baseball game he was at, was this like a major league baseball game or what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. It was the Yankees [New York Yankees]. Speaker 1: Yankees, okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. I guess you could go--yeah, you could go (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in 1939. Sure, you could go to the baseball--yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Story_ID: 656681 Speaker 1: He graduates in '39 [1939]. Now, what did your father [George L. Connally, Jr.] major in? Speaker 2: Business administration. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Did he have any stories about the teachers at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] or any-- Speaker 2: Well, not really. He used talk about like, you know, they have this work study program. And he always told some story about how every--they worked--he worked in the kitchen or something, and every week or some period of time, they had to take like this butter and sugar over to like this dean's house, and it, you know, it was like, kind of like--he thought it was like a theft, and they were instructed to do this. So he like--he's like, "Should I be doing this?" And the guy goes, "Hey, you need the job, so just do it." So, I mean, there was like a little, you know, whatever going on. Speaker 1: And so, yeah. 'Cause the students produced the--I mean, the, the sugar and the butter were probably produced there at there--on campus. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They--you know, a product of the agriculture of the campus, I would guess. Sugar, I don't-- Speaker 2: I don't know. But it was like some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) know but it could have been. Speaker 2: You know, take some-- Speaker 1: It could have been beet sugar. It could have been--you know, we-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know. Speaker 1: --just don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, I mean, but he was like every--this was like every so often, he took this stuff over and delivered it to somebody's house, and he was always--thought it was kind of questionable, and it was like, hey, you know, you need the job, so just do what you're told. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Okay. Speaker 2: But I guess he must have--I know he, he graduated in, in business administration. And I always remember this. And I have a cup of tea over here. My dad never let you--he had an insurance business [Connally Insurance Agency, Cleveland, Ohio] later, and we worked there. You know, you could never have anything liquid on your desk because he said if you knocked it over, you ruined everything, so that was like a rule. I'll never forget. You'd always feel like shouldn't have any coffee or anything on your desk (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So when he graduated, what were his prospects with-- Speaker 2: Well, he got this job in Aiken [South Carolina] as a business manager of Schofield high school [Schofield Normal and Industrial School; Schofield Middle School, Aiken, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And that sent him there, and the job lasted--I think there was maybe some like sort of hanky panky going on in this high school. I think he was supposed to be there to kind of straighten it out. I don't really know all the details of that. And he worked there for a couple years, and then I know I got a job--he actually had applied to go into the [U.S.] Army, but he was registered to the draft from South Carolina, and so, I don't know, my father and mother [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] always said this thing like they didn't want to take any more black officers, so they--I don't know. They--he didn't get drafted. I don't know why he didn't. And--but he also had a job with the NYA, the National Youth Administ- [National Youth Administration] yeah. You know, the thing that Mary McLeod Bethune ran for blacks. He worked there. And he worked someplace called Jesup, Georgia, at some kind of a NYA camp for a while. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. Schofield School, there's something about that, that's important. I--it's popped up a couple of times (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was these--they were--they were--the Schofields were some Quaker ladies-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --who came to the South to, to teach blacks. You know, that whole thing with the white school marms, the whole movement in the--after the Civil War. Speaker 1: Right, right. Yeah. Okay. Because I, I've, I've known a couple of people that went to Schofield School. I mean, they made a big, you know, to do. I mean, they--it was important. Like, I got the sense it was important, so the Quaker school. Okay. Okay. So he worked in Jesup, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Jesup, Georgia, for a while. Speaker 1: Oh, Georgia. Okay. Speaker 2: And he used to get ration coupons and things, and it was--so it was like--and my mother said that was the first time he had cereal. He used to bring things from the, from the NYA camp. Because I remember we had like blankets, and--I guess it was probably theft (laughter), but he's dead, so it--but I know we had like NYA blankets, and, you know, lots of things that, that he would get from the NYA camp. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He would bring to my mother's family. Story_ID: 656682 Speaker 1: Is--oh, the story of how they met. Now, how, how did your parents (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think they went--he said, now, my father [George L. Connally, Jr.] always said that, but she said something else. He came into the drugstore to buy some shoe polish. And that's how they met. It was a very small community, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you think about their looks, their dispositions, how they walked, talked, their sense of humor, their talents, state of mind, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My dad. Yeah, my dad. Speaker 1: And, and why? Speaker 2: My dad was very outgoing. You know, he always knew people. My mother [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] just tended to be a little bit more introverted, but my, my dad like knew, knew everybody. And he, and he used to campaign for me when I was still alive--when he was still alive, so--and then, of course, my grandfather was--on my, my father's father [George L. Connally, Sr.] actually went to the Republican National Convention [1948 Republican National Convention, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I think, in like in '48 [1948] or something. And then my mother's father [Charles C. Johnson], he was very much involved, you know, with the thing with the, the Masonics, and, you know, you know, sort of political. He knew Jimmy Byrnes [James F. Byrnes], you know, who was friends with Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], and so he--I think he was political also, so I think I take like from a lot of different people. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, tell us about your siblings. Speaker 2: I have one sister who's older. Speaker 1: How much older is she? Speaker 2: Almost four years, like three and a half years. Speaker 1: And what's her name and what does she do? Speaker 2: Her name is Gwendolyn Marjorie Connally Campbell [Gwendolyn Connally Campbell]. And she, she ran my dad's insurance business [Connally Insurance Agency, Cleveland, Ohio] after my dad retired, and I think she's retired now, but we're kind of estranged, so I don't talk about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. She doesn't help me with my mother or anything, and so we don't get along. I haven't spoken to her in several years. Story_ID: 656683 Speaker 1: Now, your father [George L. Connally, Jr.], South Carolina, is that where--oh, what insurance company did he work for, or did he start his own (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. That was here in Cleveland [Ohio]. He became -- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. I have to tell you the whole story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. After he left, after he left--worked for the NYA [National Youth Administration], then he came to Cleveland. His sister lived here in Cleveland, so he came to Cleveland and got a job. He worked first in the steel mill, and then he delivered milk for, for Telling Bell Vern- Vernon Milk Company [Telling Belle Vernon Company, Cleveland, Ohio]. And then--and all the while when he was working delivering milk--I mean, he's, he's a person with a college degree in business administration [from Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. The only job he could get was delivering milk, and so he was always trying to start his own business, and he--you know, he did like--even when he was delivering milk, he had little side hustles. He was always, you know, selling storm windows, or, you know, doing collection work, and, finally, he started his own insurance business. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So he, he, so he came to Cleveland, of course, before you were born, so what--when, did he come, did he come? Speaker 2: They came--I think my dad came like--my mother [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] came--okay. My sister [Gwendolyn Connally Campbell] was born in November of '41 [1941] and my mother came like six weeks later, and my dad had been here about a year, so he must have come like in the '40s [1940s] or something. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, like, like in the late--early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: So 1943 or four-? Speaker 2: No, no, before. No, before 'cause my sister was born in '41 [1941] and my sister came when she was six weeks old. Speaker 1: Okay. Your sister was born here (unclear). Speaker 2: No. My sister was born in South Carolina. Speaker 1: South--yeah. That's what I-- Speaker 2: But she came here when she was six weeks old. Speaker 1: Six weeks, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So that would have been like, like forty--right at, right at the beginning of '42 [1942]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my dad was already here. He'd been here for a year, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was the name of his insurance company? Speaker 2: Connally Insurance Agency [Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he--I think he was the first black person to have an agency with a major white insurance company. Speaker 1: So who, who was he affiliated with? Speaker 2: Motorist Mutual Insurance Company. Speaker 1: Boarders? Speaker 2: Motorist. Speaker 1: Oh, Motorist Mutual. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm going to sneeze. Speaker 1: All right. That's okay. Speaker 2: Excuse me. I hope that's not in the camera. Yeah. Motorist Mutual Insurance Company out of Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother always said, you know, he'd always get--you know, take a day off from work and get all dressed up and go on these interviews, and then, you know, nothing panned out. Oh, he also worked before that--before he had his own agency, he worked for United Insurance [United Insurance Company of America, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], which was one of those industrial insurance companies. Yeah. He worked there first. Speaker 1: Now, now, when, when did he establish Connally Insurance Agency? Speaker 2: It must have been, it must have been in the mid-'50s [1950s]. Yeah. In the mid-'50s [1950s] I would say. Story_ID: 656684 Speaker 1: Tell us now, what did--where did you live-- did, did you grow up in the same place, or did you move around a lot, or-- Speaker 2: Oh, no. We lived in--I lived in the same house until I was eighteen years old. I--10621 Greenlawn Avenue in Cleveland [Ohio]. It's in the Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] area, and it was a area where Jews were just beginning to move out. Glenville High School [Cleveland, Ohio] was--the whole, like, Glenville area was a very Jewish neighborhood. In fact, the guys [Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster] that wrote Superman lived in Glenville. Speaker 1: Oh, right, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the alumni association from, you know, the '40s [1940s] and even in the '50s [1950s] are very prominent--a lot of white Jewish people. So when I lived there, we--my parents [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally and George L. Connally, Jr.] bought a house there in 1944, and my [maternal] grandmother [Cecelia Ladeveze Johnson] sold the house down in Georgia or South Carolina or somewhere and gave my mother--I can't remember if it was fifteen hundred or two thousand dollars as a deposit, which was, you know, was a lot of money, and they really wanted to buy this house on Herrick Road. In fact, I know the house. But it cost five thousand dollars, and they couldn't afford it. So they bought this house that was thirty-five hundred dollars. And I think their payments were like, you know, twenty-five dollars a month or something. So, yeah, we lived in the house on Greenlawn until we moved to Beechwood [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's when money was really money (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right, right. Speaker 1: A dollar, dollar went a long way. Speaker 2: Yeah. But it was the--like I said, this money from South Carolina and Georgia, you know, that, that my grandmother gave my mother, it was the, you know, it was the nest egg that paid--that, you know, started that house. Story_ID: 656685 Speaker 1: Tell us what your neighborhood was like, and what was were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I grew up, it's interesting I was thinking about this last night. When I grew up in, in Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio], it was still--it was right off of 105th Street, and all up and down 105th Street, there were still many, many, Jewish businesses, so there were dress shops and shoe shops, and we used to go to the market, and they would--you could see the live chicken. They would pick out the chicken and kill it, which I always thought was horrible. So we could do all of our shopping if you walked up to 105th Street. And now where Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio] is at 105th and Euclid [Avenue], there was a major shopping area. It was theaters and, you know, nightclubs, and, you know, restaurants and all kinds of things, and, and, you know, the--sort of like department stores, and so--but you--as I was growing up, you know, by the time I got into high school [Notre Dame Academy, Cleveland, Ohio; Notre Dame-Cathedral Latin School, Chardon, Ohio], you know, all these stores had disappeared. I remember there was a--you could buy fabric. You could buy all these various things because people walked, and it was a society where people walked and bought for--you know, just a short period. You know, they bought groceries for just a day or so, but I grew up--and I went to Catholic schools, so I didn't go to school in my neighborhood. I mean, I was close, but I took the bus to school, so I remember we always took the bus to school. And it's so weird now. These children are like, you know, "I, I can't, I can't go very far." I was like in the first grade, I'd walk down the street. I got on the bus and I went to school. And then I went to, went to--of course, to Catholic high school. I went to an all-girls Catholic high school. Story_ID: 656686 Speaker 1: --I went to Catholic school, and there were maybe two or three blacks in my class, and then in high school, there were maybe two or three black people, so I always went to all-white schools, so--and then I went to Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio], and-- Speaker 2: Well, we're, we're not going to get you to, to college (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. But what I was going to say, my point is-- Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --that it--when I found out--when I went places and people--it's like you're the only woman. I was like, I'm so used to being the only black person, that it doesn't really occur to me. So I, I never went to a predominantly black school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I went to a Catholic church, and so I never went to a predominantly black church. Speaker 2: Okay. So were your parents Catholic? Speaker 1: My dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] was Catholic, and then my mother [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] became Catholic. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. So, so were they members of the, the parish where you went to school? Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 2: The parish is where you went to-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay. So you were going to St. Thomas Aquinas [St. Thomas Aguinas School, Cleveland, Ohio]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --first, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. That's the only school-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I ever went to. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The elementary school. Speaker 2: The elementary school. And then Notre Dame Academy [Cleveland, Ohio; Notre Dame-Cathedral Latin School, Chardon, Ohio] for high school, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I actually sit with somebody at church now that was in my class in elementary school. Speaker 2: Okay. So what I--did you like school? Speaker 1: Yes, I did. I liked school. I remember one year like I cried. It was the end of the school year. I didn't want to leave. I liked school a lot. Speaker 2: And what was your favorite subject then, that-- Speaker 1: I liked to read. Anything that was reading. I'm not a big strong math person, but I liked to read. And I remember my dad used to take us to the library. I remember I got in trouble one time. Like I put a--I was reading like a novel or something, put it in front of a textbook, and I was like reading away in class. Speaker 2: Okay, and--okay. What were, what were your favorite, you know, reading materials? So-- Speaker 1: You know, I really--I always liked biographies and, you know, kind of historical things, and I like novels. Speaker 2: Now, did, did the family--did a, did a lot of newspapers come to the house? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Call, Call and Post, The Plain Dealer, all that, you know? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, we always got the The Plain Dealer. And my dad was a reader. My mother was not much of a reader, but my dad was a reader. Story_ID: 656687 Speaker 1: Were you parents involved in any of the civil rights organizations of the day? Speaker 2: Not particularly. My dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] was always kind of working, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, not particularly. I do remember that--I must have been--I always tell this story. I was maybe--I don't know--maybe twelve, thirteen years old. I don't know. But my dad took me to some kind of--it was like an award club meeting, and there were all these ladies there with, you know, hats and gloves, and they were kind of sitting up in the front. And I kind of said to myself, I wanna be, you know, with those people. I wanna be--you know, when I grow up--I want to be like those ladies. You know, like, kind of in the know. Speaker 1: Yeah. What club was it, do you remember? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think it must have been -- Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: --been like a Democratic Award Club [ph.] meeting. I think like the mayor was there or something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because he--my dad had a friend. She was a secretary for Mayor Celebrezze, so my dad kind of--I mean, he, he was--I mean, he always read and knew about stuff. He just wasn't particularly involved in politics. He knew a lot of people. Speaker 1: Now, is this the Celebrezze that became governor of Ohio? Speaker 2: No. You're--there is Anthony J. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Anthony Celebrezze [Anthony J. Celebrezze]. Speaker 2: He was the mayor of the City of Cleveland [Ohio], and he was secretary of health, education and welfare-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --under President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. And the story is that Kennedy says--was looking for a secretary of health, education and welfare, and says to his staff, quote, "What about that dago from Ohio?" Well, he was talking about Mike DiSalle [Michael DiSalle]-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --who had been the governor, and the staff person thought he was talking about Celebrezze, and they call Celebrezze. "Yeah, I'll take the job." And then Kennedy is like, "Who the hell is this guy?" So that supposedly is the story about how he ended up as secretary. And then, of course, I've been friends with the Celebrezze family. Frank Celebrezze [Frank D. Celebrezze, Jr.] was a close friend of mine, and all the--I still--I'm still friends with the Celebrezzes. Speaker 1: That's an incred- incredible story. That's how--you know, it's like you don't, you don't want to know how sausage is made. You know, the politics, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I got a great one. This is-- I'll tell you later about how Warren got to be chief justice, similar story. Speaker 1: Wow. Well, I don't, I don't want you to forget it. Maybe you should tell (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I, I'm doing this work on, on Chief Justice Warren. I had read this before, but Warren had been attorney general of the State of California and governor for ten years. Speaker 1: This is Earl Warren. Speaker 2: Earl Warren. Speaker 1: For those who don't know. Speaker 2: Yes. And Earl Warren was very involved in getting the nomination for Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] in '52 [1952]. John Bricker [John W. Bricker] from Ohio had ran for vice president with Dewey [Thomas E. Dewey] in '44 [1944] and then Warren ran in '48 [1948] for vice president with Dewey, and so he was, you know, set to be vice president under Eisenhower, but on the train from California, Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] outmaneuvered him, and, you know, got the votes together to be vice president, so, you know, Warren is very upset, right, so he goes to Ike, and Ike says, "Listen, you know, let's settle this. I'll give you the first seat on the [U.S.] Supreme Court." So he's like, "Okay." And then Vinson [Fred M. Vinson], you know, who had been chief justice suddenly dies, very unexpectedly, and Warren calls up Ike, "Okay, I'm ready." And Ike is like, "I didn't promise you the chief justice." "No, you promised me the first seat on the, on the Supreme Court." And so that's how he got to be chief justice, but that really--the, the story flows into what we're talking about because Vinson was from Kentucky, and I'm not sure he would have worked for that unanimous decision in Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] because the case is pending when Warren becomes chief justice, and so Warren, you know, works to get a unanimous decision and, and kind of works out the politics. Warren is much more of a politician than, than probably Vinson was, so it kind of goes into the story. Speaker 1: Thank you for that. That's (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I'm a world of these kind of stories. Speaker 1: Thank you, thank you. That--well, well, we want to get all of them, so that, that's great. That's a great story. But, oh, I keep up--the Celebrezzes, huh? Speaker 2: So, anyway, and that's how I kind of--I always wanted to be--I kind of remember--'cause I remember that I used to take the bus, and there was a woman that was real poor, and she had all these kids, you know, hanging on her, and I was like, I was like, I don't want to be like her, you know, this poor--I mean, she was, you know, you know, with kids, and it was cold, and I was like, I don't want to be--I want to be like those ladies that, you know, were at that meeting, you know. Story_ID: 656688 Speaker 1: Well, you had a lot of examples in your family of people that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --college graduates and had careers, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We used to, we used to go to South Carolina just about every summer. We used to take the train. We used to--we have a--we took our dog with us. We would have--my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] had a crate built, and we put the dog on the train, and, and we'd go to South Carolina and spend, you know, a couple months, and then-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Aiken [South Carolina] seems to be like a enclave of very educated black people. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, any rate, so, now, were there any special mentors or teachers in, in grade school [St. Thomas Aguinas School, Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: I had some nice teachers in elementary school. I do remember when I was in high school [Notre Dame Academy, Cleveland, Ohio; Notre Dame-Dame-Cathedral Latin School, Chardon, Ohio], and I told the nun I was going to Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio], she told me that I, I wasn't going to get in. And I not only graduated from Bowling Green, but I became president of the board of trustees, so in heaven, I hope this nun realizes that she made a big mistake, but I think I learned very, very good study habits, and I learned very, very good English grammar. I'm not real good in foreign languages, but when I did study foreign languages, I knew the grammar because the nuns had very much instilled that in us. You know, how to diagram sentences and that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I think I got a really good background, and, you know, we, we had homework, and we had to study, so I thought I, I learned good study skills and, and like really good foundations. Speaker 1: How were you treated for the most part? Were you treated any differently than-- Speaker 2: I never thought (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the other students? Speaker 2: --I was treated any differently. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Were the other black students around the same, same color as you, or the, they-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like once--there was one, one or so but not really. Story_ID: 656689 Speaker 1: But I never thought I was treated--I had an older sister, and I didn't like being Marjorie's [Gwendolyn Connally Campbell] little sister, and my sister played the piano very well, and I, I mean, I could sort of struggle, and the piano teacher loved my sister and didn't like me, and so if I had a different piano teacher, I probably could play the piano a lot better. I mean, I could play a little--I play handbells now, but we used to--we took music lessons, at the music school (unclear). We took music theory, so, you know, I'm--and I, I'm able to read music. I know all the music signs, so handbells was just real easy for me because I knew all the musical stuff. Speaker 2: Okay. I know music is very important in Cleveland [Ohio]. I think when you were coming up, the Cleveland symphony [Cleveland Orchestra] was number one in the world, huh? Speaker 1: Yeah. There was this lady named Leota Palmer Apple, and she took--taught piano lessons. Her--she had a daughter named Natalie Hinderas [Natalie Henderson Hinderas] who I think was a pianist of some note, and everybody that, you know, would kind of--everybody was everybody, you know, all the middle class kids took piano lessons. Now, I will say this, that my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] was a milkman [Telling Belle Vernon Company, Cleveland, Ohio] at the time when we were like, you know, younger, and you know about the Jack and Jill's [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]? Well, they wouldn't let us in the black Jack and Jill's. You know, we were light and bright, but they--somebody blackballed us because he said my dad was a milkman, so I remember that when Stephanie Tubbs Jones, who became the congresswoman and Judge Ron Adrine [Ronald B. Adrine] who is now the presiding judge of the common pleas court [Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court]. We were sitting in the cafeteria. We're all judges. And we're sitting in the cafeteria, and somebody came by, and we go, "Wasn't that guy on the Jack and Jill?" I think he was a defendant or something. And we're like, "Yeah. They wouldn't let me in because my dad was a mailman," and, and Stephanie and Ron said, "Yeah, they wouldn't let us in because we were too black." So what, you know, what does that tell you about the Jack and Jill? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's some misplaced priorities there. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, yeah, I--from what I understand--someone was trying to explain it to me last week about the intention of it, and that seems to be against the intention of it, you know, 'cause it, it should be the--it should have been the aspirations of the family that were trying put their children in with (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was a very, very elitist--it was, yeah, it was a very, very elitist snobbish thing, and I still have a very, very negative opinion of the Jack and Jill. Every once in a while, somebody's kid is in a scholarship and I have to, you know, and--or is in a cotillion and I reluctantly, you know, make a donation, but I really have no use for them. Story_ID: 656690 Speaker 1: Now, did, did you have--were you friends with the kids in your neighborhood [Glenville, Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Friends with the kids in my neighborhood and the kids at my school. Speaker 1: I know the--they--your neighborhood kids probably went to public school, right? Speaker 2: They all went to public school. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I mean, yeah. We used to ride bicycles and that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have a chance to go to summer camps and-- Speaker 2: No. We never went 'cause we went to South Carolina. Just about every year, we would go to South Carolina, so we didn't go to summer camp. Speaker 1: So, so would you spend like-- Speaker 2: Like a month or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Month, six weeks, sometimes shorter. I remember we cried when we came back home. We, we didn't want to leave. We would always cry. Speaker 1: South Carolina is, is a rough place for black people, but, yeah, was there any-- Speaker 2: I don't know. We lived in little, you know, this little world of, you know, we had cousins there, and we would stay with different cousins, and my, my uncles were really nice, and my, my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] was a very, very strict disciplinarian, so if my dad said, he was leaving at eight o'clock, you were to be there 'cause he, he'd leave you. But my uncles were kind of like, you know, nicer and so we, we would always enjoy--and we'd stay at my [maternal] grandmother's [Cecelia Ladeveze Johnson] house, and so it was--and, you know, we'd have picnics and that kind of stuff and play in the sand, so, yeah, I liked going there. And then my, my sister [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally], when she got older, she would work in the drugstore in the, in the summertime because she actually has--her social security card comes from South Carolina because you know how the numbers are different, and so, yeah, she would work in the drugstore, and we would do different things, and we took our dogs. And I think I used to go to like some kind of little camp or something during the day when I was in South Carolina. And we went to--it was a segregated pool, but we used to go swimming at the pool. We had a good time. We didn't really kind of think about it. Story_ID: 656691 Speaker 1: So when you were--okay--when you were, I guess, getting ready to go on into high school [Notre Dame Academy, Cleveland, Ohio; Notre Dame-Cathedral Latin School, Chardon, Ohio], did you know any black attorneys or judges? Speaker 2: Yeah. My dad knew, my dad knew--yeah. There was Judge Theodore Williams [Theodore M. Williams], his daughters were, were friends of ours, and we knew them. I knew Judge Williams, and my dad had friends that were attorneys, and there was attorneys that lived on our street. There was two or three attorneys that lived on our street. Speaker 1: Any women? Speaker 2: I knew of--I think Judge Capers [Jean Murrell Capers], and I knew of a couple of other women attorneys. I didn't know them, but, I mean, I knew of them. I knew they existed. And I remember when I was in high school, we used to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] later for the summer sometimes, and there was a program called 'Divorce Court,' and they used to have, I think, real--they were real attorneys, and they'd kind of give them a fact situation. They had this live on TV. And I used to think, oh, that's really cool. I'd like to do that. I'd like to--you know--I'd like to be a lawyer and be in court. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course, my parents [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally and George L. Connally, Jr.] thought, only, you know, girls can only be teachers, and so they, they--I got--I have a degree in education. Like, you have to be a teacher. And I was like, I don't want to be a teacher. But I ended up, you know, getting my degree in education so I could teach, and then I got--I went away--right away, got into law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio]-- Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: --when I graduated. Speaker 1: --so did you, did you really want to be a lawyer when, when you were in high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm yeah. Speaker 1: Or when (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. I always wanted to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So high school, were there any special teachers or mentors in high school? Speaker 2: Oh, there were teachers I remember that I liked, and I know we used to--the one teacher we were like--we were--I was on like the council of world affairs [World Affairs Councils of America], and, yeah, there were good teachers that I liked. Speaker 1: Okay. So you, you were in high, high school from like '59 [1959] to '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So in light of some of your political activities later, I mean, were you aware of politics more so than other children you think in those days? I mean, other high school (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just remember that I went over to my father's sister's house, and I had my big Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] button on in 1960, and they had Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] signs. I was like, (laughter) "Where is this--who is this--how could you even think about voting for Nixon?" But, you know, they had been, you know, the old term Republicans. You know, blacks had been Republicans all these years, and they had--and then my father used to vote for Frances Bolton [Frances Payne Bolton] who was a Republican congresswoman because her family had given money to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And I used to say, that doesn't make any sense. "Well, no, I vote for her because she gave money to Tuskegee." Speaker 1: Well, those are the days that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --correct me if I'm wrong, that a lot of black people were still Republicans and (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Blacks really turned in '36 [1936] when they-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --when they switch over to, to Roose- Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], but, yeah. But they're still, you know, there's still these vestiges of black Republicans because Judge Lillian Burke [HistoryMaker Lillian Burke] was the first black judge in Ohio. She was a Republican. In fact, when I was elected judge in 1979, I was the first black woman in Ohio that was a Democrat that was a judge, and I was the first black woman in Ohio that was straight up elected. There had been four other black women on the bench, but they'd all been appointed by the governor, by the Republican governor and then held their seats, but I was just elected straight up. Speaker 1: And it seems to me that Ohio is traditionally kind of a Republican (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is, right. Speaker 1: --state at core. But then it, it is morphed where you've got half Democrats now, but that old core is still Republican, all the--yeah, this--yeah, most of the black judges in Dayton [Ohio] are Republicans believe it or not. Speaker 2: Yeah. Because they probably got appointed by the governor, and then they were able to retain their seats. And that's what happened here. We had Judge Burke, Judge Harper [Sara J. Harper], Judge Capers, and then there was Alice McCollum [Alice O. McCollum] was down in, in, in Dayton when I got elected. And then I got elected, and like I say, I was the first Democrat. Story_ID: 656692 Speaker 1: When you're on the verge of graduating from--well, what--now what did you do in high school [Notre Dame Academy, Cleveland, Ohio; Notre Dame-Cathedral Latin School, Chardon, Ohio]? What kind of activities were you involved in? I'm sorry. I got (unclear). Speaker 2: You know, I, I used to play volleyball and basketball, and I was actually pretty decent, but it wasn't a time for girls' sports, so if we had, had, you know, girls' sports, I probably would have been, you know, on the basketball team, but you only had to take gym for the first two years, and we had these horrible green bloomer things, gym suits. In fact, I just went to my class reunion, and somebody still had it. Someone still had our green gym suit. So, yeah, I was involved in that, and, like I say, I think in the council of world affairs [World Affairs Councils of America], and I think I got on the student council. Speaker 1: Okay. So you--how were your grades? Were you a top student, or-- Speaker 2: No. I wasn't a top student. I was never a top student, but I, I plugged along. I always say if I knew what I knew now when I was in high school and college, I would have been valedictorian. When I went to graduate school, I got straight As, I mean, it was a different--you know. But, I, you know, I plugged along. I, I was never the great--the, the teachers used to say like, "Oh, Marjorie [Connally's sister, Gwendolyn Connally Campbell] is really smart, but, you know, Ellen [HistoryMaker C. Ellen Connally] is sort of a plugger," but my sister didn't achieve as much as I have. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So when you were thinking about college then, did you have good counseling at-- Speaker 2: Not really. No. My dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] and my--you know, my--this, this is interesting. My, my sister had gone to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and had not been successful there, and then I had some cousins that went to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] and had not been successful, and the myth was kind of like, well, black students can't achieve in our family. Well, you know, you know, you can't make it at these white schools, and I remember one cousin said to me like, "Well, why are you going to Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio]?" He has never finished college to this day. But, anyway, I--my dad had looked at a lot of colleges, and I found the letter from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that didn't admit me that rejected my application. Yeah. I, I found it recently. I got to find it 'cause I was going to send it to Sidney Ribeau [Sidney A. Ribeau] who has been the president of Howard. I was going to send it to Sidney 'cause he was the president of Bowling Green. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I know him, so I was going to send it to him. Say, hey, you know, you didn't even let me in. But--so I just arbitrarily picked Bowling Green 'cause it was the smallest of the state schools because my sister had gone to Ohio State and had not been successful there, and I had--we used to go to Ohio State when my sister was there, and it was just like really too big, and so I just picked Bowling Green out of the catalog and, and, and went there and applied, and, and I went there, and my--and, of course, my dad paid all my tuition and stuff, so I wasn't worried about scholarships and stuff. Story_ID: 656693 Speaker 1: So you--okay. So you had never been to Bowling Green. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You didn't know anybody there? Speaker 2: I knew somebody that went there, but I didn't-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --know anything about it. I just know that I looked at the brochures. It was a state school, and, and it wasn't that far away from home, and-- Speaker 1: Okay. So I-- Speaker 2: People say I picked it because the colors are brown and orange 'cause I like brown and orange (laughter), but-- Speaker 1: Now, brown and orange, now, that's, that's interesting because-- Speaker 2: The Cleveland Browns actually got their colors from Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio] because they actually had their training--their first training camp was at Bowling Green. Speaker 1: I thought actually it was the opposite, but, but it's Bowling Green was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Bowling Green was here first. That's true. Speaker 2: Yeah, 1910. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We had our hundredth (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I always thought that Bowling Green-- Speaker 2: --we had our hundredth, we had our hundredth anniversary. Speaker 1: --I always thought that Bowling Green should have green in there (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I know. No, no. Speaker 1: --(unclear) Bowling Green. Speaker 2: It's brown and orange. Speaker 1: Brown and orange. Speaker 2: Brown and orange. I bleed brown and orange. I love Bowling Green State University. Happiest years of my life. Speaker 1: What do Browns call theirs, feel brown and orange? Speaker 2: Ours are just brown-- Speaker 1: Feel--yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and orange. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So when you were there, I've been told--I was told yesterday, that there were 125 black students on campus. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Leon would have said that, yeah. Because Leon was a year ahead of me. Speaker 1: It's [HistoryMaker] Leon Bibb. Speaker 2: And there was about 100, 110 or so, yeah, the, the years I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. And, now, so what was the--was there a black student organizations there? (Unclear). Speaker 2: No. I was just going to college. I mean, I wasn't into all that struggling black organizations. I was just trying to get an education. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you get involved in any of the black fraternities or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I mean, sororities or -- Speaker 2: Oh, no. I, I-- Speaker 1: --any, any of the (unclear) like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't have, they didn't have AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. My mother's [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] first cousin was in the first class of pledges at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in AKA, so I'm a legacy member of AKA, I feel. My mother's cousin, her name was Vivian Cook Stokes [Vivian Johnson Cook], she was there, you know, in like 1910s or something, and so--and then my mother and her sister--my mother was an AKA, so there was no question I could be anything but an AKA, and they didn't have AKAs at, at Bowling Green at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they just had some kind of like, I don't know, some kind of like local sorority that one of the white women made up for the black girls, and I thought it was really stupid, so I wasn't interested in it. And they lived in this house, which I was like, well, I can live in this nice dorm. Why would I want to live over there? And I didn't particularly know the people or like the people, so-- Story_ID: 656694 Speaker 1: So were there any African American professors at Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] when you got there? Speaker 2: I did have--I think I had an African American speech professor once or like public speaking, but I think that's the only one I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. So Bowling Green [Ohio] is a--this is south of Toledo [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What--so what were you--what, what activities were you drawn to, and what did you do? Speaker 2: You know, I just remember going to school. I didn't do a lot of--whole lot of extra--you know, every, everybody now in college does all these extra, you know, curricular things. I did get involved in the Young Democrats [Young Democrats of America]. This is one of the things that--I looked in the newspaper, in the campus newspaper, and they were going to have this Young Democratic meeting. I think this was my sophomore year. Maybe it was my freshman year, and I looked--and I said, well, I'll go into the union at this meeting. Well, I--you know, I'm from Cleveland [Ohio]. I think there's going to be like, you know, a multitude of people there, so I get up to the second floor of the union, and I see this sign out in the hall, and there was like nobody in the hall, and it was like really quiet, and I was like, oh, maybe I should just forget this and go back to my dorm, but I figured, well, I'm here now, so I knocked on the door, and I went in, and there was, you know, eight or ten people there, and I met, you know, the people in the Young Democrats. One of which was a gentleman by the name of Allen Baldwin, who was a year behind me, and he was a towny, and so, you know, he lived in Bowling Green, and he ultimately became the local chairman for many years of the Wood County Democrats [Wood County Democratic Party]. And I always say that had I not gone into that door that night, my whole political future would have been different because he, he and I were friends for many years. He just passed away last year. He was the one that got me on the board of, of trustees of Bowling Green. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he helped me, you know, when I ran for, you know, different offices, and kind of kept me in touch with statewide Democratic things, so, you know, that meeting, I always tell students, always go to the door. If you--you know, if I hadn't gone through that door and just gone back to my dorm, I probably would have not been involved in politics, so I was involved in the Young Democrats at Bowling Green. Story_ID: 656695 Speaker 1: Now, 1963, the year that you started [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] was a pivotal year in United States history. In fact, there's--a couple of books have been written about '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: I, I have read some-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --of those books, and, of course, you're going to--the day that changed my life was November 22nd. I had gone over to the--it was a Friday, of course--and I had gone over to the bookstore with another roommate because we had a roommate that had a birthday, and we were going to go over, and we chipped in, and we were going to go and buy her a gift. So I had gone over to the bookstore with this other student, my, my roommate, and we came back across the street, and I lived on the first floor of Founders Quadrangle, and I walked in through the hallway and said--someone said, somebody shot President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], and I just remember running down the hall because our room was the last room and telling my other roommates, and, yeah, we listened to the radio, and, of course, you know, I'm this Kennedy--I'm an expert on the Kennedy assassination now. I call myself an expert. My, my son [Seth Connally] says, he'll ask me a question. He goes, "I didn't need to know that much," you know. And so I remember we watched TV, you know, over the weekend, and then--we--it was Thanksgiving the following week, so I went home on Tuesday, and we went to--I got home, and then we immediately left for Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because my [paternal] grandmother [Rossie Connally] was living in Philadelphia, and we had Thanksgiving dinner in, in Philadelphia, and then my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] had an aunt that lived in Washington [D.C.], so my dad and I got in the car Friday morning and we drove over to Washington, and we went to Arlington Cemetery [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia], so the flowers were still there, and my aunt talked about how she had waited in line many, many, hours to--and she'd walked by the--my grand- you know, my father's aunt. She'd walked by the casket. So I went to the--I was at, you know, Arlington Cemetery the week after the, the funeral. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a--yeah, this is--it was a very sad period of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have--I must have every book written just about on the Kennedy assassination. I can tell you every detail. I can tell you everything that Lee Harvey Oswald said from minute by minute to the time he's arrested. I mean, I know more than--I teach a seminar on the, on the Kennedy assassination. I have a huge collection of Kennedy memorabilia; buttons, busts. I have all my friends going to house sales, yard sales. If you see anything Kennedy, just buy it for me. I think--you know, and if you're in my office, I've got, you know, all kinds of--but part of my Kennedy collection probably is in storage 'cause we just moved, but I got Kennedy plates, glasses. Story_ID: 656696 Speaker 1: Well, the question is, so, you know, just to boil all this down, what do you think happened? Do you agree with the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly what the Warren Commission [President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy] said. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That, that Lee Harvey Oswald is the lone assassin. That if you track down all of the evidence, all--after all these years, you know, the conspiracy never existed. It-- had there been a conspiracy, Lee Oswald is the last person that you would have hired. Of course, I'm friends with Judge Burt Griffin who was a staff member of the Warren Commission, but, I mean, I have really studied this, and I went to a conference for --I said--for like the last four years, I was going to go to Dallas [Texas] for the fiftieth anniversary, so I went to the fiftieth anniversary of the--I went to Dallas, and I went to this conference by The Lancer Group, and these are all the conspiracy people. I mean, I knew it was going to be different, but they were all the conspiracy people, and, you know, they blame everybody from Prescott Bush and, and Geor- and, and Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] to Elvis [Elvis Presley]. I mean, you know, they got guys coming out of the sewer. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: French underground (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. And, and I just was in contact with--the, our coroner, county medical examiner has a friend who just did an extensive investigation. The Kennedy family authorized him. He actually went and investigated and examined Kennedy's actual clothing. He studied the gunshot wounds in Kennedy for something like eight or nine months. He is like the world expert on shotguns to--wounds to the head. Dr. Peter Cummings, and he is con- shows conclusively with the X rays and everything. Kennedy was shot from the back of the head. So one of the premises of the conspiracy people is that he's shot from the front, that this is an entrance wound rather than exit wound. I mean, this doctor shows conclusively, he's shot from the back of the head, and the angle is clearly from the sixth floor of the book depository. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: So and it's, it's really sort of a crime that, you know, that Oliver Stone has really even like to besmirch the reputation of, of Earl Warren making him look like a bumbler and a liar. And, and, you know, these Warren Commission people, these are, are scholarly people. I mean, they had no reason to lie. Judge Griffin always said that if he could have found a conspiracy, he would have been the next governor--I mean, the next senator from the State of Ohio and not John Glenn, so, you know, why would--what reason did they have to lie? Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. I know for years and years, I mean, the people talked-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --about the-- Speaker 2: There's three hundred-- Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: There's like four hundred people in Dallas, and they're all con- absolutely convinced there's a conspiracy. I mean, I've been to the house where Oswald lived. I mean, I've been to the book depository. You know, I can tell you the routes, everything he did. I was in Washington [D.C.] in October in the news museum [Newsuem, Washington, D.C.], they actually had the shirt he was wearing. I can tell you where all of Ruby's [Jack Ruby] clothes are. It's--like I said, my, my son [Seth Connally] says, "More information than I probably need to know." Story_ID: 656697 Speaker 1: All right. So you, you were explaining why there's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. There's, there's-- Speaker 1: --so much confusion, right? Speaker 2: You know, there's, there's you know the Warren Commission [President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy] in, in--talks to over twenty-five thousand people, so, I mean, they--there's, there's no stone left you know unturned, but there's always--there's information that wasn't given. Now, there was some information that wasn't given to the Warren Commission, but it doesn't change the outcome. But what--Chief Justice Warren [Earl Warren] makes decisions in the process that affect the outcome. For instance, the, the photographs, the, the autopsy photographs and the X rays. He sees them--and I just read his memoirs--he says he actually becomes physically sick after seeing them, and he doesn't want these to become tabloid items, so he doesn't let anybody see them. He doesn't even let the other people on the commission see them and--'cause he wants to protect the Kennedy family, and he, you know, he's, he's become friends with John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. He actually had been at the White House [Washington, D.C.] the night before Kennedy left for Texas for an event. So and then he releases the Warren report, you know, it's like, what, six hundred pages, and it's a document for the early 20th century, the 19th century, where people would sit down and read six hundred pages, but he gives it to a society that wants a ten second sound bite, and so he--and then he, he does it like a court decision. A court decision, you release it, and you don't say anything else. And that's what he did. And the, and the staff of the Warren Commission, they, they release this, and then they, they just go back to being lawyers, and, and a few of them, I think, that we got--David Belin [David W. Belin] wrote a book. A couple of them wrote--but for the most part, they went back to their lives, so they were not defending the Warren Commission. Then you have Mark Lane who's friends--you know, who's hired by Marguerite Oswald, who's a total nut case, and, you know, she start--you know, she wanted Oswald [Lee Harvey Oswald] buried at, at Arlington [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia]. Yeah. And she--I mean, she was a total nut case, and she starts the first day, "Oh, there's a conspiracy and this stuff," and so, you know, what--we're talking about 1963. You know, we'd had all these relationships with the Russians and all this tension, and so, you know, Oswald is going to Russia. He's going down to Mexico, trying to go to Cuba and we got all the relationships with Cuba, so all this just filters in that everybody wants to believe. And then the bottom line is, no one wants to believe that this unknown nobody with, you know, with a twenty-one dollars or twelve dollar rifle could change history. And that's what he did. And I really believe that Oswald--and he told people that he wanted to--you know--he wanted to do something that would make him famous for, you know, for a thousand years, and I mean--and this is my argument. He--and the night before, you know, he goes back to his wife, and he tries to reconcile with her, and she won't have anything to do with him, so, you know, if Marina [Marina Oswald Porter] had given him some nookie the night before, maybe they had reconciled, maybe, you know, maybe, he wouldn't have done something. But I got a picture with the guy that drove Oswald to work, Buell Frazier [Buell Wesley Frazier]. I met him at a conference when I was at this conference. I have a picture with him. Speaker 1: Buell Frazier, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Hmm. Speaker 2: He's still alive. Speaker 1: Yeah. What, what did he have to say about Oswald? Speaker 2: He tells the same story about, you know, driving him to work, that he was a nice guy, and, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that, "Hey, Lee, what do you have in the package?" "I got the curtain rods." Well, the curtain rods were never found at the book depository. There were never--there was no need for curtain rods where he lived. He, he didn't tell his wife he was taking curtain rods. There were no curtain rods missing from Ruth Paine's garage, so it was obviously the rifle. They've got the proof that he bought it, the purchase--you know--the purchase order, the post office box it was sent to, you know, so, it--you know, he takes the rifle in, and, you know, he's the only person they can't find. They don't know where he is. Everybody else is, is--you can tell where they are at the time of the assassination. Story_ID: 656698 Speaker 1: Earlier in the year, that summer, before school started the March on Washington took place, did, did anybody in your family participate in-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --the march? Speaker 2: No. I think I was--I, I can't remember. No, I, I was home that summer, but, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And the summer of the Hough [Cleveland, Ohio] riots, I was in Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio]. I went to summer school that summer, so I wasn't here the summer of the Hough riots, which I think was in '65 [sic. 1966] maybe. Speaker 1: Of the what, what riots? Speaker 2: The Hough riots here-- Speaker 1: Hough, oh, oh. Speaker 2: --in Cleveland. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: H-O-U-G-H, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right, right. Okay. So then Bowling Green from '63 [1963] to '67 [1967]. So, so were there any special teachers or mentors at Bowling Green? Speaker 2: Not particularly. I--yeah, I did like-- I remember Professor Rollary [ph.] taught American history, Southern history, and I liked him a lot because I like the Southern history and the Civil War history. Speaker 1: Okay. Were they teaching it from the perspective of--like a New South perspective, or was it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Kind of. I just--I mean, he had gone to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina]. I just remember him as a good--I remember, I remember 'cause I used that information when I went on to take other classes in history, but, I mean, he was good. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you were just trying--you're trying to finish-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) school-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and get on to law school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: I graduated in January, and I came home, and I took-- Speaker 1: So is that like in three and a half years, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. 'cause I went to summer school every summer. I'd take a class here in Cleveland [Ohio]. Then I came home, and I was a substitute teacher, and I really didn't like teaching at all. I was a substitute teacher like for high school, and I, I just really didn't like it. So I went to school. I went to law school that fall, and, actually, right across the street where the Justice Center [Cleveland, Ohio] is, Cleveland-Marshall law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio]. And when I was in law school, I think my first year I didn't work, but then the second year, somebody--a lawyer called my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] and says, you know, "I hear your daughter is in law school. Do you think she would want to work for us, you know, like in the afternoons or something?" And so I worked for Carl Character [Carl J. Character] and Sam Perry [Samuel Perry], and it was Stokes, Stokes, Character, and Perry [Stokes, Character, Terry, Perry, Whitehead, Young and Davidson, Cleveland, Ohio], so it was actually the law firm where Carl Stokes had left, but he was the mayor, so I used to see him, and we--I'd see him once in a while, and I'd see [HistoryMaker] Louis Stokes once in a while, so I was kind of in that Stokes circle. You know, they were--when Stokeses ran, I was always involved in the campaigns and stuff. Story_ID: 656699 Speaker 1: Now, Carl Stokes was elected mayor in '68 [1968] right? (Unclear). Speaker 2: I think it was '68 [1968]. Yeah. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Now, this is the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 1: --this is the, the year after you graduated [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So when you started working for-- Speaker 2: He was the mayor. Speaker 1: --Carl Character [Carl J. Character] he was the mayor. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was the mayor. Speaker 1: He was the mayor then. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so what did you think when you, when you come back to Cleveland [Ohio], and, and here we have a black man running for mayor? Speaker 2: I just thought it was cool. I mean, I, I don't, I don't think in the same context like, you know, then. Speaker 1: Did you think he would win? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I remember going to--I remember--I guess that must--he was running for reelection. I remember going--working in the campaign. He ran for reelection, when he ran against Seth Taft. Speaker 1: Yeah. But before he won the first time, did you think he was going to win? I mean, you know, this is-- Speaker 2: I think I was at school. I don't think I just--I don't think I was paying too much attention to it. Speaker 1: Yeah. This is a big, you know--this the first-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --black mayor of a major urban city. Speaker 2: I don't think I thought in that context. I really don't. I just--I mean, he won, so I don't know. Speaker 1: I know everybody else was shocked, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: But, you know, I served with him on Cleveland Municipal Court with Carl Stokes. Speaker 1: Okay. But in those days, you didn't see it coming. You didn't, you didn't have any thoughts about it. Speaker 2: I think I was in school, you know, and I just--I probably wasn't paying too much attention to it. Speaker 1: Okay. So the election was in '68 [1968] or '67 [1967] or was it in '67 [1967], sixty-- Speaker 2: I remember that my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] had an office on Superior [Avenue], so I changed my voting, and we had lived in--we moved to Beechwood [Avenue], so I moved my voting address to Superior so I could vote, and I remember I voted one time from there, and then went to vote again, and they questioned my voting, so I didn't vote. I just walked out. I said, "That's okay. Maybe there was a mix up," because I wasn't want to get in any trouble, and I think that was-- Speaker 1: So you were trying to vote twice? Speaker 2: No, no. I wasn't going to vote twice. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I just wanted to vote in the City of Cleveland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then they questioned my voting, and so I didn't want to get in a big fight about it, so I just walked away. I didn't vote. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. This is Cleveland, not Chicago [Illinois], right (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah. No, right. I just wanted to vote once. I just wanted to vote in Cleveland. Story_ID: 656700 Speaker 1: So what did you think about the administration of Carl Stokes? Speaker 2: You know, I was in law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], and I was working. I worked at the law firm [Stokes, Character, Terry, Perry, Whitehead, Young and Davidson, Cleveland, Ohio], and I was there when they had the big scandal. There was a big scandal about a lawyer by the name of J.B. White [ph.]. They, they--he was on the police--on some kind of board, and they claim he stole the police exams. They claimed it was copied at the law office where I worked, and I mean, I, I was kind of like on the fringes of that. But I mean, I just--I mean, I was learning. It was exciting to me to be around lawyers and learning, and, you know, I'd go file a paper or, you know, go to court with somebody, or--so, you know, I was in law school, and it was, it was kind of where the action was. It was interesting. Speaker 1: Hmm. So they were, they were claiming that J.B. White --he's black, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was black. Speaker 1: They, they were claiming that he stole the police exam, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Or he copied it. Speaker 1: --would give it to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and gave it to people. Yeah. He was on the--some kind of commission. Speaker 1: Now, this is a charge that's leveled, yeah, every time there's a police exam-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in a major city that somebody stole an exam 'cause it's usually the white people that are accused of stealing the exam, you know, and black folks that don't get it, but because you have a black mayor, then this is a scandal. So, so what was the outcome of the scandal? Speaker 2: I think, I think that--I think maybe he pled to a misdemeanor or something. I don't know. But they--I think it was all--I don't remember exactly how, but it was, it was kind of--it was--there was some actions, and I don't know if there was ever any proof. I just don't remember. I probably should but--'cause I read one of the biographies of Carl Stokes, and there was like--no, that's not right. That, that didn't happen that way (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, so there's some things being reported that you don't-- Speaker 2: Well, every (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) think-- Speaker 2: --history, every historian, you know, you see something, and you go, well, Carl Stokes living--no, he didn't live there. He lived there. You know, people start--once things get--'cause I've known his--and, you know, when I--I mean, I, I have all the dissertation for this Ph.D. in history, but you go back and you, you look at a source and it will say this. And then like this thing about my, my rel--the Ladeveze family and going back to the black elite. And you keep tracing it back, and it all goes back to one source, one person says that, and then everybody else starts--puts footnotes and it says the same thing, so-- Speaker 1: So then they kind of pile on, and so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it looks like a lot of people. Speaker 2: Yeah. Except it's only one. It's only one (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's only one. Speaker 2: Yeah. Or you'll go back and trace it back and one bad source that everybody else, you know, repeats. Story_ID: 656701 Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, what did you--was law school easy for you, or was it-- Speaker 2: I was the only girl (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what you expected? Speaker 2: I was the only female in my class. I went to day school, and I'll never forget, I was in school, and there was me and there was a guy from Liberia, and so the professor comes in one day, and he's all upset, and he says, somebody is going to get expelled, and there was like a big problem, and, you know, they were in deep trouble, and everybody is like kind of quaking in their boots, and I'm sitting there, and he goes, now, "Ms. Connally [HistoryMaker C. Ellen Connally] and Mr. Butler--," well, at this point, I had just about lost it. "We're not worried about you because it was a white male, that had done whatever it was" (laughter). So he was letting us know, but it was kind of like, oh, my god, you know, why are you calling my name? But I'm still very good friends with people that I went to law school with. I, you know, hear from them a lot, and, you know, the one, one of them actually, we're sort of in the same travel group, and so-- Speaker 1: So who was--now, this is--the Liberian is named Butler. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right? And-- Speaker 2: He was Andrew Butler [ph.]. I don't know whatever happened to him. I know he lived in California for a while. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So he didn't go back to Liberia. Speaker 2: I think he did go back to Liberia eventually. And then he was, he was working for the government, but there was a coup, and he was outside of the--that's what the people tell me. He was outside of the country during the coup, and he never went back. I remember his, his mother owned a bunch of rubber plantations or something, but I never know what happened to him. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. He, he was lucky he was outside of the country (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. This was after he was a lawyer 'cause he just needed to graduate. He, he like didn't study and stuff 'cause as long as he graduated, they didn't have a bar exam in Liberia. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. This would have been about nineteen seventy-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I graduated in '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: --eight [1978] or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. He, he--the coup, I think was in '78 [1978] or '79 [sic. 1980]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Samuel Doe. So, okay. Well, were there any--did you have any favorite professors in, in law school? Speaker 2: Yeah. I liked Professor Myriad [ph.]. He was, I think, a Jamaican or something. He was like--I, I think he was really black, but he didn't--they didn't--he didn't pose as black. But I used to go--I actually got to be friends with him afterwards, after law school, but, yeah, I had a lot of professors. It's funny that I--one of the professors died, a professor I actually kind of liked, and he died about--oh--about six, eight months ago, so I called my classmates. I says, "Hey, you know, professor So and So died." And he goes, "Oh, that bastard. He gave me a D. You got a, you got a twenty-six, and I got a C, and I got a twenty-four, and, and you got, you got--I got a D." It's like, "How can you remember that? (Laughter). He actually remembered what--he says, "Yeah. Don't you remember? You got this grade, and I got this grade, and you got a C, and I got a D." I was like--so, yeah, I remember a lot of my professors from, from law school. Speaker 1: Was, was Cleveland-Marshall College of Law [Cleveland, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Yes, Cleveland-Marshall College of Law. Speaker 1: What, was it very competitive? Speaker 2: It was a night law school. Then it--I was in the first day class, and so it was--I don't know, it was--I don't know. I just remember I made good friends there. I still have a lot of good friends from law school. Speaker 1: I know a lot of law school, you know, graduates talk about, you know, cutthroat activities in law school-- Speaker 2: No. No one cut the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where, where the students--actually, they're graded on curves. Everybody is trying to pull each other back. Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. We used to study-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And then--and I know from the bar exam, two white guys came and says, "Hey, you know, we want a third person. You want to study with us?" And, I mean, we kind of like lived together for two months, you know, you know, studying. Yeah. It was, it was, it wasn't cutthroat. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We share books and, you know, share information, and-- Story_ID: 656702 Speaker 1: And did you specialize in any-- Speaker 2: Well, actually, when I was in--well, I went to--when the, the law firm--Character and those guys [Stokes, Character, Terry, Perry, Whitehead, Young and Davidson, Cleveland, Ohio] hired me because the idea was like women did probate. You know, we could, you know, have her do our probate stuff, but I didn't really specialize in anything. And then when I, I actually, I failed the bar--Ohio state bar exam the first time, which was, you know--but a bunch of us failed that time, and then I continued to work at the law firm, and I worked someplace else, and then I got out and I was looking for a job, and I went over to the court of appeals [Eighth District Court of Appeals of Ohio]. I was just asking everybody, you know, 'cause I was looking for a job. I went to talk to the--a judge I knew got me an interview with a county prosecutor who told me if I was a male, he would have hired me. Yeah. And now that would have been a great lawsuit, but, yeah, he told me, John G. Corrigan [sic. John V. Corrigan]. He said, "Like, you know, if you were a man, you know, we'd hire you, but, you know, we're not going to hire you." So I went over to the court of appeals, and Judge Leo Jackson [Leo A. Jackson], who had been a councilman, and my dad knew him, when over and was a court of appeals judge, so I just went over and said, "Can I see the judge?" And they said, "Yeah." And he--and I, you know, told him I'm looking for a job, so he actually ended up getting me a job as a law clerk. I will tell you this about my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.], though. This--my dad used to send us on these missions, and it--we used to call it, taking the message to Garcia. Now, if you go back--I actually tracked this down. Booker T. Washington used to tell the story about somebody in the Spanish-American War where you had to go by hill and dale to carry this message, and I think his name was Garcia [Calixto Garcia], but it became-- Speaker 1: Garcia (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Garcia to us. Yeah. And my dad would tell us like, okay, take this letter down to this office. You know, get on the bus and go there and take this letter or go do this, and, you know, he probably could have mailed it, but he would send us on these missions, and at the time, we used to hate it. My sister [Gwendolyn Connally Campbell] and I, we thought it was horrible, but it really was a great experience because when I was ten years old, if they'd had said, "Here's an airline ticket and, you know, your aunt will meet you in the plane in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or South Carolina," I'd have gone, like, okay. 'Cause I had a student--I had--this has been like when I was still on the bench like 2003 or '4 [2004]. I had a student who was a senior in high school, and you know how they come. They do that kind of senior experience, and so I said, I didn't have anything for her to do, and I said, "You know, I need a book from the library. You know, can you go to the public library and, and get this book?" "Oh, I couldn't do that." I go, "What do you mean you can't do that? The, the library is right there. You look out the window. It's that tall building right there. Go down the elevator." And so she--and I said, "Here's my library card. Go down the elevator and go walk over to that building. Go to the fourth floor. Give the librarian your--my name. They'll give you the book and bring it back." Well, she, with great trepidation, finally did it. If I was in the third or fourth grade, I'd got on the bus, go to the public library downtown, got the book and gone--we used to go to the library downtown on the bus all the time. So I mean, I think we have a bunch of sheltered children that, you know, I think it was very good for me the things that my dad made us do. Speaker 1: Yeah. The idea of being in the suburbs, doing everything (unclear). Speaker 2: No. I wasn't in the suburb. Speaker 1: No, no, not you. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, now. Right. Speaker 1: But I'm saying-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --now. You meet people, a lot of kids don't have a--they don't walk anywhere. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. We used to walk to school sometime, or we'd walked to the library, or, you know, we'd go different places, get on the bus and go, and, I mean, I, I was taught--and when we would go on--like we would drive to South Carolina. My dad would make us, you know, map it out so we know which routes to take. I mean, these kids don't even know what a map looks like now. Just put in Google Earth, I guess. Speaker 1: So this is a, this is a--some- somebody that's clerking for you in the, in the office, in, in a legal office that-- Speaker 2: No. She was just a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: --high school student. Speaker 1: She was just a high school student. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, not like to do-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --like they'd come and watch or something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I mean, so when I got jobs, and I was, you know, given tasks to do, I mean, I knew how to do them. It was kind of the same thing. Like, so, you know, when I worked in a law office. I would go, you know, take this over to a certain court or something, I knew how to do it. Speaker 1: Yeah. I've heard this, this message to Garcia story-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --before. Do, do you, do you want to, want to tell us that--what, what the story-- Speaker 2: I don't know all the story. I think it was like during the, the Spanish-American War or something, and like there was some guy that had to go over hill and dale to deliver this message or something. My father used to quote it, says, "Yes, take a message to Garcia," so that was the name that we used to--when my dad would send us on all these little silly missions. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Okay. It was to teach you, you know-- Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: --(unclear). Speaker 2: --it was a very, it was a very, very good experience. Story_ID: 656703 Speaker 1: Okay. So law clerk for Ohio's Eighth District Court of Appeals [Eighth District Court of Appeals of Ohio]. That's where--and you, you clerked under Carl J. Character, right? Speaker 2: No, no, no. I worked as-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No. I worked at-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --the law office [Stokes, Character, Terry, Perry, Whitehead, Young and Davidson, Cleveland, Ohio] for Carl J. Character. Speaker 1: Okay. So this, this-- Speaker 2: I clerked for Judge Alvin I. Krenzler [Alvin Krenzler]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Alvin-- Speaker 2: Who was a Republican. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, Character was a part of the law firm that included-- Speaker 2: With Stokes, yeah. Speaker 1: --Stokes and-- Speaker 2: So I knew all the Stokeses [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes and Carl Stokes], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so you clerked for Krenzler. Speaker 2: Krenzler. Speaker 1: Krenzler. Speaker 2: And he was Republican. I always say if I had changed to be Republican, I probably could have been a federal judge 'cause he was very, very wealthy and very influential, but I just couldn't. I couldn't switch parties. Speaker 1: Okay. You know, well, by '71 [1971] Republicans and Democrats are really--are becoming more and more polarized. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: But I, I think I was the first black female clerk at the court of appeals, and I worked there for about two years, and then I got a job as a magistrate in the probate court [Probate Court of Cuyahoga County, Ohio], which I really--it was, it was one of my favorite jobs. You know, you're kind of like a sub judge. You're, you know, ruling on things and having hearings and I met a lot of lawyers there, and it really helped me when I ran for judge. And then, you know, and, and all these people would say like, she was really nice to me, and so when I ran for judge, people say, "Yeah. I remember her. She was nice to me." And I had people now say, "You know what? You don't remember this, but like, you know, forty years ago, I came to probate court, and you gave me some good advice." Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Let's see. So, so you were with Judge Krenzler for-- Speaker 2: About two years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about, about a year? Two years. Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: So in seventy--was it '72 [1972] that you went to the probate (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah. Right, actually, same building right across the hall. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Tell us about that experience. Speaker 1: Yeah. I was--there had been an African American gentleman who was a magistrate, and he, I don't know, he, he left, and so there was an opening, and they didn't have any other black magistrates, and I think, may, may--a couple people called and, and recommended me, and so it was, you know, working as a--in the--as a hearing officer for the probate court. So the judge--you do all the basic hearings, and made rulings, and then if they didn't like it, the judge could appeal, so you're handling the daily operations, so I got to know probate very well. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. And-- Speaker 1: And I established my reputation. I got involved with the bar association, and, you know, some other things while I was working at probate, and that's when I decided to run for judge. Speaker 2: Okay. So you--but you were there from '72 [1972] to '79 [1979]. Is that-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. I got elected in '79 [1979]. Story_ID: 656704 Speaker 1: Then you decided to run for judge in '79 [1979]. Speaker 2: Yeah. I ran against a guy by the name of Hugh Brennan [ph.]. Brennan was a very, very strong name. People said, "Well, you know, go ahead and run, but, you know, you can't win." And I really worked, and, you know, I had this Irish name, and I was a woman, and this guy, he was--I think he was really kind of getting senile. He was, you know--when he went for interviews, he--they asked him what he did for a hobby. He said he liked minstrel shows or something. I mean, he was really kind of--yeah, it was kind of bizarre. And so, you know, it was time for a change, and women candidates were, were running--were, you know, winning, so, yeah, I won. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you're elected to the Cleveland Municipal Court. Speaker 2: Well, there's a-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --story behind that. I got elected on a--the election was on a Tuesday, and the Friday night before the election, I was actually, I was actually with Mike White [Michael R. White], who was mayor, or he was--no, he wasn't the mayor. He was a councilman. And I went like this, and I had this like lump under my arm, and I go, gee, I got this, this lump under my arm, and so I went to work on Monday 'cause I figured, well, I've either won or lost now. The election is tomorrow. I either won or lost. So I went through that, and I called the doctor, and I said, "You know, I have this lump--(unclear). I got a lump under my arm." And the lady says, "Well, can you come today?" I go, "Well, yeah, I guess so." So I go to this doctor, and I go, "Well, I got this lump under my arm," and they go, "Well, you got to have surgery." And I said, "Well, we got to go tomorrow." And I go, "Well, I can't go tomorrow because I'm getting elected," so--and the guy goes, "You probably can't come Wednesday either." So Thursday I went and I found I had breast cancer right after, you know, after the election. So I had surgery like, you know, two days after the election. Speaker 1: Okay. So that, apparently solved the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Did, did that solve it? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Wow. So they just had--just removed that lump from your arm. Speaker 2: No. I actually had a mastectomy. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So I, I've been involved in the Breast Cancer Fund of Ohio [Independence, Ohio] for a while, that's later on, but, yeah. Speaker 1: That's a lot of stress at one time. (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, well, then, the other thing is, you know, when I worked at probate court [Probate Court of Cuyahoga County, Ohio], I adopted my son [Seth Connally]. I worked at probate court, and they had this baby that the guy comes to me and says, "Well, we got this baby that these people brought from Vietnam, and they changed their minds, and we have to find a home for it," so that's how I got my son when I worked at probate court. Speaker 1: Now, what year is that? Speaker 2: It was like '74 [1974] or '5 [1975]. I think it was '75 [1975] 'cause I bought my house in '76 [1976]. I think it was '73 [1973] or '4 [1974]. Story_ID: 656705 Speaker 1: So '79 [1979] so at--was it--(unclear) seem like it was pretty tough adjustment. Was, was it a tough adjustment to, to-- Speaker 2: Become a judge? Speaker 1: Yeah. At that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --juncture? You know, (unclear) -- Speaker 2: No. Because I had been a magistrate. It was--it's very, very similar. Now, I hadn't done the criminal stuff, but, but, yeah, I got all the--I mean, I got The Plain Dealer endorsement. But I had to learn the criminal stuff, but other than that, I was used to, I was used to the filings and the court system. I mean, I was, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So-- Speaker 2: And the civil stuff was very similar. Speaker 1: So now what is--so you were a judge for twenty-four years. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, well, and, and you handled like--what kind of cases (unclear)? Speaker 2: I was a municipal court judge [Cleveland Municipal Court], so we handled misdemeanor and civil cases up to fifteen thousand dollars. And we had preliminary hearings on felony cases. And then when I got elected, Frank Celebrezze [Frank D. Celebrezze, Jr.] was the chief justice of the Ohio supreme court [Supreme Court of Ohio], and I had campaigned for Frank Celebrezze and my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] knew Frank Celebrezze, and so every time there was like--you know, you got to go to Reno [Nevada] for--Ohio needed a municipal court judge, it was me. I was like, you know, I was like on the inside track, so I was, I was appointed to a bunch of commissions and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And if Frank had gotten to be governor, I'd have been in good shape, but then he didn't get elected governor, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. I thought--well, yeah. 'Cause I thought there was a Celebrezze who had been governor, but he--they ran for governor. Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And then it was, it was attorney general. Speaker 1: Attorney general. Speaker 2: Yeah. People would call me up and say like, "Are you going to talk to the chief justice?" I go, well, "I don't know, you know." I could call him up, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So this is--so you're elected in '79 [1979]. So what, what were some of the memorable cases? Can you talk about any of the cases? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I had like--I had (unclear) a woman named Wendy O. Williams, who was charged with some kind of pornography. I had people-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. That's the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --woman that would spray--I mean, she had like whipped cream that she would spray all over herself and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --appear in public, and-- Speaker 2: You know, I had--you know, I--it was a whole different side of life, you know, to see the people that, you know, the homeless--we didn't really call them that much--homeless, that much, but, you know, the bums that, you know, you, you give them a couple nights in jail 'cause they had no place to go. You know, we, we--it's interesting. We did not have domestic violence at that time. It wasn't a crime when I got elected, so, you know, you'd have like assaults on women, so when I--since it would be--during that twenty-four period--twenty-four year period, the whole domestic violence law develops. You know, we ended up with a domestic violence special docket. When I got elected, we would have very, very few women charged with drinking and driving, maybe out of a hundred cases, you might have one or two women. Now, you know, you're probably running probably about 40 percent women, much more. But I, I think that police either didn't arrest them or women didn't drink out as much, but very few women. But it was--you know--it was really kind of a happy family at, at Cleveland Municipal Court. When I got there, my dad said, like, "Now, listen, you know, you listen to Judge Clarence Gaines. He's been there a long time, so there's going to be a lot of politics involved, and you listen to Judge Gaines." And I remember I did. I, you know, I'd always call Judge Gaines or Judge Williams [Theodore M. Williams] and say, you know, what do we do? Or, you know. We'd always have--it was, it was amazing. We'd have Christmas parties and bottles of liquor would all be out on the table (laughter), and I remember this one police officer used to make some kind of bayou punch that tasted like really good, and you'd drink a couple of glasses, you could barely stand up, so at, at some point, we said, like, you know, we can't have all this liquor in the court anymore, but that was kind of (simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 656706 Speaker 1: So just check back for the record now. You were the, you were the first female African American Democrat elected [to the Cleveland Municipal Court]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, okay. So the-- Speaker 2: And first one who was elected straight up, so I was never appointed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was just elected. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: The other women-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --had all been elected--been appointed first. Speaker 1: And--but there were other African American female Republicans that were elected. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. All right. So there are-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Judge Lillian Burke [HistoryMaker Lillian Burke]. Speaker 1: --other black people, judges. Speaker 2: I sat with Lillian Burke-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --was the first black judge in, in Ohio. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: A black woman judge. And I actually knew Judge Perry Jackson [Perry B. Jackson]. He was the first black judge in Ohio. Speaker 1: Yeah. Judge Lillian Burke, I think is Julieanna's [Julieanna Richardson] aunt, I think, of the, the lady that, that founded The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Oh, really. Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. So, so is--now, did you make a difference in terms of domestic violence? You know, do, do you think when you look back on your time on the bench? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. I think that, you know, you know, you, you would--the women who want, you know, want to drop the charges. Now, actually after I retired and actually one of the last cases I had, this girl's name was Tonya Harding [ph.]. I'll never forget this. I was sitting by assignment. They called me up, and they said, "Can you do a docket tomorrow morning?" And I go, "Yeah, I can do a docket tomorrow morning." And I go down there, and this man is charged with a probation violation, and he had beat this woman up for a second time, and I was very upset about it because he had done it in front of her child, and I, I--and I said to her, I said, "What do you do for a living?" She goes, "I'm a marriage counselor." I'm going, "You're a marriage counselor." And I said, "Well, you got to break up with this guy." I said, "This guy is going to kill you." I said, "You know, this is, this is really bad," and I gave him something like forty, forty-five days in jail, and, and I, and I act--and I'll never forget it because after the docket was over, you know, how the court reporters and the bailiffs and everybody is standing around. They're going like, "Boy, you know, that, that guy was like really bad. Like, he's going to kill her." And I go, "Yeah, like, he was like really scary." And then about two months later, I get a phone call, and they said, "Didn't you have that Tonya Harding?" I go, "Yeah." He goes, "She's dead. That guy killed her." And it was, it was just, you know, it was heartbreaking that I had warned her. I says, you know, you got a break up with this guy. I just remembered, you know. I said, you know, if I--and I, I was like, I was like, "You know if this guy, if this guy kills you, now, I'm not going to feel sorry for you 'cause you got to get away from him." And he did. But then I also had women who came and said, like, you know, "You gave me that speech and, and I broke up with my husband, and I'm alive, and--or I broke up with my boyfriend," so very, very bad, bad, sad stories about women that get involved in this syndrome of domestic violence. Story_ID: 656707 Speaker 1: I neglected to ask you, what inspired you to run for office? Speaker 2: I wanted to be a judge. Speaker 1: And did anybody encourage you? Were people saying-- Speaker 2: I had worked in other campaigns (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you ought to be a judge (unclear)? Speaker 2: I had worked in other campaigns, you know, so I mean, I saw these other black judges, and I was like, well, they can--all the--if they can do it, I can do it. So-- Speaker 1: Did anybody say you ought to be a judge or we'll support you if you run for judge, or (unclear)? Speaker 2: Not necessarily. But, you know, I had a lot of support like a lot of--you know, from probate court [Probate Court of Cuyahoga County, Ohio], and, you know, I knew a lot of lawyers, and people say, yeah, you can do it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, basically, you germinated the idea to (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. And I remember there was one guy that I used to ask him, "Well, are you going to run?" He goes, "No, you--I don't think you can win." So I said, "Well, I'm going to give it a shot," so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I germinated the idea. Speaker 1: Are the elections like citywide, or-- Speaker 2: It was just a citywide election. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So the chances for a black judge in those days were pretty good considering the population was pretty much. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I had an Irish name. Irish names run really well. I was a woman. Women, you know, always get, you know, a really good vote. Corrigans and Donnallys, you know, had got elected, so--and I got the Dem- I got The Plain Dealer endorsement. I got the bar association [Ohio State Bar Association] endorsement. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then my dad [George L. Connally, Jr.] knew a lot of people, you know, and, I mean, I mean, I knew people from--you know, I, I lived here all my life, and-- Speaker 1: Judges are normally the most obscure people on the ballot-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you go to vote. And you get a list of those judges, and you look at the list, and I know, I--as an African American male--I try to find out if I don't--and I usually don't know all of them--I try to figure out which ones are black. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: From looking at the name. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so I'm looking at the name, so this is a--Connally is a name that's in the black community. People know that name, so that's--that was helpful I'm sure. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Had your name been something else, you know, that was not so well known, it might not have been-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was lucky enough to have an Irish name. Speaker 1: Okay. Or one that black folks had as well. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. So, okay. I thought I'd ask then, but was, was there any, any, was there any particular mentor or, or person that served as a--you know, somebody to advise you during this period of time, you know? Speaker 2: No. I mean, I, I used to have--they used to have the John M. Harlan Law Club. I used to work in that, so I knew--you know--I knew lots of lawyers, and I knew--and I had worked in the Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes and Carl Stokes] campaigns, and-- Speaker 1: Did anybody tell you, try to discourage you, to tell you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --not to do it? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Shouldn't run for-- Speaker 2: No. If they were saying it, they were saying it behind my back, so-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. All right. I just wanted to surround that one, so, okay. Story_ID: 656708 Speaker 1: Now, back to the court cases. This is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --a little different. Speaker 2: I had--we had a cadre of, of women who were involved in prostitution, and we had, you know, six to eight regulars. We knew them. They were in court [Cleveland Municipal Court] all the time. We knew their pimps. They knew their children. And so, you know, over the years, now, most of the women involved in prostitution are involved in drugs, but these women, this was their--this was a terrible thing, and, you know, we're always trying to get them out, but, you know, you got to know them over the years, and I remember--I still see--some of them call me up, or I see them on the street. I was someplace not long ago, and I ran--I was actually with one--a girl that used to be one of my probation officers, and we ran into one. It was like (unclear). We were hugging. How you doing? And the one gal called me about six month ago, and she had--she says, "Aw, Judge [HistoryMaker C. Ellen Connally], I, I don't have a driver's license." I said, "Let me--I'll help you get your driver's license back." So I went over to court and said, "Listen, can you pull all her cases?" And they said, "Yeah. We'll go through the docket and make sure we get them." We got all--she had like, you know, ten, twelve cases or something. And, you know, I represented her, and they dropped a bunch, and I went into court, and I said, you know, this lady was--used to be a frequent flyer here, but she's got her life together, and, you know, they've dropped a bunch of tickets and she paid some. And now--and she was so proud. She faxed me her driver's license. Speaker 1: When, when you--do you ever reflect--did you ever reflect or do you now on the law as it affects--prostitution is a victimless crime basically. You know, here's some--we were just talk, talking about a man who beats up his, his wife or his girlfriend repeatedly and then kills her. You know, he gets like forty-five days or something, you know-- Speaker 2: No. They got more. He, he had done other time. I mean, I just-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: But, I mean, I--we used to get all these white guys from the suburbs, and, and they--the lawyers would just die. They would just cringe. Like, I--"You know, sir, you live out in Parma [Ohio] and you work in Mentor [Ohio], and how did you happen to be down here at, you know, 30th [Street] and Prospect [Avenue] at two o'clock in the morning? Did your grandmother live down that way or something?" You know, they'd be sweating, and, you know. They're--we kind of broke it up. You know, I used to go out with the, the vice unit, you know, kind of watch these guys out involved in prostitution, but we, we don't have quite as much of that anymore. Speaker 1: I know you're just enforcing the law, but, but did you--I mean, do you think that prostitutes ought to be prosecuted for-- Speaker 2: I never--I mean, I never gave them any serious time. You know, I was always trying to get them out and trying to, you know, trying to help them. And, and actually one time, another judge actually was trying to charge me with something, thought I had done something improper or something, and some of the prostitutes, one of the prostitutes came up and said, "You know, Judge, we saw that on TV that Judge So and So was trying to, you know, trying to attack you on something, but, you know, he comes down and engages in our services, and if, you know, you want to--you want us to testify, we'll come down and testify because you've always been fair to us." So I was like, "Okay, thank you very much." And I got the message to that judge and never heard any more about it, so, yeah. They, they would kind of look--you know, it was, it was give and take. Story_ID: 656709 Speaker 1: And now, this is not a prostitution story, but I was going--I went to the federal building [Anthony J. Celebrezze Federal Building, Cleveland, Ohio] about two years, year and a half, and the guard said--you have to show your ID. And he goes, "I know who you are. You can go on in." And I go, "Like, did I do something wrong?" He says, "No," he said, "no. You gave me a break." He says, "I have this job because you gave me a break." He said, "I won't tell you what it was." He said, "But you were fair and you gave me a break, and I was able to get this job." So, you know, some kid would come in, and he had a marijuana charge, and, you know, he didn't have any other record, and he seemed like a good kid going to school. I'd say, you know, what, prosecutor, can you give the guy a disorderly conduct and he'll pay the maximum fine, and he won't have that mari- that drug charge. Because you know, thirty years from now, something comes up. You got a drug charge on you. So, you know, the people that can go to the first offender program. You know, the kid is going to go in the [U.S. military] service, and they got--he's got, you know, some kind of a little disorderly conduct, similar charge. Say, you know what? Can we put him through the first-offender program? He's got his recruiter here. He's going to the service. He'll be gone. You know, we get him through in a week or so (unclear). So I think those kinds of things, you know, are--a judge can do that, you know, you can, you can help somebody. These are not people that killed somebody. Now, if you killed a dog, that's it, maximum sentence. Speaker 2: You had some cases like that, huh. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. If you did something to a dog, the prosecutors would all be praying that I would get the case because I, I, you know, it's very hard for me to be fair to somebody--not fair--I'm fair, but be lenient on someone that does something to an animal. Speaker 2: Okay. So not just dogs, but-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Any kind of animal. Speaker 2: Any animal. Did you have to deal with--I know Ohio at one time had more exotic animals than any other state. Speaker 1: You know, we never had any of those. I never had any of those. Those are more out in the suburbs, yeah. I know because I went to a conference when I first became a judge, and they were talking about a wildlife violation. I thought they were talking about prostitution. They were like, no, no, like that jack lighting deer. Like, what the hell is jack lighting deer? You go out like you shine a light up and it scares the deer, and they freeze and you can shoot them or something. I was like, I was like I didn't know what that was. Speaker 2: That's the first time I've heard of that. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's called jack (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What-- what's this-- Speaker 1: --lighting deer. Speaker 2: Okay. So it makes them easier to shoot, just-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Because you, you-- Speaker 2: It freezes. Speaker 1: --you shine the light in their eye, and the deer freezes, and you can shoot them. Speaker 2: Oh, oh. Speaker 1: Which is horrible. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's really not sport (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Killing Bambi, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Right. Story_ID: 656710 Speaker 1: Now, do you--what is your, what is your judicial philosophy? Do you-- Speaker 2: I think you ought to be fair, and you got to look at the facts, and you got to be fair. Justice Warren [Earl Warren], I was just reading his biography, and he talks about, does your--and I think he quotes Oliver Wendell Holmes [Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.]. You, you are affected in a sense by your, your background, but, you know, you look at the law, and you want to be fair. I remember I had a--they had--the City of Cleveland [Ohio] was down charging people for scalping tickets at the Browns game. Now, somebody is going to get their car stolen, you know, and they're out using police time to charge somebody with scalping tickets, so I threw out a whole bunch of tickets. It was like, you know, pay the costs and good bye or not guilty. And the police department was very upset about me, but The Plain Dealer wrote an article in the--wrote an editorial, and said, you know, we final got somebody with some sense. If you're going to go down there and stand in line and sell the ticket for more, who really cares? I mean, who's really hurt? Speaker 1: Yeah. The people that, that really can afford to pay more for it, pay it, and go on in. Speaker 2: Yeah. And there were people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you don't get it, you'll never get it. Right. Speaker 2: --and they were people who said--and I don't know if they were lying or not, but people said, "Like, you know what? I had an extra ticket, and there was some old guy with his grandkids, and I gave him the ticket. And, you know, and they wanted--they wanted to charge me." And I kept telling the Cleveland Browns, you know, I think they--they may have something now, but, have a thing where if you got an extra ticket, you can leave it, and you come down, and you're a member of the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] or something, then we'll give it to you, you know. 'Cause after--you know how it goes--after one season, you can probably predict about exactly how many tickets you're going to get. So you tell the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts, the Boy, Boys Clubs [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America], whoever, to come down and they'll give you a ticket if you, you come in. Speaker 1: Right. That makes sense too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. So, so is--your philosophy is just be fair. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And I think--I mean, I've, I've had people tell me, say, hey, you know, you were fair. And that's all you, that's all you can do. I, I used to have--I'd have a case where they'd say--the, the lawyer or the public-- particularly, in public defense. "Oh, Judge [HistoryMaker C. Ellen Connally], you know, if you lock this person up, you know, there are children at home," and I go, "That's not my problem. You know, lock them up." And then the public defender would say, "Well, Judge, you know, his dog is at home, and there's no one to take care of his dog." I go, "Oh, well, how much time does he need to, to get somebody to take care of the dog?" Because I'd be more, you know, concerned about getting--somebody taking care of that dog. Couldn't leave that dog in the house. Speaker 1: So you--do you have a dog at home? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I have two dogs. Speaker 1: Oh, you got two dogs. All right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: One, one time I had this case where these, these pit bulls had killed this man, and I had to order the dogs destroyed, and I think it was the--one of the like--one of the tabloids, the Star or something wrote this article about me. Pet loving dog orders--pet loving judge orders dogs destroyed. But, you know, the--these dogs had to be destroyed. It was, it was bad. They wanted to show me the pictures of the guys' body. I was like, no, no. I don't want to see the pictures. Speaker 1: Did, did this start becoming a problem in Cleveland [Ohio] before-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We had some--we had some problems with the pit bulls. It's still a problem. And I love dogs, but I'm, I'm still a little leery of the pit bulls. Speaker 1: Yeah. That seemed to be a problem. It's a problem in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all over the country now. Yeah. Speaker 2: They're a big problem in Detroit [Michigan]. They've got a lot of abandoned dogs, big problem in Detroit. Speaker 1: Right, right. Roaming. Speaker 2: Yeah. I sent, I sent money to the SPCA [SPCA International, Inc.] specifically for, for Detroit. Not responsible pet owners. Story_ID: 656711 Speaker 1: So when I was on municipal court [Cleveland Municipal Court], I ran for the common pleas court [Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court]--I ran for the court of appeals [Eighth District Court of Appeals of Ohio] once, and I ran for the common pleas court once, and was not successful. The first time I ran, I think, in '82 [1982], I ran against Judge Richard Markus [Richard M. Markus], who was like supposed to be the best judge in the world. But I came very close if I had gotten any help. And then in 2004, I ran for the chief justice. I, I retired--I was getting ready to retire from the court, and the Democratic Party asked me would I run for chief justice and I did. And I came--I actually got more votes than John Carey, and if I had gotten any help from the Democratic Party, if I had, had five hundred thousand dollars, I would have been chief justice of the Ohio supreme court [Supreme Court of Ohio]. I came very close there. I got out spent like 10-1, but I came very close. It was a presidential year. Speaker 2: Now, in '83 [1983], you were joined in, in the municipal court by Carl Stokes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And you mentioned that, I think, off camera, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Carl was different. I remember he got elected, and he wanted to be presiding judge, and he talked us into voting for him to be presiding judge his first term. And the first year or so, you know, you listen to these great stories, and he would--he was a great raconteur, and, you know, but after the second or third time, you're kind of, hey, Carl, I mean, I got to go home. And he--I eventually had a difference of opinion with him. He was--Carl was different sometimes. Speaker 2: So what was the difference of opinion about? Speaker 1: It was crazy. I went on vacation--or my bailiff went on vacation, and they--the procedure was, you could call down to the bailiff's pool and ask, you know, to have a bailiff fill in. So I'd ask for this guy to fill in. And I--and he worked the first day. And I come in the next morning, and I, I come in--at my desk, there's, there's another guy, who I liked. I mean, I go like, "You know, is So and So sick?" He goes, "No. Now, Judge, now just calm down. Don't get upset." I go, "What do you mean?" Carl Stokes had called the chief bailiff at like three o'clock in the morning to say don't let that guy work on Connally's [History C. Ellen Connally] desk, like, you know, I, I set the rules here. It was crazy. And so, you know, he could be vindictive. He wanted it the way he wanted it, so we--and then we voted him out. Yeah. We voted him out. Speaker 2: Okay. So he-- Speaker 1: You had to be on his team 100 percent. You know, and this is not to besmirch him in any way, but, you know, sometimes you're in a situation. Say, listen, I can't be with you on this one. I won't work against you, but I can't be with you on, on a particular point. And he didn't understand that. You had to be everything Carl Stokes' way. Speaker 2: So you think--do you think it was tough--now, he was presiding judge, right-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --of municipal court? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he stayed a judge after you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) voted him out-- Speaker 1: --he had a-- Speaker 2: Right? Speaker 1: I think he had a problem with women, too, because I spoke up to him. Because I know I, I--he came in my office one day, and he and I had, had words, to put it nicely, and I slammed the door and told him to--I told him in the vernacular of the street to exit my office. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: And I slammed the door, and he told people later he thought he got shot in the back because I slammed the door so hard (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Do, do you think it was difficult for him to go from being--he was mayor so young-- Speaker 1: Yeah. You know-- Speaker 2: --and the only one, the first one. And then to--I know he was a newscaster in New York [New York] for a while, and he comes back. Speaker 1: Yeah. It--you know, he went to the pinnacle at the beginning of his career. You know, and then he comes back, and I don't know that he was all that successful in New York. And, you know, it was probably tough living in New York. Comes back to Cleveland [Ohio]. He was working at a law firm, and then, you know, he gets elected to the court, so it's--you know, I'm sure it was, it was difficult for him. Speaker 2: You think it would, would you advise politicians to be a success later rather than earlier? Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know. I think you always have to have--there's always a life, you know, after. You know, I retired from the bench thinking I was going to finish my Ph.D. because I'm--you know, I had done all the class work. All I had to do is sit down and write my dissertation. I ran for the supreme court. Then I taught at the law school. And I was a special prosecutor, and then I ran for this office, so, you know, and I'm going to--I'm not running again for this office, so I'll find something else to do. You always got to find something else to do. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Yeah. But he was so iconic at a time when, you know when-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --no one else had, you know. Speaker 1: He had a great ego, and, yeah, he had a--he had a great ego. Story_ID: 656712 Speaker 1: So how many--how often do you have to be reelected for the municipal court [Cleveland Municipal Court]? Speaker 2: Every six years. Speaker 1: Every six years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think I had opposition twice, and I think it was unopposed once. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you, you were a judge for twenty-four years, and, and-- Speaker 2: No. I was a visiting judge after that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Til I ran for this office. You can't be in, you can't be in two branches of government. Speaker 1: Okay. So--oh, I'm sorry. I didn't--in, in 1998, you received a master's degree in American history from Cleveland State [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, what prompted you to go (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I got divorced in like 2000, I don't know, '90 [1990], I don't know, I mean, like in 1990 or something, so I started taking these classes at Tri-C [Cuyahoga Community College Cleveland, Ohio]. I took African American history and African American literature, and I took Spanish. And I was like, you know what? This is like--doesn't make any sense for me to be taking these classes at Tri-C, so--I mean, at the community college, so then I started taking these classes at, at Cleveland State, and so I, I had taken I don't know how many classes, and I said, okay, you just need two more and you'll get your master's. So I got my master's. It was a hobby for me. Going to school was a hobby. I loved it. And then I started--I said, well, I got this master's, I might as well get a Ph.D., so I started at Case [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio], and I didn't really like Case. It wasn't a good mix for me, so I actually met a professor through Cleveland State who was teaching at Akron [The University of Akron, Akron, Ohio], and so I switched over to Akron, and I really was looking at the law on slavery, and, and legal issues regarding the Civil War. I wrote this paper about the Cummings case [Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education, 1899]. I got that published in the Journal of Supreme Court History. I wrote this piece about Jefferson Davis. I think I'm the only African American in the history of the, the world to write about Jefferson Davis. The legal proceedings against Jefferson Davis after the Civil War, he was charged with treason, and, and so then I got into this thing about treason as--treason is the ultimate legal issue of the Civil War. Is secession treason? So I had done this stuff about treason, but then I could just kind of never find a niche when you got to really love this subject, so, I mean, I got this Ph.D. I mean, I took, you know, French history and German history, and Arab history, and I had to take a foreign language, and I had to take statistics, and, you know, I'm taking all these classes, and so I'm ABD [all but dissertation], so maybe I make--I'm going to try and maybe go back now when I finish this office, and if I can do something on the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination to go ahead and get my dissertation done. Story_ID: 656713 Speaker 1: Now, what was the--let me just back, back up a little bit. Now what, what was the Cummings case [Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education, 1899]? Yeah. Speaker 2: Cummings was a case in Richmond County, Virginia, Rich- Richmond County, which is Augusta, Georgia, and the, the--there was no tax money allotted for black schools, and the black citizens, one of which was my great uncle, said that, "If you--we, as taxpayers, are paying taxes that we should, you know, get schools." And they took the case all the way to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, but they really made--and you'll see in my article I wrote. They made a tactical error. They didn't raise suffi- they didn't raise this issue of due process and equal protection in--early enough in the case, and when it went to the Supreme Court, they really didn't have the legal issue to support it, so they lost, but it, it was arguably first desegregation case, and, like I said, my great uncle was one of the plaintiffs, and then when he lost, he took his family and moved to California and passed for white. Speaker 1: So this is a, this case is--I don't think a lot of African American people know-- Speaker 2: No. Some people that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) this history. Speaker 2: --involved in school, school desegregation know about it, yeah. Speaker 1: Would even, even think that there was a time that taxes that black folks were compelled to pay, weren't being used to support-- Speaker 2: Right. And there's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black education-- Speaker 2: --marker. There's a mark-- Speaker 1: --anyway. Speaker 2: Yeah. There's a marker where the school was in, in Augusta. Speaker 1: So the-- Speaker 2: And I went down in '99 [1999] and, and spoke at a symposium in Augusta for the hundredth anniversary, was decided in 1899. Speaker 1: So, eventually, though, tax money is used to support black schools in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Georgia and the rest of the South. Speaker 2: Right. And then that's what happens is blacks are saying, okay, if the Supreme Court has said that separate but equal, then this is the philosophy that, that Thurgood Marshall and the rest of them developed, they forced separate but equal, so it starts like with the law school. Okay, fine. You don't have a--you're going to--you don't have a black law school, then you got to give us a black law school, and they said it was cheaper just to let blacks in, so this is the, the process that they used to break down segregation. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. That's-- Speaker 2: 'Cause, okay. Pay for separate but equal. I mean, even in the, in the Plessy [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] case, I mean, if--Plessy is essentially--which is the case that sets up separate but equal. Plessy is a test case because the railroads in, in, New Orleans [Louisiana] didn't want to have to set--have two sets of trains, so they send Plessy in there who's this really light skinned guy who's only one eighth African American, and he's testing--he wants to test whether or not he's actually--if he qualifies being black, and then the whole thing about the, the train, so, so there's this development of, of the--these series of cases leading up to Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Speaker 1: So this--the article you wrote on the Cummings case was published-- Speaker 2: The Journal of Supreme Court History. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is, this is pretty good. Speaker 2: It was very good. This was very good. I had ended up--a professor, Paul Finkelman who was really an expert on the law on slavery. I got to know him at Cleveland State [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]. He was instrumental in, in getting it published. I think he--I came in second in the competition, and then he contacted the office and said, you know, the--the editor of the Supreme Court journal and said, you know, "You've got to publish this," so, yeah, it's published. You can get it online. Story_ID: 656714 Speaker 1: And then Jefferson Davis, an interesting figure. Speaker 2: How I got into Jefferson Davis, I Googled the Fourteenth Amendment and Salmon P. Chase. Now, Salmon P. Chase is one of my Ohio guys. I'm into Ohio history and Ohio people. Salmon P. Chase was chief justice of the United States Supreme Court-- Speaker 1: Some have said--in fact, [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett said in his book on Lincoln ['Forced into Glory: Abraham Lincoln's White Dream,' Lerone Bennett, Jr.] that he thought that Salmon P. Chase probably should have been--and Salmon P. Chase thought he should-- probably should have been the president-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --instead of Lincoln. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. He did think he should have been president. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, anyway, so, you know, he was secretary of the treasury, and then Lincoln appointed him chief justice, and so the judges of the Supreme Court sat by assignment, and Chase takes over the seat of Roger Brooke Taney [Roger B. Taney], and Taney was from Virginia, and so, traditionally, that you, you sat--you heard cases in your own jurisdiction when you weren't hearing cases (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, Taney was the justice that wrote on the Dred Scott decisions [Dred Scott v. Sanford, 1857]. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So Taney dies, and they appoint Salmon Chase, and so Chase has to take over Taney's district, which was is Virginia and Richmond, and if Jefferson Davis is tried for treason, he has to be tried in Richmond because this is the situs of the crime. You have to be tried where the crime occurs, and so I Google, you know, Salmon Chase and the fourteenth amendment, and I come up with Jefferson Davis. I go, Jefferson Davis? And that's how that led me to this whole subject of, of Jefferson Davis because it's an issue of, of treason, you know. Should he have been convicted of treason? Speaker 1: So this is a big--Salmon P. Chase was an abolitionist, strident. Speaker 2: He was an anti-slavery (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: Not so much--a law--he was an anti-slavery lawyer. He's a lawyer in Cincinnati [Ohio], and there's a number of significant cases that Chase tries in Cincinnati because Cincinnati has all of these--by being on the boarder--has all these escaped slaves. Speaker 1: So how did this turn out, this trial? And Salmon P. Chase is the judge? Speaker 2: Well, Chase didn't want to try the case because the Civil War was over. Actually, I argue that, after the Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] assassination and the Lincoln conspirators are, are hung, the nation--if you go back and read the newspapers--the nation really wants to be--they want to, you know, they want to get the Civil War behind them, so Jefferson Davis is in jail for almost two years, and he's kind of, you know, they got this--and they keep continuing the case. They get some difference lawyers. They get a different attorney general, and so, finally, Chase says to the lawyers, well, if you raise the third section of the Fourteenth Amendment which says that, you know, double jeopardy, that he's been punished because he can't run for office again, that it would be double jeopardy, you know, so, anyway, they kind of find this loophole where they let Jefferson Davis go because it really would have been counterproductive. See, you would have had to try the case in Virginia, and if they'd have found him not guilty, then you'd say, well, was this whole Civil War a waste, so it probably was the best solution just to get--Lincoln was hoping that Jefferson Davis would leave the country. Lincoln said this in one of his last meetings with his, with his cabinet. He's hoping that Jefferson Davis would just go away, and he doesn't go away, so, you know, he's in jail. They got out at fortress Monroe [Fort Monroe; Fort Monroe National Monument, Hampton, Virginia]. They finally got--Horace Greeley actually gets him out on bond. And so they--you know--they--and he still--the case keeps getting continued, and, and I think that Chase probably came up with the right solution. Story_ID: 656715 Speaker 1: And then, you know, Jefferson Davis lives on until like 1890 or something [1889]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Finally, had this huge funeral--and, and dies. Speaker 2: Yeah. He, he lived-- Speaker 1: Always wore gray suits for the Confederacy. Speaker 2: Um-hum. He--didn't he have the--now, he, he was originally from Montgomery, right, Alabama? Or, or he-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Alabama. Speaker 2: And then he lived out the balance of his live, I think in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Down on the Gulf Coast, down on the-- yeah. Because Trent Lott actually got money and they had like a presidential library for Jefferson Davis [Jefferson Davis Presidential Library and Museum, Biloxi, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Isn't that something? Speaker 1: Amazing. You know, they spent like $5 million. Speaker 2: And I think his house was blown away-- Speaker 1: Yeah, in Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) during Katrina. Speaker 1: Yeah. It was, it was pretty much blown away. It wasn't his house. It was this rich widow who kind of felt sorry for him and, and gave him the house (cough) and he lived there much to chagrin of his wife for a couple years, but they kind of all made friends. Speaker 2: There's also--now, have you ever heard, now, he, he and--or his brother [Joseph Emory Davis] or both of them donated the land that Mound Bayou [Mississippi], the all black town was built on in Mississippi. Speaker 1: I think so. He was, he was fairly decent to his slaves. I mean, compared to others, he was, you know, he wasn't that bad. Speaker 2: Yeah, very interesting, strange, strange history. But, okay. So, so, all right, so you-- Speaker 1: But then this, this article about Jefferson Davis has been published in the University of Akron law review [Akron Law Review]. I think it was 2008. They had a symposium, and I spoke on that subject, and then it's also been published in a book by the University of Akron Press [Akron, Ohio]. Or maybe it's Kent State University Press [Kent, Ohio]. It's also published in a book. So it's actually quoted as a source about Jefferson Davis' trial. Speaker 2: Now, have you ever presented a paper before the Association for the Study of African American Life and History? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, okay. Have you ever been invited to? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Do you, do you think they know about your work? I mean, the (unclear)? Speaker 1: I mean, I don't know if they're interested in Jefferson Davis, I can, but, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, he was--yeah. He plays a big role (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean, I'm kind of like-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: I'm--you know, I've kind of moved on from Jefferson Davis, but, I mean, I can refresh my recollection. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Okay. So, so, you--from '98 [1998] to 2000, you're, you're the chairperson of the Cleveland Municipal Court's personnel, huh? Speaker 1: Yeah. I was in charge of like, you know, like, you know, hiring and firing, that kind of stuff. And I was administrative judge, I think, for a year, and so I mean, I was, I was, you know, was involved in--I think I was a pretty hard working judge. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. You were--you served on the fair elections committee for the City of Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Yeah. They appointed me that. I did on the fair elections committee. I think Mike White [Michael R. White] appointed me, and I was--I did a lot of stuff with gang violence. I worked with the gang violence taskforce. I did a lot of stuff with DWIs [driving while intoxicated]. I used to volunteer at the DWI program and go and talk to the offenders, you know, about not getting--you know, not drinking and driving. Story_ID: 656716 Speaker 1: We wanted to talk about the 2004 supreme--the general election for chief justice of the Ohio supreme court [Supreme Court of Ohio]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you alluded to it before, but now we're going to try to get into now. What, what prompted you to, to run? Speaker 2: Actually, I got asked by the Ohio Democratic Party. You know, somebody said, "You know, would--do you want to run?" And I was like, "What?" And I did it, and I knew I didn't have much of a chance, but there were three candidates for the supreme court, and I really didn't have any money. I think I raised probably like a hundred and fifty thousand dollars, you know, the whole campaign, and I didn't get any endorsements, but I came very, very close. And if I had gotten any support from any of these, you know, so-called black politicians, I would have won, but, you know, they just kind of ignored me. And [HistoryMaker] George Forbes, the president of the local chapter of the NAACP [Cleveland Branch NAACP, Cleveland, Ohio] had my opponent speak at the NAACP dinner that year that I was running, so I haven't been to a NAACP dinner since. I mean, he had him speaking like saying what a great guy he was. Speaker 1: So George Forbes, at that point, was the president of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --NAACP. Speaker 2: He was, right. And he had, he had Tom Moyer speaking at the, at the dinner. Speaker 1: That sounds--I mean, I, I don't live in Cleveland [Ohio]. I don't follow it that much, but it sounds like different from George Forbes' reputation (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I guess it was more politically expedient for him to support the Republican, the white Republican, so, you know, I--you know, Arnold Pinkney who just passed away didn't lift a finger, wouldn't return my phone calls. If those guys had given me any modicum of help, if I had gotten ten votes from--ten more votes from every black church in Ohio, I would have won. There were people, there were people running around--the black ministers were out running around voting down the gay marriage amendment. I was like, what difference does it make about this gay marriage amendment? And, you know, to have a black woman on the Ohio--chief justice of the Ohio supreme court would make a whole lot more difference in your life. And I remember--I, I think it was, what's her name? [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman, you know, I think she was talking and said--they were talking about the gay marriage thing. How many people don't have medical care? How many don't have prescription care? You know, how many people don't have a job? You know, and then the people are worried about gay marriage. Like, what difference does it make to people? Speaker 1: You know, this was something that baffle- I was living in Illinois at the time about--I kind of--always kind of look at Ohio and see what's going on, and that, that's the year that Ken Blackwell supposedly helped engineered the election away from Al, Al Gore, right? Speaker 2: I think so, yeah. It was two thousand-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: No, no, it wasn't Gore, but-- Speaker 2: That was two--yeah. Well, I ran with Carey. Carey ran-- Speaker 1: Carey, John Carey. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 1: From John Carey. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, there's this thing about--you know, this--they call it Connally [HistoryMaker C. Ellen Connally] anomaly that some guy wrote a book about it and says like, you know, how I got all these votes down in southern Ohio, and was (unclear), you know, where there's, where there's some shenanigans going on or something, but I actually got more votes than John Carey, so I, I really could have won the election if I had gotten any help from--you know, all these people, they get up in the NAACP dinner, oh, well, you know, I'm for black people, and, you know, we're all, we're all so oppressed. Well, there's black candidates running, and, you know, you sell out. Speaker 1: Interesting, so-- Speaker 2: I mean, when I, when I'd run for office before, I mean, I, I ran on my own. I had--with a few friends and stuff, you know, even when I ran for this office. Well, I have people call me up now, and says, "Well, you know, can you endorse me? I'm running for something." I said, "You know, I've run for office like eight, ten, times. I've never seen you. You know, did--or did you work in somebody else's campaign?" One gal came and talked to me, and, and she didn't work for me, but I found out she'd worked for some other candidate. Well, that's fine as long as you worked for somebody else. But you can't come in and ask for somebody to help you when you've never helped any other candidate or, or helped me. Like, I was saying, where were you all the times I ran for office when I was out there walking those parades in the heat? Where were you? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I know there was a job opening. I gave a reference to a white guy that I know. And this black guy said, "Well, why did you give it to that--why did you give it to him?" I said, "You know why? Because his--every time I've run for office, his mother has been on my campaign committee. She's given me money and she helped me, and he walked in parades and did other things. Have I ever seen you before?" So, I mean, at some point, you know, you can take blackness too far. Speaker 1: Now, you alluded to the fact that the ministers were really against this gay marriage amend- and the main-- Speaker 2: They had spent all this time-- Speaker 1: --(unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. They spent all this time with people out--you know, I was down in Cincinnati [Ohio]. These people are like picketing about the gay marriage thing. And I was like, hey, I'm black. I'm running for chief justice. Not, not in their radar screen. Speaker 1: Well, that's--yeah, that--yeah. What an issue to focus on with so many other things going on. Story_ID: 656717 Speaker 1: So after--well, so, now, are you--you're starting to wound down your-- Speaker 2: Well, I thought I was gonna wind down. You know, I ran, I ran for chief justice, and I figured, well, you know, now, now I--that's over, and I'll, you know, get back to my Ph.D. studies. I, I can't remember the sequence. I got a call from the dean over at Akron [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] and said, you know, "Would you be interested in being a professor?" So I was a, a visiting professor of law for a year at Akron, and the following year I was an adjunct professor. I taught criminal law. And then the law director called me. I don't know. I think it was like 2008 or so, and said, you know, "Would you be interested in being a special prosecutor?" And that was a very interesting job. The, the--we didn't have a current city prosecutor. The city prosecutor has to rule on deadly force shooting cases, and so they had seven or eight deadly force shooting cases that had not been ruled on and involved most--all of them were black males been shot by the police, and so I was appointed special prosecutor, and I ended up ruling on about forty cases. I really cleaned up the office. I went and I kept calling the--I found some more cases that haven't been ruled on, so I ended up ruling on like, I think, maybe thirty-five, forty cases that had not been ruled on. So I cleaned up the prosecutor's office for the new prosecutor, and I ruled on some very controversial deadly force shooting cases. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you mentioned all of these cases were--the deadly force was committed against a black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --male. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And is there a--were the--well, I know in other cities they've discovered that certain officers are repeat offenders. Speaker 2: These were not repeat offenders, and I really went, went in wanting to find the, the police officers, you know, guilty or, you know, and, and, I mean, I went in and some of them--they call it suicide for--a couple of them were what they call suicide by police, so, you know, you want to die, so you get the police to shoot you, but, you know, every one of these, I mean, the police officer was saying--most of the police officers were saying like, "Put your hands up. You know, let me see your hands," you know. It ended up all of them were, were justifiable. Speaker 1: So, so all of them were justifiable? All these-- Speaker 2: One of the, one of the--the last one was--the last of it was, was one young boy that was shot in his house. I think--and all of them were kind of like a--I don't want to say comedy of errors. Everything that could have went wrong, went wrong, you know. I know the one was very controversial. The boy was in his house, and when the police came, rather than his uncle saying, "Yeah, he's upstairs." You know, "I'll have him come down." If the police came to your house, and they said, you--we're looking for your kid. You'd go, "Hey, he's upstairs. I'll have him come down." The, the uncle kind, "Well, I'm not sure if he's here," and stuff. The police officers go upstairs, and the kid is kind of hiding in the closet, and, I mean, I went over this--I mean, I knew every single inches. I mean, I went through the house. I had recreations of the scenes and the angles of the bullets and the blood splatters, and, you know, I couldn't find any culpability there. And then I had other cases where, you know, the police officer dropped his gun in, in the snow, and it discharged where the prosecutor has to rule on--some of them were like two years old. The prosecutor never ruled on it. So I, I cleaned up a bunch of stuff for the city. Speaker 1: Yeah. It seems odd that all of them would be justifiable, but, you know-- Speaker 2: Some of them were really odd cases. They were--and you had to go through each one. I know it sounds bad but, I mean, I went through each one inch by inch. I mean, I spent hours in the library trying to make them, you know, not justifiable, but once you put that police officer in danger, he believes in his, his or harm. He's in danger. And, you know, even now, if I, if I get stopped by the police (unclear). Put your hands on the steering wheel and say, "Officer, my driver's license is in my purse. Can I reach down and get it?" You know, when you--now--when you--people need--I think we're doing a pretty good job--teaching children to, to follow the direction of a police officer, you know, early on. Story_ID: 656718 Speaker 1: What you described earlier, the case of the kid in the closet sounds to be--it seems to be a problem with, you know, police community relations in the sense that black males often hide from--they don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right. Speaker 1: --want to--you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The, the police are seen as an occupying force, so whether you've done something wrong on not-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you don't want to deal with the police because you've heard that there are forty-six cases of people that have been shot. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: Right. And then I was chairman of the--I was foreman of the grand jury, and that was interesting. I was kind of like always arguing with prosecutors on that one. They were always charging people--over charging. I remember they had one case one day where this woman had written some checks or something, and they charged with A, B, C. It was a white woman. In the afternoon, they had a black woman, and they charged her with a whole lot. And I said, wait a minute. This is the same thing you had with that black--white woman this morning. No, no, no. I'm the--oh, yeah, you're, yeah, you're probably right, so I think in that--in the, in the grand jury, I made a, I made a difference. I had some really savvy black women on the jur- on the grand jury with me, and I thought that, you know, that, that we made a difference. Speaker 1: Okay. So there's a certain amount of latitude a judge has that can really make a difference if the judge is trying to be fair. Speaker 2: No. Well, no. I'm talk- I was talking about the grand jury. This was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --civilian. I wasn't being as a judge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew--you know--I knew the laws, so I think I, I gave a little--I got some, some latitude there. Speaker 1: Oh, did you just serve on a grand jury. Speaker 2: Yeah. I served on the grand jury, yeah. Speaker 1: But, but, as a judge, though, there's a--isn't there a-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sentencing, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In terms of sentencing, latitude. I remember when I was first a judge, I had some girls who were in a--passenger in a vehicle, and they charge--they were just passengers. They got a ride with some guy. And they charged them with receiving stolen property. And I'd always throw those cases out because--and, and these girls--and I said, you know, these girls should be charged with gross stupidity, but they didn't do anything wrong here. They're--and when they found out the car was stolen, they told the police where he was and all this kind of stuff. Well, it turned the, the girls were--the grandmother was like a Democratic ward leader or something, so she told everybody after many years. "You know, that judge was really fair to my, my granddaughter," but I didn't know who she was at the time. But I'd always say like, you know, this isn't right. Just being a passenger in a vehicle, why is this a--you know, why is this a receiving stolen property? Speaker 1: Yeah. A different judge would have--could have sent, sent them all to jail (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, just--yeah, um-hm. Or bound them over. I--you know, we would--we could drop it--we'd nip it in the bud at the municipal court [Cleveland Municipal Court] level. Story_ID: 656719 Speaker 1: Now, you also served as a visiting and adjunct pro- professor at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So you're teaching history. Speaker 2: No, no. I taught law. Speaker 1: Taught law, okay. Speaker 2: And I taught history at the--I taught history at Ursuline [Ursuline College, Pepper Pike, Ohio]. I taught African American history at Ursuline for a couple of semesters. But I taught criminal law, and I taught a seminar on, on (unclear) on, on civil rights and, you know, civil rights cases, and then I taught trial advocacy, and, like I said, I taught mostly criminal law. Speaker 1: Okay. You also taught at Baldwin Wallace [Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Ursuline. Speaker 1: Oh, Ursuline, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ursuline. Speaker 1: Scratch this one off (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. So Ursuline, okay. Now, in 2010, you ran for a seat in the newly formed Cuyahoga County Council. Speaker 2: And that's the office I have now. Speaker 1: What is the Cuyahoga County Council, and why is it newly formed? Speaker 2: Well, the State of Ohio, we have eighty-eight counties, and every county except--well, in, in--when I ran in 2010--every county had three county commissioners, so the county is run by this board of three county commissioners, which is kind of a combination of legislative and executive. We had a big scandal in 2008 and '9 [2009] here in Cuyahoga County [Ohio], and so legislation went on--or went on the ballot to get rid of the three county commissioners and have an elected county executive and a county council, and there's only one other county in the state that has that, and that's Akron [Ohio]--I'm sorry, yeah, Summit County [Ohio], which is Akron. And so I thought about--you know, I was out of office, and I had said I wasn't going to run again, but this looked like, you know, something that would be like a nice little part time job for me, so I ran, and I think there were--I don't know, it was like seven other people in the race. I got like 80 percent of the vote, 85 percent of the vote, so I won really--'cause my friends, election night, the primary, they were all going to--'cause people were going to come over and, you know, bring pizza and watch, so this one guy kept calling me, and I went on the website like right at seven thirty when the first returns came out. Well, I was like so far ahead. I was like, hey, you know, I won, guys, so, so it's been--it, it really has been a challenge because most--you know, when you go into a legislative body, there's always a historical memory. There's institutions and committees and, you know, things set up. Well, I had to start a government from scratch, so I think that my service here as a judge and, you know, my historical background and my court background was very beneficial because, you know, I set up--I, I assisted in setting up the whole county council, you know, a form of government, and I got elected president, so, you know, in terms of hiring the staff and, you know, procedures, and, you know, how things, how things would flow and setting up the meetings. I had a really good staff also, but I think that my background has been really very good for that. And I think I'm, I'm sure I'm going to be missed 'cause I'm not running for reelection. Story_ID: 656720 Speaker 1: Okay. So this is your last year [on the Cuyahoga County Council]. Speaker 2: Yeah. I just, you know, I just figure, I'm sixty-nine years old, and, and I, I didn't, I didn't really want to go through another campaign, and it would take me to being in like, you know, four more years, and I was like, you know, I--this is not the way I spend the next four more years in life. I want to travel, and, I, I got into this, this--teaching these seminars about the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination, which I'm really fascinated with, and I want to--I have some other projects I'm working on. I'm very involved with--I got appointed to the board of the Ohio Historical Society [Ohio History Connection, Columbus, Ohio] by the Republican governor. I'd been trying to do that for years, and could never get appointed. I'm very into the Ohio presidents, and I've gone around and visited the Ohio presidential sites. We want to have--I'm working with some people--we want to have sort of a trail where we would have people going around to different Ohio presidents, and then also I'm very involved with Garfield's [President James Abram Garfield] monument. We need to raise about $13 million to fix up President Garfield's monument. Speaker 1: Where is Garfield's mon- monument? Speaker 2: Garfield is buried in, in, Lake View Cemetery, which is right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: So we need a lot--I was--I gave a presentation to the, to the board about that, so--and there's lots of other things. I'm working on--I'll probably be working with Jim Rokakis who has a--deciding what demolitions. That's a big issue in county government, so I'll probably be--try and work on that, you know, even after I retire from this office. Story_ID: 656721 Speaker 1: Okay. There's one story here that just intrigues me. It says on the outline. And I don't know about what's happened the last four years. But there's a story about you contended with [HistoryMaker] George Forbes about a case where a woman beat a deer to death. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: What was that about? Speaker 2: I need--let me refresh my recolle- there was a lady out in one of the suburbs, and she, she killed this baby deer, and I, I can't remember, but I know that George Forbes wrote--said something like, I think he was representing her, said, like, you know, it's no big deal or something like, something like that, and I wrote this scathing editorial which they published in Plain Dealer [The Plain Dealer] bashing George Forbes. I, I wish I could remember it now. I can't remember all the things, but, but people were stopping me on the street saying, "Oh, that was really great. I'm really glad you said that," and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, all right. Yeah. Seventy-five year old woman, it says, beat a deer to death. And then, okay. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I--'cause I had got my--I'm good at writing poison pen things. I've written a few things for Cool Cleveland. I probably--they want me to write for them again. I wrote an interesting one. I--our--Ed FitzGerald is our county executive, and he's running for governor, and I wrote a really nice--interesting piece about first names. John has been a big name in Ohio politics, and John has been for the presidency. We've never had a president named--president or vice president--named Edward. There's never been--I think we had--the last governor named Edward in Ohio was like, you know, in 1896 or something like that, so it was kind of cute, and so, so when you look at the difference between the name, John Kasich is over Ed FitzGerald. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: And then for about five seconds earlier this year, they talked about me running for lieutenant governor with this guy Todd Portune who is not running, so I really wasn't interested, but my name was in the media for about five seconds on running for lieutenant governor. Story_ID: 656722 Speaker 1: So you think you're, you're finished with politics when you-- Speaker 2: I, I don't want to run for anything else, but, you know, I'm certainly available. I, I--like I say--I want to stay like in terms with the demolitions 'cause it's--really shows that if you get rid of some of these old buildings, it improves your property values. But I'm sure I'll find lots of things to do. I, I thought I was going to retire in 2004, and I keep getting appointed to different things, so I'd love to get appointed to another university board of trustees. I was on the board of trustees at Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio], you know, for nine years. I'm on the board of the foundation of Cleveland State University [Cleveland State University Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio], probably like to get more involved in that, you know, when I have time. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So what do you, what do you think about Ohio politics today? I mean, just in, in general. Do you think--and the fortunes of the Democratic Party. Speaker 2: Well, we, we got some real serious challenges. I know that, you know, Ed FitzGerald is running for governor now, and we have a, we have a really bad ticket. We don't, we don't have--I don't see we have any winners on the ticket. The only person that I would predict that could possibly win is maybe this gal Connie Pillich, who's running against Mandel [Josh Mandel], and she's not going to really win. He'll just lose. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we don't have a good ticket, and I've been--ever since I ran for the supreme court [Supreme Court of Ohio], I'm been trying to get the Ohio Democratic Party to get, you know, Ohio lawyer's group that we can start identifying candidates for the supreme court. I mean, you know, they come up like two months before the filing dates. Well, do you--you know, we got to find somebody to run for supreme court. We should be grooming candidates now. And if we had a group of Ohio lawyers that everybody, you know, kick in a hundred dollars a year or so, or--and if you want to be on the board, you kick in a little more, and we could have a fund. Like in Columbus [Ohio], they have a Democratic lawyers group that they--you know--they got money to give to judicial candidates. The Ohio Chamber of Commerce only exists for supreme court races. They, they come out every two years and, you know, raise a bunch of money for Republican candidates for the supreme court. So until we get our organization together, it's just very disjointed, and, you know, Ohio--yeah. We, we got problems. Speaker 1: So the Demo- the Democratic Party in Ohio is being out-organized is what you're saying. Speaker 2: I think so. I think so. I mean, I, I was--you know--I was a candidate. You know, I'd been--I was a candidate for the supreme court. You know, I've been a judge for twenty-four years. I've done all these other things. And I applied to be a trustee at Akron [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio], Cleveland State [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio], and Bowling Green and when Strickland was in office. They didn't even send me a letter saying, we got your stuff and thank you very much. Now, I knew my chances were someplace between slim and none, so I'm--wasn't like I was counting on it. But, you know, here I'm a loyal Democrat, and you got a Democratic governor. I've been a, a trustee at Bowling Green. I've done all these other things. I fell on the sword for the Democratic Party in 2004, and I don't even get a letter saying, we got your stuff and thank you for applying? I mean, that doesn't leave a good taste in people's mouth. Speaker 1: Yeah. Ted Strickland was the last Democratic governor just for-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)(unclear)-- Speaker 2: The last Democratic--right. Speaker 1: --(unclear). And you would think that--so, so this was, again, is--it seemed like a lack of organization. That's what you're saying. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I mean, you at least send somebody a letter, says, you know, we got your application, and we really--you know--because I, I applied to be on the, on the board of elections [Cuyahoga County Board of Elections], and when Jen- Jennifer Brunner was in office, and I think that she was down to two, and I says, "You know what, Jennifer, my feelings will not be hurt if you don't appoint me." So I, you know, I went for the interview, I says, "But, you know, so I'm cool. If you don't appoint me, I'm--," she goes, "thank you very much." I was like--'cause she sort of owes me, but, I mean, I still--I like her, but I wasn't living or dying over being on the board of elections, which I'm probably glad I didn't get it this time, but-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And I, I had been like in '82 [1982] when I was--I ran for the court of appeals [Eighth District Court of Appeals of Ohio], and I was supposed to be the heir apparent to be appointed to the common pleas court [Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court] and--under the Celeste [Richard F. Celeste] administration, and I didn't get it. They appointed Stephanie [Stephanie Tubbs Jones] over me, and it was--I--it was, it was devastating. I, I was really crushed about it. I mean, I held my head up and kept going, and it probably worked out for the best, but, you know, I've taken, I've taken my lumps also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's what you got to do. You got to take your lumps and keep moving. Story_ID: 656723 Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for, you know, the African American community in Cleveland [Ohio] and the, the nation? Speaker 2: Well, I'm concerned the population loss in, in Ohio has been significant, so we've lost, you know, we lost the congressional seats. What did we lose, two? And so the districts can only get bigger and whiter, and I'm concerned, will Marcia Fudge be our last black [U.S.] Congress woman from this area? Black people are notorious for not voting in the primary. In the Democratic primary, I mean, there's a race I know right now for-- oh, in the state races, is a white woman--has run--is running against the--an incumbent black male. And she's very organized, and she's got women behind her, and she could knock this guy off in the primary, and so our district can only get--Marcia Fudge--there isn't more black people they can put into Marcia Fudge's district, so, you know, we just had redistricting, but I'm concerned about all these that, that we're going to lose black elected officials. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because of the loss of population. Speaker 1: Okay. Nationally, what, what are your feelings? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. I don't know. Do we have any rising stars? I think that, I think that--and I, I think critical of the Stokes brothers [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes and Carl Stokes]. I don't think that they raised up any new generation of politicians that they, they were so concerned about keeping their own seats that they didn't, they didn't, you know, they didn't mentor anybody, so we don't do a good job of that. You know, you kind of have to--you know, Mike White [Michael R. White] just decided to run and became, you know, became the mayor and stuff, but, you know-- Speaker 1: He kind of broke away from [HistoryMaker] George Forbes, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: To, to run. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. So, you know, we don't--I, I don't know. I mean, will we ever have another Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]? I think he's kind of anomaly, you know. I don't know. I'm, I'm not enthused about it because we got to get people out voting, and we got to get people out--we got to get people reading and going to college. You know, I mean, I mean, I remember I was in court one day right after Thurgood Marshall died, and I said to this guy, I said, "Do you know who Thurgood Marshall is?" "He go to East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio]?" That's one of our high schools. Said, no, you know. I, I ask people like, I ask like, "Do you know who Carl Stokes is?" "Oh, I don't think so." Or you got people with an Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] t-shirt on. "Do you know where Ohio State University is located?" "Oh, I don't know, Cleveland." I don't know. I mean, it's--(unclear) somebody that doesn't know where Ohio State is located in Columbus [Ohio]. I mean, so you have people that are, are culturally illiterate. And that, that's a real, real concern to me. Speaker 1: Now, these are just African Americans you're talking about? Speaker 2: African Americans and whites, too, but, particularly, African Americans, you know. And, and, you know, like, you know, like, you talked about voting in judicial races. I mean, we're the ones in court, and we don't vote or we don't know, you know. Got to get people out there voting. You got to have an educated workforce. You got to have people that, that are, that are trained. You got to have people that can read. I mean, you know, like I said, my, my--I read. I went to the--you know, when you--and we used to go to the library, but when you--you know, all you can do is text and thing--sing rock--you know, do this rap music and stuff, it's, it's not, it's not positive. But, you know, it's, it's really difficult. I remember when I was teaching in Akron [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio]--I mean, at Ursuline [Ursuline College, Pepper Pike, Ohio]. This was a white woman. I asked her a question, and it was a very, very simple question. And I--so I said, "You know, do you know the answer?" And she goes, "You know, you're really stressing me out. I'm feeling very stressed." And, I mean, this is the idea that, you know, some people kind of feel like they know everything. I have a cousin of mine that called me yesterday, and her husband is in the hospital, and she was just ranting on and on. "Well, that nurse didn't know what she was talking about. And this doctor--," I'm like, you're a clerk in social security. Like what the hell are you talking about? You know, so people just like--well, they saw on Dr. Oz [Mehmet Oz] something, you know, and they're going to go tell the doctor. They're going to tell the--you know, because they're smarter than everybody else, you know. I, I think it's, it's a bad kind of trend in our society. Story_ID: 656724 Speaker 1: What about the schools in the Cleveland [Ohio] area? Are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Our schools [Cleveland Metropolitan School District] are, are really suffering. And I think home schooling is just horrible. I mean, I--like I said, I think I already said earlier. I sit next to somebody at church that I went to elementary school [St. Thomas Aguinas School, Cleveland, Ohio] with. I, I had a class reunion with gals I went to high school [Notre Dame Academy, Cleveland, Ohio; Notre Dame-Cathedral Latin School, Chardon, Ohio] with. There was one police officer that actually went to the same elementary school I went to that we didn't know each other, but we went--but you then you still had this camaraderie, went to the same elementary school. So and, and, you know, when you get up, when you get up in the morning, you go to school, you get up in the morning, and, you know, you put your--you take a shower, and you put your clothes on and you eat your breakfast, and you go out to school. And so you grow up, and you're an adult. You get up in the morning. You take a shower. You eat your breakfast, and you go to your workplace. So I think that this whole school--and you have to sit next to Johnny who maybe doesn't smell so good, but that's growing up, and so that's what you do in life. And I just think this home schooling is just horrible. You have--I mean, maybe you have a teacher that you don't like, but when you grow up, you have a boss maybe you don't like, you know. I think it's, it's all about learning the life experiences, and, and you don't have that. Or you see people like walking around in the middle of the day. Like, why aren't these children in school? Ever go to the supermarket in the middle of the day, somebody with some kids? Like why aren't these children in school? I was in school. Or when I was growing up, the only way you missed school was like you were like near dead. You did not miss school. Now, we all--you know, they didn't feel so good, so they didn't want to go to school. It's all about responsibility. Story_ID: 656725 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what's next for you? Now, do you want to finish that Ph.D. (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really do but I think you really have to love the topic. Now, I'm going to probably contact Akron [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio]. I'm doing a lot of reading about the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination, I mean, all aspects of it, and so I might try to do--if I could get my dissertation on, you know, maybe about Chief Justice Warren [Earl Warren] or, this conspiracy of why people believe in the conspiracies. Otherwise, I'm working very actively. We, we're just forming a corporation. It's called JFK seminars. And we are booked to give the seminar. We gave it at the Cleveland State University law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] and raised a lot of money for the alumni association. We over--almost four hundred people there. We're giving it for the Ohio State Bar Association [Columbus, Ohio] in June. I've talked to the Ford Library [Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library and Museum, Grand Rapids, Michigan]. It's me and some other lawyers, and then at least two people from the Warren Commission [President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy] staff, Judge Burt Griffin and another guy named Howard Willens [Howard P. Willens]. They were actually lawyers. And they, they give a presentation about the inner workings of the Warren Commission. I've talked to--I've been into--I've contacted the LBJ Library [Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum, Austin, Texas]. I'm waiting to hear back from them, so I'm kind of on this mission to, you know, to, to get the word out about the--and, and it also could be profitable, so that's kind of my thing right now. And then, you know, I've got some other things. Story_ID: 656726 Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, I was, I was asking you about the psychic effect. I mean, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, here, here's my-- Speaker 1: --the effect to, to the psyche of the American people of the-- Speaker 2: Here's, here's my presentation that, that the other assassinations when Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] dies, Booth [John Wilkes Booth] is killed within eleven days. When Garfield [President James Abram Garfield] is shot, Guiteau [Charles J. Guiteau] is arrested immediately, and he's ultimately hung after a trial. And, you know, he says that, you know, he's a disgruntled officer, so there's a logic behind--not logic, but, you know, people know. And then Czolgosz [Leon Czolgosz], who actually lived here in Cleveland [Ohio] shot McKinley [President William McKinley]. He's an anarchist and he's, he's hung within, I don't know, like a month or something. And then there's some other attacks on, on presidents, and there's very swift justice. Well, and they're all in plain view. You know, walk up to McKinley, shoot him. Walk up to Garfield, shoot him. But, you know, you got Oswald [Lee Harvey Oswald], you know, he shoots from the window, and, there's--now, there are actually eyewitness that see him shooting out the window, but they get always kind of lost in the shuffle, but--so no one ever knows the motive, and then, you know, when Ruby [Jack Ruby] shoots Oswald, you know, and then there's all this, you know, the, the trial is in the media, and, and Ruby is the executioner, so it, it affects the psyche that no one--there's no finality. There's no due process, and there's no finality, so people are, are wonderi- are never probably going to be satisfied, so that's why we like to--you know, there's me and these other people kind of like to get the word out, the anti--'cause conspiracy people--'cause I've written to a number of historians. They're like, why have the academic community really abandoned the Kennedy assassination? Because it's kind of been taken over by the crazies, and it's, it's hard to argue with them, you know. You have all your evidence there, and they come up with like, you know, well, this guy was walking down the street, and Oswald was like living in the same town, so, therefore, there must be a conspiracy. Speaker 1: What, what did the Kennedy era mean to you and those who--I mean, writing about the assassination is one thing, but what did that era mean? Speaker 2: I just remembered that was the first president that I had ever campaigned for. And I think I told you earlier that I went to my aunt's house, and she's this old line Republican, and she's got these Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] signs on her door. I was like, what is this? So I remember that I had Kennedy buttons and my mom [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally] had never worked at the polls, and she actually worked at the polls the whole night that--counting votes, you know, for Kennedy, so I just remember, you know, kind of going--rushing home from school and watching press conferences and, you know, always, you know--we all wore like kind of the Jackie Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] clothing, and it was just--you know, after this kind of stodgy Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], who just kind of played golf. You know, it was exciting. You know, the, the whole Kennedy era was exciting, and so, you know, when he, when he dies, it's just--it's like a relative or something died. It just changed everything. Story_ID: 656727 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could change something? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. Hindsight is always 20/20, and I said there were times where, you know, I kind of took my lumps, and--but I think, all in all, I think things have worked out. You know, if I had gotten elected to another office, and, you know, gotten elected county wide I could have lost, you know, and so, you know, I stayed in municipal court, and, and I think that I helped some people along the way. You know, like I said, the, the, you know, the ladies of the night that still call me, and that kind of makes me feel good. And one of my court reporters, she went off kind of the deep end and got involved in drugs and stuff, and I was always tracking her down, and she was in a halfway house down in Akron [Ohio], and I was going down and taking her clothes and calling her up, and she's now gotten her life together and gotten a job, moved to another state. And she just wrote me this morning. She wants me to write her a letter of reference because she wants to get a better job, so, you know, those people that you kind of helped along the way, or the, or the people that, that worked at the court. And I'd say, you know, you need to go back to college. You know, you, you've got two or three classes, and you, you need to finish them, and some of them did and said, you know, I got my degree because of you, or the other ones who said, like, you know what, I wish I had listened to you. So those, those kinds of things, you know, I think--I don't know. Hindsight 'cause the hindsight is always 20/20. Would I have done something differently? I don't know. I don't know. I made lots of friends, probably some enemies along the way. And now, you know, now that I'm not running, some people are saying like, you know, you know, Ellen [HistoryMaker C. Ellen Connally] is going to be really missed down there, and she really--well, you know, you weren't helping me when I, I had to really fight to be council president [Cuyahoga County Council]. I had to fight with black people, some black people on the council, to be council president. It was a very, very tense situation that I'm--back and forth and a lot of maneuvering. So, you know, I think I've made--I've opened the door. I've made--I mean, I really opened the door for all these other black women that are on Cleveland Municipal Court. I was the first one. After I ran, then we had a whole bunch of other black women that ran, but I was really the first one. And then Judge Burke [HistoryMaker Lillian Burke], as I told you before, she was the first black woman judge in Ohio. I think it's been--I think she's been dead about three years. I knew she was not well, so I organized all the black women judges, and we all went over her house, and we all wore our robes and stuff and got a picture with her. And some of the younger girls didn't even know Judge Burke, and we had something like twenty-five black women judges. Some gals came from around the state, and we all, you know, met with Judge Burke, and she was so happy, and, you know, we made like a plaque for her, and, you know, we all got pictures with her, and so some of the girls were able to say, you know, I had a picture with Judge Burke, so it was kind of a nice thing to do. Speaker 1: Now, did she really serve as a mentor for the younger women? Speaker 2: Not so much. I mean, but she was always around. Judge Burke was a very--I think she was a nice lady. She was a very proper lady, you know. I remember my bailiff's husband kind of said to her one day--we were like at a, like a luncheon or something. And he said--you know how black like black guys say, here you go, baby? Well, I don't even hear that. You know, and she says, "Young man, I don't know you that well. Now, you can't say that to me" (laughter). So I always say to guys, young man, you don't know me that well. You can't say that to me. But she was a very, very proper lady. But it was good. It was really good, and I really felt good that we got, you know, we got those judges together and we were able to, you know, honor her because, otherwise, people die, and, you know, you're laying in a coffin and, you know, you can't get to hear all those good things about people. Story_ID: 656728 Speaker 1: Once again, when you look back at everything you've done at this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think that I opened the door for, for the other black women to be elected, that I showed it could be done. I think that, I think that I--I--hopefully, you know, some other people have looked at what I've done, and, and kind of said that they could do the same thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think, I think that my legacy here at the county, I think, is going to be very, very important because I was the first council president [Cuyahoga County Council], and, you know, we made lots of decisions about the direction that the county is moving and the role of the county council because the people that created the county council or the--created the new charter for government, I think that they thought that the county council would just be some role you would come down once a week, you know, once a, a couple times a month and read some stuff, and vote, and we was like, no, no. The people that got on council, we work. I'm here almost every day. I mean, I do a lot of work. I never--I think--I keep telling people. I'm getting paid like fifty cents an hour now. I, I had--when I was a judge, I went back and got a master's [degree] and a--almost a Ph.D. I don't even have time for that, so our council people put in a great deal of time which is, is--and, and really concerned about the citizens of the county and what's going on in the county, so that's going to be, you know, kind of the legacy. Story_ID: 656729 Speaker 1: Tell us about now, your family. I know you, you--you've been married at least once. Are you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --are you married now? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got divorced. And then my husband died. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where did you meet him? Speaker 2: I actually met him at the 55th Street Marina [East 55th Street Marina, Cleveland, Ohio] (laughter). I was meeting a, another guy who tells everybody he's my ex-husband but he's not. But, yeah, I met him there. And he was a school teacher, and we were married for about almost nine years, but, you know, we--it just didn't work out well, and we remained friends. He--we had broken up, and we had these two dogs--we had this dog. We had two dogs but my dog died. But his dog, he wanted me to keep the dog, and I was keeping the dog. And I then called him. I says, "You know, I'm going out of town," and he said--I said, you know, "You keep the dog 'cause I'm going out of town." And he kept--he had the dog, and he just walked up the driveway one morning and had--and he said, you know, I was going--I brought the dog back. And I said, "Yes. It's fine. She can stay here but I'm leaving tomorrow." And he died that day. He had, he had a heart attack. 'Cause when he had, had his original heart attack, we weren't married, but he--they called me from his school and said that, you know, he was at the, at the emergency room, and he wouldn't sign the consent to have the surgery until he found out that I could go and take the dog, so I went up to the hospital, and I knew the security guard, and they said, "Oh, yeah, Judge [HistoryMaker C. Ellen Connally]. Here's all his--," and they give me his car keys and stuff, so I went--you know, I drove his car and went to the house and got the dog out, and so I kept the dog while he was sick, and, actually, then after he died, he left me his insurance policy, which was actually kind of nice of him. But, yeah, but I have, I have my one son [Seth Connally] who lives with my mother [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally]. My son is an Iraq War veteran, and we went to Vietnam about three years ago, three, four, years ago. Speaker 1: You mean a Vietnam War--I mean, oh, he's, he's an Iraq War veteran but he's-- Speaker 2: He was born in Vietnam. Speaker 1: He was born in Vietnam. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. We went back to Vietnam (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's, he's Viet- Vietnamese. Speaker 2: Yeah, black and Vietnamese. He looks kind of like-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Tiger Woods. We went back to Vietnam which was pretty cool. And so he lives with my mom, and he works at the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], and my mom like I says, is--was 100 last June, and I have one sister [Gwendolyn Connally Campbell] who I don't get along with. We don't really hear from. She doesn't help me with my mother at all. So and I have one nephew, who's kind of like my little brother, and he just had a baby, so we have a little grandbaby also in the family, and my wife's--my nephew's wife, so, but then I have like a lot of first cousins, but they live scattered around. I talk to them frequently. Story_ID: 656730 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had one--you know, these--I'll tell the story. I had these people call me up, and they said--I saw them on the caller ID, and I knew the name. They were some people passing for white, and they called me up, you know, "This is So and So." I says, "I know who you are." And so--"Well, we want to come and visit," and I go, "Well, like, for what?" And I said, "Well, let me check with my mom [Gwendolyn Johnson Connally]." So I called my mom who then called her sister [Cecelia Johnson McGhee], and you know how like got this family network, and like in about, you know, twenty-four hours, everybody in the country is like weighing in, so they, they were kind of like, oh, screw them. Well, they--anyway, they came to visit. And the guy goes, "Well, can I stay at your house?" I said, "No. You can't stay at my house. I don't even know you." So--and they, they didn't look any whiter than me. I don't know how these guys passed for white. And they, they came, and they were, they were nice, and they wanted--you know, and they had some pictures, which was really good, but they were delay- they were related to my mother's father [Charles C. Johnson]. They were descendants of my mother's father, but, I mean, I know how to get it touch with them, and, and, you know, like I can stay in touch with them, and then there was some other people that they, they got in--some other people that sort of--the--this was really sad. My mother had a first cousin--the daughter of my mother's first cousin. And they had this website of all these white people on this family tree thing, and they got me involved. They have my name on it. So they sent me a email, and they said that, you know, this guy had died. Well, I knew his sister, and so I was getting ready to leave town, so I sent her a card and said, I'm so sorry that your brother died. That was the way that she found out her brother died. They didn't tell her because they didn't want her to come to the funeral because they knew she was black or they--because she was browner skinned, and they just--they didn't tell her. I mean, can you imagine? I mean, this was like 2005 or '6 [2006] or something. They didn't tell the woman. And these--and the guys who called and wanted to come visit were the ones who perpetrated this. I says, well, why would you--you didn't even tell--you know, you didn't tell Cousin Margaret [ph.] that her brother died. Why are you coming to visit us now? But they came, and, you know, they were nice, and I know how to get in touch with them, but I'm not looking them up. So I mean, this, this race is very pervasive, you know, this--and then 'cause I've gone places where--particularly with my mother. I remember when I was like real young, I was down in, in South Carolina. We went to the courthouse to look for some deeds or something, and my mother was asking the direction of one of the state troopers, and I was like, don't ask him, mom. Like I'm trying to be all militant. I think he thought he was--we were white because they were like--the guy was like so nice. Like, c'mon, ladies, I'll show you, and he took us, you know, where we had to go, but a couple times I think I was on the bench, and the people--the lawyers thought I was white, and, you know, then they found out I was--wasn't white, but that, that's happened a couple times, but I don't really--I don't pay too much attention to it anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything that I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about? Speaker 2: I'll probably think about a hundred things later, but I've-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) told you a lot. I told you--sort of spilled my guts here, my whole story. Story_ID: 656731 Speaker 1: Well, thank you for what you've given us. And the last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, when I got elected to municipal court [Cleveland Municipal Court], the people at the court said that they asked people like about me. Said, you know, she's coming over here. And they said, you know what, you know, she's a nice person. She's fair. And then when I got to this office, someone else who, you know, a couple of people said they asked around who didn't really--they kind of knew of me, but they didn't really know me, and they said similar things, so I would like to be remembered as someone who's fair, and, and nice and kind to people. You know, I, I'm, I'm a very--you know, I think there's a sign at my door, you know, like at the Statute of Liberty [New York, New York], give me your tired. Well, you know, I've got like a, you know, formally incarcerated person who comes and walks my dog, and my-- somebody else who's got depression, all these people got problems, and I'm running around helping them, so I have a cadre of, you know, wayfarers that my son [Seth Connally], is like, how did you meet that person? Well, you know, I'm trying to help them out, so I'm, I'm sort of generous at heart that I'm always trying to help out people, so I'd like to be remembered that way probably. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: For sharing (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. It's been a pleasure...