 Story_ID: 373303 Speaker 1: Good morning. I'm Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] is our videographer. Would you state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name? Speaker 2: Okay. I am Patti [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter], P-A-T-T-I, now for the Y (laughter), middle initial or middle name Y, Yvonne, Y-V-O-N-N-E, last name Carpenter, C-A-R-P-E-N-T-E-R. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: Is May the 2nd, 1955. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: What is your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently, I am an international design and development consultant and I have my own company, for which I do that, Continuum Home Incorporated, and then I also have my own proprietary line of home decor, personal accessories, and gifts and that's Carpenter and Company. Speaker 1: And, what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: We're here in New York City [New York, New York] at 4 Times Square in the heart and the crossroads of the world (laughter). Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 10, 19--sorry, 2007. Remembering the seven (laughter). Story_ID: 373304 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you a few People magazine-ish type questions, okay? Tell me your favorite food. Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably macaroni and cheese (laughter). I grew up being from Washington, D.C., with parents [Vivian Tyler Carpenter and Horace Carpenter] are from the South and my mother makes great macaroni and cheese so the pressure was on to learn how to make that. So, though I don't eat it as often as I'd like I love macaroni and cheese. Speaker 1: Okay. Where do you like to vacation? Speaker 2: I like to vacation in warm places with water. A few come to mind that I've really enjoyed; Bali [Indonesia], I've been to twice and I really had a wonderful time. It's a beautiful island and prior to the bombings, would have probably been the place that I had said I'd love to most return to, and this past year my boyfriend and five other friends went to a small island in the Grenadines called Bequia, which I was unfamiliar with until I had spoken to a friend who dives, and it's a beautiful small, gracious island that is, as my girlfriend that told me about it, she said you don't need any cute shoes because it's just very casual and very laid back. The water is beautiful, the people are lovely, the food was great and it was a wonderful time, so I think this two would probably be the top on my list. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Absolutely (laughter). Speaker 1: And, this might be a tricky question but what is your favorite phrase? Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is, this is interesting because I have a lot of phrases that I put up in my office that are inspirational to me but really the first one that leaps to mind is one that's a Chinese proverb. I did a lot of work in the Orient when I was in the garment industry and it says, "If a man has but two dollars he should buy a loaf of bread with one and a flower with the other," and I think that really sort of sums up my philosophy in life that you really need to balance the sort of practical things with some art. It keeps the beauty alive in the world. Story_ID: 373305 Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna begin to talk about your family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Before we get into your life. How far can you go back in your family tree? Speaker 2: My father's family, he's documented, he actually made a CD [compact disc] for my sister [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter] and I a few years ago and so we know our great-grandparents and then, on his side, and information regarding them coming down, but not clearly farther back than that, though he has done some research that indicates that at one point we had Dutch in our family on his side. On my mom's [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] side, because both of her parents [Coteha Crocker Tyler and Milton Tyler] died--well, we think both are dead, when she was very young, her mom passed when she was two, then I don't have very much information on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Well, let's start with your father. Tell me your father's name. Speaker 2: My father's name is Horace [Horace Carpenter]. Shall I spell? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: H-O-R-A-C-E; Jentons, J-E-N-T-O-N-S; Carpenter, and he was born in Madison, Virginia, in 1934. Speaker 1: Okay. So let's go back to his grandparents, because you said you can go back to your great-grandparents. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about them. Speaker 2: His great-grandfather [sic. grandfather] was John Henry Jentons. He was a blacksmith in Madison and he served as what we understand both the white and black communities, which is unusual at that time, and he married Eldora--sorry, he married Anne Eliza [Eliza Jentons] and Eldora [Eldora Jentons Carpenter] was their child, who is my father's mom, so that's my grandmother, Eldora, and my father has one sister [Norville Carpenter] and one brother [William Carpenter, Jr.] and the sister is named after my grandmother, Eldora [sic. great aunt, Norval Jentons]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was the story about the Dutch? Speaker 2: The only thing that we know from him doing research, it was back at the time of 'Roots,' when everyone was doing some sort of research about their family, that he tried to do some research and there are both black and white Carpenters in Madison and the family of Carpenters that was a white family had some Dutch people that were connected to that in some way and so his belief is that that's sort of how he came. The interesting thing is that my father's middle name is Jentons and some of relatives' last name is Jentons, and we're not sure when it changed in the family line to move to Carpenter. We're not sure where the Carpenter and the Jentons--how the Carpenter and the Jentons--sort of separated, and it became his middle name but others of my relatives, it's their last name. So, (laughter) that's a little bit of a mystery. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, they had your father's mother-- Speaker 2: And fourteen other children. Speaker 1: And fourteen other children. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) My father's mother was, I think, something, well she was definitely below the halfway mark, so, because she was towards the younger side so, she was, I think, something like seventh or eighth of the fifteen, and so there were lots of them (laughter). Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Eldora. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And when was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in, I believe, '54 [1954], no sorry, Eldora was born in 1890 and died in 1936, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And now, your grandparents. Speaker 2: She's my grandmother on my father's side. My grandfather on my father's side is Milton Carpenter [sic. William Carpenter, Sr.], and that's where that name change comes in that we're not so sure why (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: And, again, he, she was born in Madison. We know he was born in Virginia but not where, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But in, we believe Madison County [Virginia], but not necessarily in Madison itself. Story_ID: 373306 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father [Horace Carpenter]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And, tell me any stories that he might have told you about growing up. Speaker 2: (Laughter) About growing up? Speaker 1: He grew up in Madison, Virginia. Speaker 2: He was born in Madison, but he, his mom [Eldora Jentons Carpenter] died when he was two, and so he was raised by one of her sisters, my Great Aunt Norval [Norval Jentons] and my aunt--his sister is named after her--my Aunt Norville [Norville Carpenter], and my Aunt Norville moved from Madison to Washington [D.C.] to New York [New York], and back to Washington, so he was raised within those three places, between Madison, Washington, D.C. and New York, and Queens [New York] actually. And, I came up through my young years before moving here for school going to Queens in the summertime and having that very New York experience and then going to Suffolk, Virginia where my mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] was from and having that very country experience (laughter); so, it was a combination of sort of the city and the country at that point. And he went to high school in Washington, D.C., and, I believe part of his junior high end was in Washington and part of it was in New York. My father is an artist, which is where I get my talent from, and he worked in the government in Washington. He was in allied and public health with NIH [National Institutes of Health] for many years. Initially from the graphic arts side, what I remember most fondly and I think that's part of what put me on my path was when I was very young, maybe six or seven, my father used to design and build the booth displays for various new products that were coming out in allied and public health, and he would make them in miniature in our basement in Washington and then after they were done and he had finalized them and was beginning to work on the real scale, I would use those with my dolls and so I would play with my dolls moving through these very intricate and elaborate kinds of booth displays and one of the things that sort of set me apart in elementary school [Jessie LaSalle Elementary School; LaSalle-Backus Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] was that because he was a graphic artist and I always worked with rubber cement and never that white paste that everybody else had, and they all thought I was a little odd but mine was much cleaner (laughter) and much more professionally done; so, yeah, we, he always involved me in the artistic part of what he did and I believe that really did lay the groundwork for my going into that. I really enjoyed working with him on those kinds of things and one of the other things that he had, a very dear friends that was an architect and so between them, you know, if he would make small scale things then he would give those to me as well and by the time I was a teenager, one of my summer jobs was helping them work on the, the flat plans of various buildings that were going up that his friend, the architect, would work on so I grew up with that kind of art in very geometric forms (laughter). Speaker 1: Were you with him while he was doing the designs? I mean-- Speaker 2: Sometimes, yeah, absolutely. Story_ID: 373307 Speaker 1: Do you have any, you know, stories to share about the times that you spent with your dad [Horace Carpenter]? Speaker 2: Oh, my dad was the sort of glue around our whole family and one of the ones I most remember is he made this incredible sort of hexagonal three dimensional piece that was going to hang in a booth and it took him a while to sort of do the, the calculations to make the piece completely symmetrical and I always say that I'm really not interested in math and that art has nothing to do with math, but at the end of the day it really does and that was one of the first experiences where I realized you really should pay attention to what's going on in math because you need to know this in order to even create something that's artistic in many cases, so that was one, and another in the seventh or eighth grade. I came in second place for a science project and I did a science project on taste and the human tongue and my dad and I built this huge replica of the human tongue out of Plaster of Paris in our basement (laughter) and, you know, mixed the color exactly and went through with different tools that he had to make the various textures and outlined the various areas on the tongue in different colors to show where sweet versus sour is tasted and so those are the kinds of things that we would spend our time doing when I was very young and my mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] would just say, "Please clean up after yourselves," because we'd have things all over the place (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But yeah. And we won second place and I say we because he was very instrumental in that. Speaker 1: What type of man was your father? Was he gentle, was he the disciplinarian? Speaker 2: He was a combination of the two. He is definitely the disciplinarian in our household, but one of the things that I am most thankful for, I think, is that I only have one sister, my sister Shari [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter], and he encouraged both of us from the moment we got here around some very specific things and one of them was that if we believed in something and we tried, that we could achieve it and he has always stood behind both of us to push that. And, at times when other people, and certainly other parents, might have gone, "What are you thinking," he said if this is what you truly believe and this is what you truly want, we're there to support you. He was always very prideful. My friends tease me that my father was the first black nationalist that they knew because we always had pictures of very important black leaders from around the world, not just the United States, in our home. He took us to see various and sundry people speak when we would be in Washington, D.C., where I grew up, and that was one of the things that I loved about growing up in Washington was that it was a very diverse place and that, you know, I'm born in the '50s [1950s], so in the '60s [1960s] when all of that was going on, we were really at the heart of a lot of what was going on and I found him to be so strong and so steadfast in his belief of being proud of who we are, and proud of what we bring to the table and to not only think of yourself in the terms of being a color, but to, not to be ashamed of that color, but to understand that there is a way to move through with that pride and to keep bringing things forward. Even to this day, and I don't know if he'd want me to say that, but when he says our grace at dinner, the end of his grace is always, "And help us to do those things that are in the best interest of our people," and that's my dad (laughter). Story_ID: 373308 Speaker 1: So, let's go to your mother's side. Tell me your mother's name (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. My mother's name is Vivian Constance [Vivian Tyler Carpenter]. Speaker 1: Can you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) C-O-N-S-T-A-N-C-E, Tyler, T-Y-L-E-R; Carpenter, and she's named for sisters as well, of her mother, so the Consta- Vivian and the Constance were two other sisters. It seems to sort of, that's what we did (laughter) in our family. We'd be named for aunts and uncles. Speaker 1: And when was she born? Speaker 2: My mom was born July 24, 1932. She's be seventy-five this year. Speaker 1: Okay, and how far can you go back, your mother's mother? Speaker 2: My mother's mother and her father [Milton Tyler] are really all that we know because her mom died when she was very young as well. She died when she was sixteen, but her father left when she was two, so she doesn't really know him, so we didn't really know them as well. Her grandmother was Curlesa [Curlesa Crocker] and her mother was Coteha [Coteha Crocker Tyler] and my father, her father [sic. grandfather] was Jessie [Jessie Crocker], and that's really who we know in that respect. Speaker 1: Okay. Any stories about any of your grandparents? Speaker 2: Because they were both gone when I was, by the time she was very young, the thing with both sides of my family, I envy people who have their grandparents because I didn't have any of my grandparents in my life. I had great aunts that were like my grandparents, but they weren't my grandparents, so I bond often with my friends' grandparents. It's very interesting. I have become very captivated by that generation of people that I didn't have a lot of in my later life. In my early life, I had a few. Story_ID: 373309 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your grand aunts? Speaker 2: My Great Aunt Norval [Norval Jentons] is the one that raised my dad [Horace Carpenter], and she died when I was young, but I was maybe, I want to say around six, six or seven, and I most vividly just remember the sadness in my house when we learned that, because she was a very impactful woman. She was a business woman. My father's side of the family is very business oriented; so, they owned business in Rochester, New York, and an ice cream parlor, hair, hair salons, things like that, and real estate, and so they were very powerful and people that, I remember my Great Aunt Norval just moved with such purpose. She was a very strong, she was just very sort of strong and kind, but a very imposing kind of a person and so I just remember that profound sadness in my house when she passed, but I didn't spend a tremendous amount of time with her because she wasn't always in Washington [D.C.] by the time I was born. So, she was back and forth. Story_ID: 373310 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter]. Did she share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: My mom was raised by two aunts. She has one sister, whose name is Virginia Oneida O-N-E-I-D-A, Lancaster [Virginia Tyler Lancaster], now. She was called (unclear) Lancaster, L-A-N-C-A-S-T-E-R, and they are both raised by two aunts, the sisters of her mom [Coteha Crocker Tyler], Bessie and Jessie. Jessie Hollis Crocker [ph.] and Bessie Baleise Crocker [ph.], who then became Purcell [ph.] and then married a Purcell-Guofney [ph.] (laughter), which I always thought that's a very unusual name, and she found two people with that name in Suffolk, Virginia (laughter). Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. And so those two I remember very well because they were in my life for a long time. My Aunt Jessie lived in Suffolk, Virginia, and I visited, as I say, Suffolk in the summers when I was very young and my Aunt Bessie moved to--Aunt Jessie was an educator and my Aunt Bessie was a nurse and those were sort of the, you know, very proper professions for black women at that time to enter into, so they are very proper women and one must always be on their best behavior when I was around my Aunt Jessie and my Aunt Bessie. And, my Aunt Jessie never married and never--sorry--Aunt Bessie never married and had children, so she lived in Washington [D.C.]. She had a wonderful home, but everything, you know, was always in its place. You didn't run through her home, you were very much on your Ps and Qs when you were there (laughter). My Aunt Jess was in Virginia and she had a, she was strict in her way but, because she was an educator, I think, but she still was a little more loose when we were there and visiting and, you know, that was my time of sort of learning about farms and that kind of thing because I considered myself a city girl in Washington, D.C., so (laughter) to go there and visit with my cousins there, I really thought I'm going to the country and you know, this is a well (laughter), but loved things like running to the corner store and fishing a pickle out of those big barrels and those kinds of things that we didn't do and have in the part of Washington that I grew up in. One thing that I do remember and it was always, it's impacted my life for the rest of my life, is when I was going to Suffolk, I didn't like the attitude of white people towards black people. I certainly felt some of that in Washington, D.C., but not nearly as much as one felt when you went to Suffolk, Virginia, and Suffolk is the home of Planters peanuts, so there were a lot of people that worked in the factories there. But I distinctly remember when my Aunt Jess went into the hospital and we went to visit her, I was too young to go to the room at that time, and then the woman who was the nurse at the station who told my mother that I couldn't go into the room was so mean to her in the delivery of just that little bit of information, and I just remember being really struck by how nastily she addressed my mother, and then they had to sit me in a waiting area, and I was there by myself because my sister [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter] wasn't born yet, so I probably, I'm six years old older than my sister, so I may have been six, and the people that passed me just, you know, sort of, I almost didn't exist, and it was that sense of just very much looking, that sense of being looked down on and I hadn't experienced that in that way at that point in my life, and it really colored my sense of the South, which is one of the reasons why I haven't spent much time in the South today, other than to fly over it to Miami [Florida] (laughter) and then fly out of the country, or spend time in Florida, where my parents are now, but I've never really, really felt like I could let that energy go for some reason. It's just really impacted me, and that was one of the really telling kinds of things at that time in my life, and I remember very vividly the next summer saying, "I don't want to go to Suffolk," and, you know, sort of being mindful at that point that it wasn't some place I wanted to spend time. It's really interesting. I hadn't thought about that in a long time (laughter). Speaker 1: So, tell me did, you didn't say your mother, what type of occupation did your mother have? Speaker 2: My mom worked in the office of the surgeon general in Washington, D.C. in D.C. government as well. My mom is a wonderful writer. She's a beautiful writer, and my sister has gotten that gene and she's a writer and so she worked in the speech writing area for the office of the surgeon general when it was Koop [C. Everett Koop], when Koop was surgeon general, that's when she worked, where she worked, and he was a very, very nice man, a very lovely man, and my sister had a problem years later when she was just her first year here in New York [New York] at NYU [New York University], and with her eye, and had to have surgery, and he was diligent about getting us the best surgeon for my sister's eye because, you know, eyes were so special and I remember just him being there and coming to visit her. He was really a very nice man. I had a really nice experience meeting him, and she worked with him for many years, and now both my parents are retired, so they spend half the year just outside of Washington now in Upper Marlboro, Maryland, and they are snow-birds and so they go to Florida for the winter (laughter) and I hope to be able to emulate something like that. As hard as we work here in New York, I don't know if that will ever be my lifestyle, but I'm blessed they're both in very good health, and they are able to do that so that's what they do. Story_ID: 373311 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] and father [Horace Carpenter] met? Do you know that story? Speaker 2: A bit. My mom met my dad when she was thirteen, I believe, in Washington, D.C. She came to Washington with my aunt [Virginia Tyler Lancaster] and she met him and because a woman that she stayed with sometimes during the day if she came home from school before my aunt was home, and, Mrs. Prater [ph.], who was the mother of my father's brother's [William Carpenter, Jr.] first wife, and she saw him and said, "I'm gonna marry that man," or that boy, at thirteen, (laughter) and they did. And they've been married over fifty years now. So, that's what I know, they met, then he went away and went to New York, and then came back and she was in Washington from that point on and they re-met and married several years later. Story_ID: 373312 Speaker 1: Did you tell me what your dad [Horace Carpenter] does? Oh, yeah. He worked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He worked, well, my dad worked in the office of allied and public health with NIH [National Institutes of Health]. Speaker 1: Right, NIH, okay. Speaker 2: He retired from that and he was an administrator at Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.] for many years after that. He's a very dynamic person and he loves to work, so he's retired you know twice over (laughter) and still does, by the end of his time with NIH, he, and one of the things that he did was also to review grant proposals for blacks who wanted to study in the fields of allied and public health, so he worked with a lot of the traditional black colleges [HBCUs] and he still does some consultancy work around that today. He really, he doesn't ever want to stop working, I don't think he's that kind of person; whereas, my mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] really enjoys retirement (laughter). She loves that. Story_ID: 373313 Speaker 1: Tell me what is your first childhood memory, if you can remember what it is? Speaker 2: My first childhood memory. I feel like I'm at that age where things are said and you can't remember anything (laughter). I remember our first apartment before we bought our house, and we moved into our house when I was two, and I vaguely remember the apartment and a birthday party. I got this horse, a wooden rocking horse, and I remember the texture, speaks to my visual nature and my design--I remember the texture of our sofa at that time, because it's almost eye level with me as I moved up and down on this rocking horse (laughter) and that's the one thing I sort of hold on to from about that time frame. And then it skips a lot of years and the next thing I probably remember is nursery school time, which I would have been four or five, but I definitely have the sense of that tweed pattern of those old '50s [1950s] kinds of tweed patterns as I went up and down on this rocking horse (laughter), so that's probably my earliest childhood memory. Story_ID: 373314 Speaker 1: Washington, D.C., you go to kindergarten or nursery school. Do you remember anything about your experiences there? Speaker 2: In nursery school, the thing I most remember was that, and this again played into sort of impacting other things in life, I think, I loved to, I was a very outgoing child and chatty, and I loved, I toyed with acting even that far back, and they usually would have a boy be Peter Rabbit in our school, in the school play, and I played Peter Rabbit (laughter) and they chose me, and my aunt, my mother's sister, Virginia [Virginia Tyler Lancaster], made my costume where other students' parents went out and bought a costume and mine was so much better. It had so much more detail (laughter) and I remember sort of standing there and, you know, having learned my lines and reciting my lines and being very aware when people didn't get theirs right and wanting to go, "No, that's not what you're supposed to say," and the teacher would say, "Don't correct anyone, since you know everyone's lines, just remember your own," (laughter) and so I was biting my tongue not to correct someone from something that they had said incorrectly, but what, the impact that that had, or the reason I make that correlation is that my aunt sewed beautifully and has always sewn, and I remember being very intrigued by looking at a piece of fabric at her house and then watching what she would make out of it and that probably was the thing that laid the seeds for my becoming a fashion designer and when I became a designer, she and I had a wonderful talk where she said--I'm born on her birthday and I wasn't supposed to be, and my mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] said she told the doctor, "Oh, she's coming on the second because that's my sister's birthday," and she said to me that their aunts who raised them, again, being proper women from the South didn't look at fashion design as a proper vocation, and so they discouraged her from pursuing that, and when I decided that that's what I wanted to pursue, she felt in some ways though I was living out some of her dream and that she could vicariously through me and that was very important to me. So, we have wonderful conversations about my travel, and the things that I do and designers I work with and how we, you know, how we come up with things, et cetera, because she's just so interested in that, and so, those, I think that those seeds of her sewing back then, you know, were what blossomed into this now. Story_ID: 373315 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to Jessie LaSalle [Jessie LaSalle Elementary School; LaSalle-Backus Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]. Shall I spell? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: J-E-S-S-E [sic.], and then LaSalle, L-A, and then I believe it's a capital S-A-double-L-E, Elementary School, which at the time, it's in Washington, D.C., Northeast Washington, where I grew up and at the time, it was a school that had a track system. The track system went away in Washington after that time frame, but at the time it had a track system and so you were placed in different grades and levels based on your various abilities, and so it was very competitive, and at one point, I remember them wanting me to skip a grade and my parents [Vivian Tyler Carpenter and Horace Carpenter] and I having long discussions about what it would mean to skip a grade and whether or not my maturity level, you know, when I would move up a grade and be with older kids, would be something that would be impacted in terms of, you know, wanting me to just have a very, I guess, simple and manageable life because the demands change as you start moving into higher grades, and so we opted not to, but then I was on the fast track, I guess, for the grade that I was in. And, it was great school. I had a mixture of black and white teachers. The most memorable teacher that I had came in the, at the end of our fifth grade year, Mr. Brown [ph.], tall, striking, very distinguished black man, very noble features and he demanded only the best of us, and so he pushed us very hard and there are times when I thank him and there are poems that we had to learn to recite in his class that parts of, I still remember and from time to time, especially in the fall, we had to learn 'To Autumn' by John Keats, and we had to pronounce the T and the S in Keats, and you know, that kind of thing (laughter). And so, he was very impactful because he made sure that we got what we were meant to get, but he also gave us, he instilled some other things in us and he was wonderful. Story_ID: 373316 Speaker 1: We were talking about your teachers-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In elementary school [Jessie LaSalle Elementary School; LaSalle-Backus Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]. Was there anyone else that might have encouraged you or influenced you at that time? Speaker 2: In my elementary years? There was one teacher, whose name I'm not remembering, who suggested my musical, that I do something with music--I love music. I am not at all musical, I have come to discover (laughter) but I love it. I have a great appreciation, but she encouraged me and I played the violin for about three or four years because of that from, like, the fifth grade maybe to the seventh, eighth grade. I played through the eighth grade, and I think she was, she was impactful because she started pulling on that other part of, I think what it was with all of them was that cultural, the thing that I respond to about various and sundry cultural activities, so Mr. Brown [ph.] with poetry and I can't believe I can't think of her name, but the teacher that encouraged the music. I did start taking, I took dance for a little while then, and then later in life took it again, but I think the installation of, and reinforcement around that, because my mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] also instilled that in us and we would go to see 'The Nutcracker' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky], the Washington Ballet every Christmas, get all dressed up in our finery and have lunch downtown like ladies and go to the theater and see ballet and see the ballet and so there was that kind of cultural background that was happening from both my father [Horace Carpenter] and my mother and the thing that was nice was that it was being reinforced with me through some of the teachers, as they sort of, I guess, recognized that I really loved it and had an affinity for it, and they encouraged it in me. And at that point, I think the other thing that really came out of that timeframe was my love of learning, because the bookmobile would come a couple of blocks from--or my love of reading, I should say--the bookmobile would come a couple of blocks from school and it was one of those things, I just was talking about this recently. Wednesday afternoons you go and you can take out and re-reading some of the books that just made such an impact at the time, like 'Charlotte's Web' [E.B. White], which is now coming out, or 'The Borrowers' [Mary Norton], which I loved the idea that when things went missing, you know this whole subset of little people (laughter) that were living in your house under your floor or something, and stealing your safety pins and using them for something much more important than a safety pin. So, you know, sort of really I think that all of that was really fostered in me at that time frame and I'm really thankful. I grew up in a really wonderful little neighborhood of Washington, D.C., Northeast, Washington, D.C., and I feel very blessed about it because the neighbors on 12th Street where I really spent my entire childhood from two to seventeen, when I left to go to college [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], many of them are the same neighbors on that street now, and when I go home I'll go by and visit and we can sit and talk and they've always been so encouraging of all I've done and when I was starting to travel, they always wanted to hear all about my travels and where I'd been and what I've done and what I'd seen, and I just, we grew up in a very nice sort of black, middle class neighborhood that was just extremely supportive and I've met so many people over, you know, over the rest of my life that didn't have that and I think having that solid foundation to come from I feel very blessed about that. I really feel very blessed about that. Story_ID: 373317 Speaker 1: Thinking about your neighborhood that you grew up in [Northeast, Washington, D.C.], what are some of the sounds, what are some of the sights that you remember, and the smells? Speaker 2: The sounds are very, very strong, probably, my favorite thing was that later I actually said to my sister [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter] she should put this in a film. Different people from different places that I've talked to over the years, when it was time to come home in the evenings when streetlights came on, you had to come home and different parents had different things that they did to call the children, so we had two or three different whistles, we had a clapper, and so there was this wonderful sort of rhythm that happened when the streetlights came on to call us in from all these various areas in the neighborhood, and I have a really fond memory of that in terms of the sound and that sense of panic if you were too far away and the street lights came on (laughter) and having to tear home before, you know, you got in trouble. So those are, certainly 12th Street was a cacophony of that. The interesting thing for me, or one of the interesting things was for my age group, I was the only girl. There were girls older than me on my street, but everybody else who was really around my age were boys, so I was very much of a tomboy at that time, so I climbed trees and I rode bikes with no hands and my knees are still skinned up to this day from those kinds of things and I skateboarded at that time and my elbows are still skinned up from that time, and it was that sense of just I loved being outside. I loved being outside and would just go. I was gone all day from the moment, you know, the sun came up 'til the last possible minute I was gone, and I'm struck by that today because I do a lot of work with kids and for kids to say to me I'm bored, I don't understand that concept because as a kid I was never bored. There was always something to do and at the time I first moved in the neighborhood, there was a actually a creek that ran behind our house on the other side of the street, so we would go exploring along the water and see little fish and what not and catch tadpoles and all this kind of thing that sort of, I would say Washington [D.C.] was a wonderful mix between a small town and a big city, because I could go that rural by my house and then I could go to visit my father [Horace Carpenter] when he first started working with the government. He actually worked at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], and so a friend of mine's family who we grew up with in Washington, he and I were two of the only black kids at the Pentagon picnic one summer and it was this sense of feeling wow, you know, look at this, (laughter) and so it was a sense of being able to go into something, you know, that was that powerful and meaningful and the seed of our government kind of thing, and then come home and, you know, go look for tadpoles next to the creek, so I feel like I had a pretty well-rounded background in that respect, and a healthy appreciation for both, which I think is necessary, sort of understanding that you need both of those things. Speaker 1: So, the sounds of a clapper, the sights of-- Speaker 2: I think just being outdoors. We had lots of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Outdoors? Speaker 2: We had you know, at that point, the neighborhood, it wasn't as developed as it has become today and so there was just that sense of still feeling like I could have a very kind of country and almost rural setting on one side, but then go downtown and be in the heart of downtown Washington and have those, you know, impactful buildings; the Monument [Washington Monument, Washington, D.C.], the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.], the White House [Washington, D.C.], the Pentagon. Have that there that I could be a part of, could move through. I think that was, that was very impactful. Story_ID: 373318 Speaker 1: And then certainly as I got older into my teenage years when the '60s [1960s] happened, to be in Washington [D.C.] during the time of riots and all of that. Those sights and sounds are really always gonna be with me, and at the time when I was in about the eighth grade, probably, I attended, we were, I was Episcopalian. I was raised as Episcopalian and the church that we attended was on 16th Street Northwest, which is, St. Stephens and the Incarnation [St. Stephen and the Incarnation Episcopal Church, Washington, D.C.] is the church and that whole corridor of businesses was burned out during the riots and on Sunday morning, the National Guard would stand outside and those buildings would be smoldering and we would march with our church along those streets and it sounds so almost cliche, but it was the time of those buttons that said, "War is not healthy for children and other living things," and, "Make love not war," and all that, and I don't know where we got them but we had, you know, boxes and boxes and we would pin them on the National Guards and the black National Guard would always acknowledge as the white ones would stand very, you know, still, almost like we weren't there, but the black ones would always acknowledge us and it was very powerful imagery, and when I look back at old footage of those days, I remember I was in the middle of all that and it's great, it was really great. So those would be some other sites that would be really, for me, indicative of my growing up in Washington, D.C. And tastes? Well, certainly macaroni and cheese (laughter) and we would go midweek to the Wonder Bread factory and the smell of that fresh bread as my mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] bought bread and we were allowed to buy a couple of things that would go through the week, so your cupcakes or your Twinkies or whatever fresh from the factory, we'd buy those and I'm--I'm very frugal. I learned that from my dad [Horace Carpenter], and I'm very practical. So I would stretch mine out over the week and my sister [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter], who is much younger, would snarf hers down (laughter) in the beginning of the week and then try and have some of mine by the end. "Oh, make her give me some of her cupcake." And my mother would go, "No. You've had yours now. You didn't portion yours out." And so the smell of that Wonder Bread factory when we were young going there, I think that was a big smell--well, a big smell and a big taste. I am, I don't eat red meat now but I certainly grew up eating it. My mother makes a phenomenal Virginia ham and on Sundays that taste of that Virginia ham is still, I haven't had red meat since 1972, but I can still taste my mother's ham. It was so good. That's the one thing people say, what do you miss about eating meat? My mother's ham (laughter). Story_ID: 373319 Speaker 1: So, we're into the '60s [1960s] now. Do you remember, you said your father [Horace Carpenter] was very active politically? Speaker 2: Yes, very. Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were doing? You were very young when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed. What was the climate? Speaker 2: I was at my mother's [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] sister's house, my Aunt Virginia [Virginia Tyler Lancaster], and we were outside playing with my cousins; she has two boys, Carl [ph.] and Ken [ph.], and there was, we were in a playground. They lived in an apartment complex at that point and there was a playground and we were out of the playground and this really strange kind of hush came over the playground and everybody called us inside; all the parents called the children inside and we sat in front of the television and we watched it and that's what, that I remember. And still not sort of, I think on some level, not really being aware of how impactful and what, you know, what we were watching was really gonna be, but absolutely recognizing that it was very meaningful because, I mean, to the person. Each of us got called in off that playground and brought back in to the house. It was very interesting. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember your parents being involved in any other civil rights activities? Speaker 2: My dad was always much more involved in that kind of thing than my mom, and my father attended Pan-African expos that happened all around the country; in fact, we were just discussing at Christmas. He has a poster that he has put up by the front door and my mother hates the words around the poster but she loves the image and he won't take that poster down, but that was from, I think, a little bit later because that was either '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]. He also has, we went to see different people speak and I remember going to see [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory speak at that time. He took me to a drug rehabilitation center and I volunteered there with him a couple nights a week during that period because drugs were becoming very prominent in the inner city of Washington [D.C.] and he wanted me to understand firsthand what that did to you and to hope that that would dissuade me from certainly going down that kind of path and that was scary, you know, coming from sort of a middle class background and going really into the inner city and going and listening to people talk about their experiences and seeing their bodies and it made me, in high school, join an organization, help to start an organization called DOOM, which was Dope Out Of McKinley. I went to McKinley Tech Senior High School [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School], which is a vocational school in Washington, and it was at that whole sense of being very much involved in, because it was a very huge influx just around that timeframe. I think it was a combination of people who had gone off and come back in some way, shape or form, the war who had addictions because I had a couple of friends who had brothers who came back with addictions and just, I don't know what the other things in the city are that caused that, that climate of the drugs coming into the inner city, so, in such a prolific way, but I remember that was a big deal, and my father gave me like a certificate or an award that he made me that said how proud he was of the work that I was doing and he said, and it said something, I'm paraphrasing a little bit, but it said something to the effect, I still have it, of I know sometimes I chastise you for things you do or don't do well enough you think to suit me, but I want to let you know how proud I am about your, of your involvement in these various things, and he cited DOOM as one of the things. It was when I was going, I guess into my junior year of high school and so I framed it and had it in my room for a while; a sort of certificate of being a great daughter (laughter). It was, that was a timeframe that there was a lot going on, and that was a very pivotal timeframe in my life because shortly thereafter was when I made the decision that I wanted to major in art, and so going to McKinley was a big deal because you had to test to go into the school. It was a magnet school, if you will, in Washington, D.C., and it was the first time that I was leaving my community to go to school. I could walk to my elementary school [Jessie LaSalle Elementary School; LaSalle-Backus Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]. I could walk to my junior high school, Bertie Backus [Bertie Backus Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], but I couldn't, I had to ride the bus to my high school. Story_ID: 373320 Speaker 1: Well, before we get to high school, let's talk about junior high school. Tell me the name of the school. Speaker 2: Bertie [Bertie Backus Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], B-E-R-T-I-E. Speaker 1: B-E-R-- Speaker 2: T-I-E, Backus, B-A-C-K-U-S, Junior High, and it has now become, I think, a science and technology school, but when I was there it was just a public junior high school that was in our community and I could walk to that school and it was predominantly black. All the schools that I went to were predominantly black schools in Washington [D.C.], and it was one of those things where when you got into junior school you thought you were big, and it's one of those things that sort of brought you back to you're only as big as your neighborhood, because as an example if you went out of the house and you were supposed to wear, it was pouring rain and you were supposed to wear your boots and you didn't want to wear your boots because it wasn't cool, so you rounded the corner and you took your boots off and walked to school. Somebody called and said to your mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter], "Do you know that Pat [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] went out of here this morning. I didn't see her with any boots on." And by the time you got home, your mother knew that you hadn't worn them, and you were in trouble. So, we had a very tight-knit community that watched over all of us. It's one of those it takes a village to raise a child, and we had it in our neighborhood [Northeast, Washington, D.C.] and so it was really fun, and I did a lot of art. I did a lot of art in Bertie Backus. My dad [Horace Carpenter] is a photographer and has studied and taught himself a lot about photography over the years and he taught a photography program after school in Backus, and both he and my mother at alternate times were president of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], which also made it very difficult for you to do too much out of line because everybody knew who's child you were, so they were both, yeah, they were civically involved and it was a really pleasant experience. The principal at the time was a Mr. Mallard [ph.], and he was a very striking, very tall black man and he didn't take any mess, but he was really sort of one of those when you got to know him very well and because my parents involvement with the school and what-not, I did feel like I got to know a bit beyond just sort of being the principal-student relationship and he was the nicest man and the most supportive person and when I was out of school a while--I was already living here [New York, New York] and working in the garment industry--they invited me back and presented me with an award for, you know, citizenship and an outstanding graduate of Backus and I got it at the same time as James Brown, the sportscaster, and so he and I were sitting on the stage remarking how little everything looked after years of being away, when you were there in those halls everything felt so big and imposing after you'd come from elementary school, you know, so, yeah Backus was a good time. Backus was a very good time, and they had a tennis court, so you used to be able to walk down and play tennis and they had a very well-rounded program, I think, when I look back on some of the things that I hear from that timeframe. From other people, you know, in other schools in Washington, I think it turned out to actually be a pretty good school. Speaker 1: Did you participate in any extracurricular activities? Speaker 2: I was a cheerleader. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: For the basketball team and we had, I was in the art club, I was in the Spanish club, I was a cheerleader and the team won several sort of citywide championships and several of the people who came out of that, the first person that comes to mind is Adrian Dantley, went on to play in the MBA [sic. National Basketball Association (NBA)] years later, but yeah, I was a cheerleader at Tech [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], I was a cheerleader at Backus and then the first year at Tech I applied, I went out for that as well. I liked that. That was fun, because I was, as I said, growing up with boys I was always very athletic, so I was, I loved flipping around the floor (laughter). Story_ID: 373321 Speaker 1: Now you're living in a city [Washington, D.C.], when the March on Washington happened. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about that? Speaker 2: I remember it, and we went down to the tent city. My dad [Horace Carpenter] took us all down. It was one of those things where I had just felt like I had never seen so many people in one place in all my life. It was just that sense of a sea of humanity and knowing that really important things were happening, really important things were happening, and wanting to, having a very strong sense of pride and wanting to be involved in that. It was really impactful standing down by the, I can remember going across and coming around into the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.] in front of the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] and just that sense of all these people around you, but feeling like it was okay; not like now, where if you get in the middle of a crowd (laughter) you wonder if people are going to stampede and if someone's gonna start something. I didn't have that sense at all, even in the midst of all those people you felt that connectedness of one, one purpose and that nonviolent sense of, that nonviolent purpose, and so those are the things that really resonate with me from that time, yeah. Story_ID: 373322 Speaker 1: Was there a teacher or someone in your junior high school [Bertie Backus Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] years that you remember that encouraged you or was, you know, impactful in your life? Speaker 2: There, it's interesting. That period of time there were certainly teachers that I felt supported my interests but it was not as strong as my sixth grade teachers and then when I moved into high school, which is interesting to think about that. My Spanish teacher was very motivating and she told me then, and I've heard it many times since, that I had a wonderful ear for languages and that I really should do something with it, and I started taking Spanish in the fourth or fifth grade, so in elementary school [Jessie LaSalle Elementary School; LaSalle-Backus Education Campus, Washington, D.C.], so I took it all the years of junior high and all into high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] and, so she was rather impactful and she's one of the people I think that put me up for the award that I went back to get later, and I can see her face and I'm trying to remember Senora and, it won't come right this minute. Maybe it will come later. And Mr. Hale [ph.], who was a mathematics teacher, and one of the most strict teachers that you could ever have, and he probably wouldn't last in public school systems today but then, (laughter) because you're not allowed to even look hard at a student sometimes, but he's a sort of person, as I said, I was very chatty and I would, I was a good student so often I would finish my work and then I'd want to chat with those around me and he would come up behind you and he would put one fist on your head and do that on your head with the other one and you wouldn't hear him and all the students around you would see him and nobody would tip you off and he would all of a sudden, boom (laughter). So Mr. Hale made a point of getting, making sure I had my math foundation (laughter) but still, again, when you graduated just so supportive and when I would come back and go visit the school, "How are you?" and, "What's going on in your life?" And so supportive, and wanting to introduce, "This was one of my best students, you know," to his current class and those kinds of things, so, so yeah, very funny. Story_ID: 373323 Speaker 1: You said you had to take a test to go on to high school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So tell me about that. Speaker 2: I had to take an art test. I made a decision that I wanted to go somewhere where I could major in art. I knew that some way in my life I would use my artistic skills and the high school that I should have gone to that was the one in my area, was Calvin Coolidge [Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], but they didn't really have a strong art program, and so I learned about McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], which was the only public high school that you could take, you could have an art major in, and then there are a couple of Catholic schools that you could have an art major in, and then there are a couple of private schools, excuse me, and my grades would have allowed me to go to a private school but I didn't want to go and I don't know whether it was a good decision or a bad decision but I've actually, I mean at the end of the day I think it was a good decision but one of the things I must commend my parents [Vivian Tyler Carpenter and Horace Carpenter] on is they didn't force it on me, because my mom, I know, would have preferred that I had gone to a private school at that point. Public schools in Washington [D.C.] are pretty good and they were much better now, I mean much better then than they are now, but I think the sense of me having to get on a bus and go more into the inner city to go to school and all that didn't really sit well with her, and I knew I didn't want to go have a, I knew I didn't want to go to a Catholic school. I didn't want to, I'm spiritual but I just didn't, I didn't want to have religion take up that much of my day and so they allowed me to take the test and you had to go in addition to your scholastic, you know, testing you had to go and take an art test and you had to draw certain things and you had to know things about color, you had to paint, you had to take a portfolio of work and Mr. Svelah [Antonin Svelah] (laughter) was our art teacher. S-V-E-L-A-H, I believe, Mr. Svelah, and he was a very narrow thinking artist as I look back on it now. He didn't have a broad idea of what it meant to be an artist, which is sort of surprising since art is such a beautiful kind of thing, but he was our art teacher, and I liked the art, well, he was our main art teacher initially. Mrs. Day, who was a local, fairly famous local artist in the Washington area, Jewett Day [ph.], was our art teacher in, as we moved in through eleventh and twelfth grade and loved her to bits; tiny little woman, very high strung and one of my best friends in high school, Cassandra Mitchell [ph.], who was just an amazingly creative wonderful woman and probably was the catalyst for a tremendous amount of my art, decided one day in Mrs. Day's class, that we were going to burn a flag for an art piece that she wanted to do and me being her good friend and, you know, radical, (laughter) we began to burn this flag in the art studio and Mrs. Day lost her mind, because we didn't know it but she said, "This is against the law. You have to stop." And she's running down the hall (laughter). "They're burning a flag, they're burning a flag." (Laughter) It will never ever fade from, today when I go home, at Christmas time I see her, you know, just this past Christmas, "I loved you, you all were great students, but you and Casey were trouble." (Laughter) And we burned the flag, and it was a fabulous piece; the piece she did was fabulous and I actually ended up with it here in New York [New York] for many years, and I don't know what's happened to it and I'm so upset about it. It was a wonderful piece that she did, that was part Africa and part the United States, and the United States portion she had the American flag that made, that she had cut the shape out of. She mounted it on canvas and through the burned holes she had Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr] and Malcolm [Malcolm X] and, you know, various black leaders that came through the holes where she had burned, it was a fabulous piece, and then the African portion, she had the horn portion of Africa, where she had painted all in red, black, and green and she had, you know, different things going on over there. It was a huge piece by about six feet. It was fabulous. And, and so we had fun in art at Tech, but at the end of the day it didn't satisfy all of my art needs and I came across through my summer job in my sixteenth year, the D.C. Commission on the Arts [D.C. Commission on the Arts and Humanities], and I taught art. My very first summer job was teaching art to little kids and in that, during that summer, I learned about this new program called Workshops for Careers in the Arts and that is what changed my life. Really changed my life. Workshop was started by Mike Malone, who just died this year. I went to his memorial service a couple weeks before Christmas and [HistoryMaker] Peggy Cooper Cafritz, two very powerful people in Washington. Peggy has been head of the school board since then in Washington, but they had a program one summer, and at the program Peggy just said this at the memorial, she and Mike turned to each other and said, "Wouldn't it be nice to have a school for the performing arts in Washington," because we didn't have one in the '70s [1970s] and they started Workshop, which then ultimately became the Duke Ellington High School for the Performing Arts [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.], which it is now and people like Dave Chappelle have come through there, but it was a phenomenal time and I went and auditioned and took my portfolio and I started leaving high school half a day in my junior year and going and spending the rest of that day and half the night at Workshop. And I did that for the next two years and that's why I do what I do today. Story_ID: 373324 Speaker 1: Were your parents [Vivian Tyler Carpenter and Horace Carpenter] and your counselors very active in helping you decide what college you would go to? Speaker 2: Absolutely, and I applied to several and actually got into, was accepted in several I applied to. At the time, I thought I wanted to go to Pratt [Pratt Institute], because it was here in New York City [New York, New York], and I was in Washington [D.C.] and knew I needed to get to New York for some reason. I also applied to Rhode Island School of Design [RISD], which is a wonderful art school and visited it in Providence, Rhode Island. It's really a beautiful art school and when I made the decision that it wasn't going to be a traditionally art major that I wanted, then that's really what changed my mind about attending Rhode Island School of Design. I applied to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] because in my high school years, I developed a love of psychology and I thought I wanted to combine art and psychology and Boston had a really good program, that you could do a psych major and art minor, or reverse it, but that's what I thought I wanted to do so I actually got accepted there and I did another Midwest school. I can't remember. I never went through the whole process, so I didn't get accepted because I stopped, but I was gonna, I had a fourth school in my head at the time and, yes, my parents were very involved because an education was paramount in our house and it wasn't an option that I wasn't gonna go to college, just where I was going was the conversation and so I had, you know, wrote essays and I had to, with the art schools you have to, you have to do art projects that have to be evaluated, et cetera, in order to be accepted. I remember at RISD, I had to draw a bicycle and an old shoe, and I still have those and they are some of the best illustrations I've ever done. I really loved those two. I did an old combat boot of my father's, took my old shoe, and I did the bicycle head on, which is one of the things that I remember one of the reviewers commented on the fact that I did it straight on. Most people would do the bicycle from a side view. And, I was really sort of set in my thinking that I was probably going to come to Pratt, because I had made the decision I wanted to not be traditionally art, and I thought, I was toying with fashion, art, and theater. Those were sort of the three balls that were being juggled at the time and my time at Workshop had exposed me; Workshops for Careers in the Arts did have something in the summer called the street theater and that street theater would take us to the streets of Washington to perform for just the local people. We went to the inner city Washington, we'd set up and put on this play and they were musicals, and so it had theater and dance and singing and those of us in the art department worked on sets and costumes, but there were really interesting ways to do sets and costumes because they always had to be put up in the street and taken down and packed and put up in another street and taken down and the costumes had to be, most of them were like from found objects and things, so we'd take very interesting things to make other things out of like baskets to make beaks, and all kinds of things like that, and we'd silk screen all the T-shirts; we'd design them and silk screen all the T-shirts that the kids wore because we all wore T-shirts and jeans with the exception of a piece you put on or off for a costume, and I loved, I realized how much I loved the theater and that part of it, and Debbie Allen was the dance teacher back then, so, I mean, you had really wonderful, wonderful people that were, we were working with professional people that went on to do phenomenal things, and so I had this love of the theater that was really solidified then, so there was a part of me that thought if I didn't do fashion, maybe I'd do costume design, so I'm juggling these balls and one of my other best friends who is now my very best friend in the world, Robin Belle Washington [ph.], lives in Washington, she was going, we had both applied and we were going to Pratt. We both went to Tech [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], we were art majors, we were going to Pratt and her sister was here at FIT in New York [New York], Fashion Institute of Technology, and we came to visit her one weekend and I had never heard of the school, I knew nothing of it and it was a two-year school. I didn't have to spend four years in school. I could get into the industry fast, so I went home saying I don't want to go to Pratt, I don't want to go to RISD, I want to go to this FIT, and my parents said, what? (Laughter) And so I went in and I talked to my counselor and my counselor had never heard of it. I don't know how Leah [ph.] found it. I don't know how she found it. I never, actually I should ask her that. But, we did some research, my father and mother brought me up, I brought my portfolio, went through the process, got accepted and decided that FIT was where I wanted to go because it was, at the time, there was only a dorm and a school building on 27th Street in New York City, and I was three blocks from the garment industry, which is where I decided I wanted to go and I thought I'll go for these two years, I'll get my associate's [degree] and I will be in the industry before all these people who are going for four-year degrees, and I'll be two years ahead of them, and that's sort of been my modus operandi in the garment industry ever since, is trying to be ahead of the curve that you could see coming, because it's such a competitive business that the whole idea of trying to be ahead of the folks that are behind you gives you that little bit of an edge. Story_ID: 373325 Speaker 1: So, we drove up. We, I had my interview. I was petrified because they're very professional, and most of the professors at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] are people who are either currently in the industry or had been in the industry, so they pulled no punches and they were very serious and because it's not a campus, you know, and the original place that we went to Workshop [Workshops for Careers in the Arts] was on George Washington University's [Washington, D.C.] campus, and then we did things on Catholic University's [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] campus, and I did things on Georgetown University's [Washington, D.C.] campus, so I come from a city that has universities that had these wonderful campuses around, and I go somewhere that they had a building and a dorm (laughter) in the middle of the city on a street, you know, and I said, "Oh, my God." But, it was actually very interesting. A very interesting way to go to school and I went out to Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] often to visit Robin [Robin Belle Washington (ph.)], and so I got my, my kind of campus university life there and then my roommates, both my roommates that I had at FIT were from Buffalo, New York, one behind the other, and they had dear friends that went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], so we'd go up to Columbia and hang out with the guys and have that, you know, sort of university campus life there as well, so that's how we got it into our systems, but at FIT it was all about business. It was all about learning it and getting it done and being good at it and moving on, and so at the end of my second year, I made a decision that I wanted to stay one more year to have another degree and so I wanted to be able to have fashion design and fashion illustration to fall back on, because back in the '70s [1970s], especially the early '70s [1970s], which is when I was at FIT, instead of photography being the way that they showed clothing in newspapers and magazines and things, it was often a beautiful fashion illustration by these very well-known and very highly respected illustrators, and I thought I might want to do that, and so I focused on fashion illustration for that last year and then, of course, wouldn't you know it the year I got out of school was the year photography became the way to show clothing (laughter). So, I had to make a decision about what I wanted to with my illustration but I did, because I love art and I love drawing and I had taken, you know, fine arts, so I had taken sculpture and painting and all those things between high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] and Workshop, then I didn't want to go away from the art immediately. So, at Christmas time of my last year, I started shopping my portfolio around and the day after college, I went to work at Vogue and Butterick patterns, and if you're a home sewer, we always used to go to the store and buy those patterns and make your clothes, and I used to do the illustrations that were on the front of that package for a couple of years, and during that time that I was there, I met several designers, because you, I don't know if the people would also remember that Calvin Klein designed a Vogue pattern and Betsey Johnson designed Vogue patterns, and Carol Horn, so all these designers would come through and work with the pattern makers on the clothing that they wanted to have be their home sewing styles, and so I met them and I understood, you know, I started to understand what it took to do that and that's when I decided I want to do fashion design, I really do want to do fashion, and so I came out of Vogue-Butterick and moved over on to 7th Avenue as a fashion designer a couple years after that. Story_ID: 373326 Speaker 1: You left Fashion Institute [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976]. And you stayed at Vogue-Butterick until (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A couple years, '76 [1976] to '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. And then you-- Speaker 2: And then I actually came here to Times Square [New York, New York] for a short period of time, maybe about eight months, not quite a year, at 1515 Broadway on the forty-second floor where you could, we used to laugh, on a clear day you can see Connecticut. (Laughter) Because it was just you were so high above the city, but I worked for a buying office at the time, Jonathan Atkins' [ph.] buying office, and Atkins doesn't exist anymore or buying offices in that traditional sense don't exist in the way they used to because so many of the department stores have merged together and they have their own offices, but at the time larger stores and smaller boutiques would belong to a buying office and the buying office would employ various buyers on their own who were based here, and all of the show rooms are predominantly here, and so what would happen is the buyers would go to the show rooms and look at the new collections for the season, and then they would bring the product back to us and we would illustrate it and we would send out weekly fliers to the various clients that we had. Then, when they came in to the city to do their actual buying for the store, they'd come with these fliers and they'd know they needed to go to this label or that label or the other label because this fit their product mix and whatever. And so, I used to do those illustrations and I did that for about--as I said, about eight months while I was trying to figure out how to break on to 7th Avenue, and I had my first job on 7th Avenue with Scott Barrie, who is a black fashion designer who, Scott's unfortunately passed now, but he was a phenomenal designer. Speaker 1: This is Scott Barrie? Speaker 2: Scott, S-C-O-T-T, Barrie, B-A-double R-I-E, and Scott was nominated for the Coty Award [Coty American Fashion Critics' Awards] the first year that I went to work with him, and the Coty Award is now what is the CFD [sic. CFDA] award, the Council of Fashion Design [Council of Fashion Designers of America] award. It's the Oscars [Academy Awards] for fashion, and he did beautiful, beautiful. He's known for eveningwear; beautiful matte jersey eveningwear. He was at the same time as [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows and Willi Smith. Those were the three black designers that were on 7th Avenue at the time, so I got to know them all and I worked with Scott for two years, from the end of '78 [1978] into '80 [1980], and it was, that was the foundation for my background and knowledge of the fashion industry, because at the time you used to have your, your design room, which was his office basically, and my office was in his office, where you sketched and designed, and then you had the room next door where your draper was, and you went next door and you worked on how you wanted to drape that particular design, and then you went next door and you had a room of seamstresses and they sewed it, so everything was done on the premise, and it was, you know, wonderful because I learned. I mean, I had the foundation from FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], having had a degree in fashion design, about draping and pattern making, but I knew I didn't want to be a pattern maker or a draper. I knew that my strengths lay elsewhere, which was always an issue at FIT, because I was black and, at that time, they tried to push you into being a sewer or draper, because the technical side was all that they really, I mean, you know, there weren't a lot of folks out there that were doing it, anything other than that, and they wanted you to have a job that, you know, so they were, I had a wonderful teacher, Laura Sinderbrand, who used to be so upset with me because I would tell her, "Laura, I want to know this, I'm going to learn this, but I don't intend to do this as my job." She's a draping teacher, she's wonderful. And years later, when she saw me, she said, "You never wanted to be a draper and look at you," you know, but it was, I knew, I knew from very early on that I wanted to understand it because you need to have that dialog with your draper or your pattern maker or your sewer, but I did not want to sit there and physically make the clothing. I wanted to design it, and that textiles was my love and working with the textiles was more what I wanted to do. So, at Scott's, I got, you know, a wonderful education because I designed clothes, I designed accessories, hats, shoes, jewelry, we designed everything, and we had that traditional 7th Avenue show and one of the years that I was there, I actually did an illustration of him that was the cover of the brochure for the show, which I was pretty proud of, and at that time, I was able to meet a lot of folks that are, you know, sort of influential in fashion now; Constance White was just getting started with Vogue and she would come and cover the line and we made clothes for Diana Ross, and so I would be in fittings with Diana Ross back at that time, and we made clothes for Ashford and Simpson [Nickolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] and for months my bathtub was this strange shade of teal because they all used to wear a Lycra kind of base material both of them would wear, and he always wore a shade darker than her, and so, and they didn't make that shade so I literally had to dye it in my bathtub and (laughter) so my bathtub had this teal ring in it for months afterwards (laughter) but it was a fabulous time; I mean, it was one of those things where you were just in the thick of everything and it was, fashion was great at that point. It was also the time of Studio 54 [New York, New York], so literally, and Scott was the kind of person who worked best at night, so we'd be there all day, then he'd come in later, you know four or five in the evening, we'd work half the night, and then he'd dress me in something and we'd go dancing at Studio (laughter) and I would come home and take a shower and go to work, because I had to be there (laughter). He wasn't going to come in until later, and that was my life for a few years and it was really great fun. I mean, I thought, you know I'm here. I've made it on to New York City [New York, New York]. I'm dancing next to Michael Jackson, and you know Liza Minnelli, and Halston and all these people and it was amazing, and that was my, my entree into the fashion industry per se. And, it was wonderful. It was a great time. It was a really great time. Story_ID: 373327 Speaker 1: So, you leave Scott Barrie in '80 [1980]? Speaker 2: Yeah, around '80 [1980], at some point, mid-'80s [1980s] I would say. Speaker 1: And, what made you decide to leave? Speaker 2: Because I was an assistant and after you've done the same kind of thing, and that's hard on the system, to sort of be up all night (laughter), you know, come in and weave a feather coat the next day (laughter), you know, and work with the shoe person and figure out the colors of this thing, that thing, and the other, at that pace, and also I just felt like, and Scott was supportive of it. At a certain point you need to move to the next level and start to work your way up and do some other things, and so I made a decision that I just needed to do some other stuff, and we stayed friends all through his life. We'd see each other; the last time we saw each other was in Italy at a trade show for textiles and I rounded the corner and he was sitting on a banquet with an entourage of people and he's so funny. When I worked with him he said to me one day, "Ms. Carpenter [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter], do you have a passport?" And I said, "No," and he loved Italy. And he said, "Would you please go out and get a passport, because you are free, black, and twenty-one, and you never know when someone is going to want to whisk you off to Paris [France]," (laughter) and that was how he was, so I rounded the corner at this trade show in Italy--I mean, we had been in touch all these years--and he said, "Well if it isn't Ms. Carpenter. I assume you still have that passport?" (Laughter) And it was great and we just hugged and it was wonderful. I mean, he was a really great man. We lost him too early. He's a talented, talented man, and so it was one of those things where he was supportive, you know, even though, you know, he would say I'm losing a really--but he didn't want to give you too much, so I'm losing a good assistant, you know, not a great assistant but a good assistant (laughter). But that's it. You sort of want to move from being an assistant to an associate, you know, to a designer and to start to get some of your own ideas out, so, so I moved and I did some freelance for a little while. That was a period of time where I didn't have a specific thing I was going into, but I knew I needed to do some other stuff, and not long after, because I went to work for people who had the license for Bill Blass and Oscar de la Renta, and so I worked on products for both of them, casual sportswear products for both of them for a couple of years and I did casual pants, men's and women's, for Bill Blass, I did denim. It was during the time that he even had a chocolate license so we, you know, would sample the chocolates and figure out the size of the B that should go on the chocolate. I mean, all kinds, he did an interior of a car during the time that I was there and we worked on that, and the right color of navy blue that the car had to be; I mean, it was really an interesting time for that, and at the same time this one company owned the license for both he and Oscar, so literally I could go Monday and work with Bill, Tuesday and work with Oscar, Wednesday and work with Bill, Thursday and Friday with Oscar, and then flip it the next week, and I actually designed, he only had, Bill Blass only had children's line for a season, a year-and-a-half, and I designed that children's line girls seven to fourteen dresses with him for that year-and-a-half and that was back in the early '80s [1980s], maybe '81 [1981], '81 [1981], '82 [1982] and, but again, I learned a tremendous amount because now we're talking, you know, about people who were internationally successful and well known and so the, you know, the level of everything kicked up a notch and every so often I will tease Andre Leon Talley, because I met him back when he was, we laughed, we were baby divas at Oscar (laughter) and he was there working with Vogue and sitting at a table when I came into the office and one of the things I always say is Bill Blass was very stern and he was very moody, so you didn't really know from one day to the next what kind of mood he might be, and one day he might whisk you into the office and tell you, "I have this fabulous shirt at my summer house. I must bring it in. We're gonna take this detail and you know," and the next he could be very, you know, sort of strict with you, but Oscar was always just this wonderful, charming man and this one day I walked in and it was the day I met Andre Leon Talley, and I got a tickle in my throat and we were talking about something and I got this tickle and I'm coughing and I'm trying to catch my breath and I'm embarrassed; you know, I don't have all day with this man, he doesn't have all day with me, and here I am wasting time, you know, and I'm turning red and I'm like I'm gonna keel over in Oscar de la Renta's office. And Oscar runs out himself and he gets me water and he's patting me on my back and I just had this sense of, Oscar de la Renta's giving me water, you know, (laughter) whereas depending on other designers that you could have they might send you out 'til you'd finished your coughing fit, and that's entirely possible, or have someone bring, "Could you get her some water?" You know, one of those things, but the fact that he sort of ran out and did this himself, I was always struck by that. He always treated me with a tremendous amount of respect and I always appreciated that. And, it was, again, a great time where you, you're just building on that foundation of what you've learned, and learning much more about a broader range of fabrics, you know, very high-end beautiful fabrics. We might not be making evening gowns in our division, but, you know, it's there while he was fitting wonderful evening gowns that, you know, women whose husbands are heads of state, you know, might be wearing to an event or something and that was really a wonderful time to be there, and so I did that for a couple of years and that was the first time that I actually left the country, because we made denim in Mexico, just over the border of El Paso, Texas, so I would fly down to El Paso and then cross over the border in New Mexico, and first I'd left the country for work. I had gone to Puerto Rico with a class trip or something, but yeah, that was my first, that was the beginning of my international travel, which now I do daily (laughter). Story_ID: 373328 Speaker 1: At Oscar de la Renta, you were-- Speaker 2: Designer. Speaker 1: Designer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but what types of things were you designing there? Speaker 2: For Oscar, I did the same, we all did the same kind of clothing. You did the same thing? Okay. Speaker 1: We just did it from both, so it was casual sportswear, so I did casual bottoms, I did denim, I did cut and sew knit tops that coordinated back to the casual bottoms. That was pretty much the Oscar line, and then with Bill [Bill Blass] it crossed over into the men's bottoms so I designed even the web belt that would go on a, you know, a corduroy pant what colors, stripe in the web that went with the pant and everything, that kind of thing. And, with knit, learning--that was my foundation in knitwear, understanding how knitting is different from weaving and that's what led me later to do, work with Adrienne Vittadini and become a newer designer, but starting to learn about how knit, knitting works and cut-and-sew knitting, particularly at that point--I didn't do many sweaters. They're mostly cut and sew knit. Speaker 2: And then you left there, what year? Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I went to Gloria Vanderbilt and at Gloria Vanderbilt I was then the designer--now I've crossed out of being an assistant to the designer and became a designer and I had the women's area and I worked with three other, four other women at that time who each had a different division under the Gloria Vanderbilt, or category, I should say, under the Gloria Vanderbilt label that are still four of my closest friends today. That's where I really met my closest friends that are still in the industry today. Fran Yoshioka, who went on to be the fashion director at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] for years, Katherine Lover [ph.], who was at Jones New York now still, but she and I worked on the Ralph [Ralph Lauren] lines and she had her own label over the years, an amazing British sweater designer, knitwear designer, Roz Mason Jones [ph.], who is a British designer, is now living and working out of Ireland, and Linda Gross [ph.], who now teaches in San Francisco [California], but we all had different divisions, but we all worked together. And Jackie Nemerov [Jackwyn Nemerov], who is a phenomenal woman; she was head of Jones New York for many years and she is now at Ralph Lauren. She is the, I think the highest paid woman in the fashion industry right now. Jackie is no slouch. She is amazing, but she hired us all. She knew, (laughter) she knew and she brought us all together and we had a great time and I worked there for several years, well not several, two or three, I didn't work anywhere more than two or three years because after a couple years you sort of know everything you know and you want to move and do something different. At least I did. And, that was my first trip to Hong Kong in '82 [1982], and I went until 1999, several times a year, but back then we would go three or four times a year, four to six weeks at a time, and sit in Hong Kong and put the line together, and it was an incredible education about how things are moved together (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you have any stories about that? Speaker 1: You'd have to have days for those stories (laughter). We had a ton of fun. It was very interesting because it certainly grew over time, but at that time the Murjanis [Murjani Group], who were the people who owned the Gloria Vanderbilt label, were a very wealthy family of Eastern Indians and they owned factories in Hong Kong that made the denim that we worked with predominately though we worked with other fabrics as well. And, so we would go over and stay in fabulous hotels, five star hotels. I mean, the money that was spent in the '80s [1980s] in fashion was just, on some level, very obscene. But, you'd stay at a five star hotel and you'd be there for like I said a month to six weeks and you literally would develop the denim, design the fabric, make the garments, fit the garments, correct the garments, get the fitted corrected garments finished so that those were your salesman samples and then you would come back with huge cases of your salesman samples and that's what you showed to the buyers in your showroom, and so that was sort of the process, and we worked very hard because you worked, it was very long hours. I mean, people really, you know, sort of think it was very glamorous and on many levels it was. It had that element to it, but you were working very hard, and the factories were huge, so you went, this was that time frame where you went from having that little room next door where your draper was and that little room next door where your sewer was, and your pattern maker, to a huge factory that employed, you know, hundreds of people, sometimes thousands, depending on the companies that you're working with and prices, you know, certainly became much more of an object because Gloria Vanderbilt was much more of a mainstream department store label, and so, you know, you're very, you had to be competitive but you had to be new and different and innovative because they were one of the big labels. Story_ID: 373329 Speaker 1: It was that, that sense of sort of going in and recognizing, learning about machinery. I learned a lot more about machinery and how fabric is made during that period and we would work in our individual rooms and then meet, you know, late at night in the hotel for dinner and often we were there over, there were certain cycles and we almost always, for years, I had Thanksgiving in Hong Kong, and we would have Thanksgiving at the top of the restaurant on the top of the Sheraton Hotel [Sheraton Hong Kong Hotel and Towers, Hong Kong] and there might be fifteen of us who were all from the states and all there for Thanksgiving and all designers, who hardly ever saw each other here because we never got out of the offices, but that was our meeting place and we would have a fabulous Thanksgiving dinner and, you know, just get really drunk in this one big room that they would give us and they knew us, and I mean, just have a great time and trying to simulate, you know, what a Thanksgiving at home might look like with all these people from these different backgrounds, British and Chinese and Asia and Europeans, French friends and American friends, and just a big conglomerate of folks that ended up around this Thanksgiving table, and we just had the best time and by the end of the night they have the, you know, sort of the singers that were kind of the lounge acts that were in the room outside and we'd be out there before the end of the night sort of singing (laughter) and they knew us, and we were interrupting everybody's everything by the end, but it was one of those kinds of things where you sort of let off a lot of steam at that point because you had been there for weeks and you still probably had one more to go before you could go home, you know, (laughter) so those kinds of things are what we did. We have great birthday parties. Whoever's birthday was within those, that period of time, just before we got there, we'd have big birthday parties and celebrate with each other and really became great friends with your agent because you worked out of offices that were also, the Murjanis [Murjani Group] had their office, but then if we were doing something else, you might have an agent's office, so sort of coming to understand the culture of Hong Kong, my love of great Chinese food came from there, and I have little patience for bad Chinese food now since (laughter) I've spent so much time there, but, you know, sort of learning about food and culture and hearing the stories behind it, and especially because it's such an old culture for me, developing a sense and a love and respect for how their culture influences all that they do and family structure the way that, you know, many people we work with could live in a home that might have four generations all living together in that sense, and just of those kinds of things. Kind of understanding, you know, broadening my love of culture and learning more about another one. That was the foundation for that and I went for so many years that by the time the '90s [1990s] came, I'd go to the Regent hotel [The Regent Hong Kong; InterContinental Hong Kong, Hong Kong], which I stayed in for years. They would say, "Welcome Home, Ms. Carpenter [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter]." And I used to change my room around to accommodate the work that I had to do, so the guys would come with the lighting I needed and my clothing rack and my extra tables and all these things, because they knew, and talk about Thanksgiving, one year, there were a bunch of us in Hong Kong at the same time for Thanksgiving, and a friend of ours had been moved there, and they bought an apartment but they didn't have anything, and literally the Regent Hotel gave us service for sixteen, so that we could have our traditional dinner at Sue's [ph.] house and they sent us over because they pick you up from the airport in a Rolls Royce or Bentley and drive you to the hotel. It's very chi-chi (laughter). And they had the row of cars take us over to the Hong Kong side to their apartment for our dinner. It was great. Story_ID: 373330 Speaker 1: Up to this point, can you tell me if you have experienced any prejudice because either you were black or a woman? Speaker 2: I would say that there's probably more from the point of view of being black than from a woman. There are a lot of women in the garment industry, and since it's predominantly an industry that deals with, you know, women's clothing as the larger portion certainly of it and women's personal accessories and things, being a woman wasn't as much of an issue as being black, I think. It's a predominantly, now it's still predominantly Jewish but then it was even more so industry and coming out of FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], a lot of the people that I was in school with were young Jewish girls whose parents, whose aunts and uncles, whose families already owned or were very high up in certain businesses, so they went right into their jobs knowing that they had it set, whereas from my point of view, that's partially the problem, I think that's the reason that I always try to get ahead of the curve kind of thing, because I recognized that I was going to be up against that kind of competition and so the sense of really knowing my stuff, really feeling like on some level I had to be a little bit better than the other person that might be going up for that same job, and as I was saying, the sense of being a credit to my homeroom, sort of showing up and doing it really well, so that it opened the idea and the eyes and the doors possibly for those that are coming because more often than not, I certainly was the only black designer in places that I worked and you knew who you were going up against. You knew who you had to beat out, and because I tended to choose named companies, designer companies because I really wanted to work in the industry and really get the full knowledge and work with (unclear) fabrics and have those experiences of travel, then the competition for those was very stiff, so you really had to know your business and, for me, the one thing that I made a point of doing very early on and I continue to do it throughout my twenty-five years in the industry, was to not only be a good designer, and I think some of that just comes innately, but to understand the business because most designers at that time especially, it's such a creative time in the industry, that a lot of designers didn't pay attention to the business side of fashion and fashion is a huge business. In 2000, I believe, it was probably the third largest industry in the country. I mean, it's a multi-billion dollar industry. None of us walk around naked, so, it's, you know, there's a business behind this whole creative force, and to understand it and treat it like one, and so not just to say I feel like it should be purple, and you know, and not really have any backup for why it should be purple didn't really fly, and one of the things I learned very early on is to learn to be in touch with the hierarchy in your company, that the president should know who you are. The head of sales should know you are, and to be able to have dialog with those people, and one of the other things that I learned was that you have to be able to talk in tangible terms about intangible things because it's creativity and when you sit down with the president, often, or head of sales, they're really looking at the bottom line. They're looking at numbers, they're looking at figures. Did it sell? How did it sell? Can we capitalize on something that didn't? Can we quickly dump something that didn't work? And, so to be able to say not only that I feel that it's purple, but I feel that it's purple driven by the fact that if you look at the last three shows that the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] has put on and the influence of Renaissance art and that you know it's when purple colors were coming into fashion then and you see these colors in the paintings, or if, and I'm just making this up in terms of the color purple, but you know, you need to talk about it from that point of view, or as an example today, if you, you know, film and music drive a lot of fashion choices for the main stream, so if you look at something like when Elle [Elle Woods], the girl Reese Witherspoon played [in 'Legally Blonde'] Elle, and went to Washington [D.C.] and she wore pink and all of a sudden everybody had to have pink. You had to be able to talk about it from--because social and cultural things definitely impact the choices we make and it's very cyclical. So, being able to understand the cycle and look at it and figure out, you know, the pendulum swings and if it's, if we've been in short skirts then obviously it's gonna be long skirts, and so it's gonna swing back, and if we've been loose it's gonna be tight. All those things are very, they're tangible things that you can point to and look at to see how something that appears to be intangible really comes to bear, and that's one of the things I had to learn early, that I had to be able to sit and discuss the business of my businesses in addition to being good at what I did creatively. And, so those kinds of things, I think, I probably did more than my counterparts who wouldn't have had necessarily to prove that they needed to be there, just because their father owned the company. You know, they grew up in it. They, of course, intrinsically understood it, you know. That was the feeling that they would give you. Story_ID: 373331 Speaker 1: You leave Gloria Vanderbilt in what year? Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], I went to, '84 [1984] I left them, and I did a bit of free lancing between and then I went to Adrienne Vittadini, and I was Adrienne for a couple of years. Speaker 1: Spell-- Speaker 2: Vittadini? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: V-I-T-T-A-D-I-N-I, and that was where I really concentrated on knitwear; she was a knitwear designer. I went in as a designer, design director of her sport collection. She had Adrienne Vittadini and she had Adrienne Vittadini Sport, and the year that, the first year that I was there, I think I doubled, my design doubled the sales that she had and by the time she sold her company many years later, she sold it for what my division alone was worth when I was there, so felt good about that (laughter). But I learned a tremendous amount from her about, or from being at that company, about knitwear. I worked in handmade sweaters, machine made sweaters, and cut and sew knits, and every season had to design approximately fifteen groups per season, and a group consisted of nine or ten pieces of cut and sew sportswear, sew a top and a bottom, and then six to eight hand or machine knit sweaters times fifteen, and so that was then I really started spending six weeks at a time three to four times a year in Hong Kong. (Laughter) So I was gone a tremendous amount, but that would entail going over, sending things over initially before you went, going for two weeks, preparing the first samples, Adrienne would come for the middle two weeks, she'd fit every single garment on her, so not only my fifteen groups, but the Adrienne Vittadini collection, fifteen groups, and then we would make all the corrections and then she would leave and we had two weeks of follow up to implement all those corrections and start the salesmen samples going in if they were ready, and carry them in if they weren't and have them sent, and that was a hectic time. That was a lot of work, and one of the few things that comes to mind is Adrienne is a, she's a wonderful merchandiser. She's not the strongest designer that I've ever worked with, but she's a phenomenal merchandiser, and a merchandiser is one who can look at something and see how to put it together, more than necessarily tell you what that thing is it ought to be to start. My job was to come up with what ought to be to start and her job was how to put it together to give it her stamp and make it hers, and she was really good at it, a strong woman, she didn't play (laughter) and one of the, the thing that really made me make it, know that it was time to leave was Adrienne, one trip just before Thanksgiving, because I said we're always there at Thanksgiving, I had a group of sweaters that I needed to send out and I had done all the sweater fronts, the designs, you design the front and the back literally to scale, so full size, and draw it out in a sweater chart, you know, each stitch, because a sweater is done with a stitch, and it's very time consuming and very labor intensive, and I had done these six or eight sweaters, and I had sent them off and when I got to Hong Kong, they hadn't arrived, and I was there for those two weeks and she was due to come and they hadn't arrived and we needed to be knitting them, and so she came, and she got very upset with me that they hadn't arrived. Now this is holiday mailing. I have nothing to do with it. I didn't do anything any differently than I usually do, and they just hadn't arrived, and so I had to redo them all, so I stayed up for three days straight and did all of these sweaters, and of course, the day after I finished the last one, the package that I had sent originally, arrived but my punishment for that was that we stayed in the Regent hotel [The Regent Hong Kong; InterContinental Hong Kong, Hong Kong], which was a five star incredible hotel, in a harbor view room, which were the most expensive rooms, because you're looking out over the Hong Kong harbor [Victoria Harbour], much like staying along the Hudson River, in a five-star hotel and looking across, and she moved me to the other side of the hotel as my punishment, so that everyone knew my shame, because I had made a mistake of sending them and them not arriving, like I had anything to do with this, and that was when I sort of said, this woman doesn't value what I do at all, and I need to move on. But, it was a, it was certainly an education. I met a lot of people that I worked with for many years after that, factories, et cetera. I even had conversation with, at one point, with the guy who backed her about backing me on my own line, at one point, because they did understand what I was doing, and that I was good at what I did, but, especially in the factories. I make great friends in factories, and we're still friends today but it was that kind of an atmosphere (laughter). Story_ID: 373332 Speaker 1: So you moved on to-- Speaker 2: My own line. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got approached by Jonathan, oh my gosh, it's an old company that's no longer around but they were a big casual sportswear company. Jonathan Logan. I can't believe I lost that for a minute, and someone called me one day and asked me to come and have a meeting and I decided I wanted to see what this was about, and I came over and met with Oozie Reskin [ph.], who was the head of Jonathan Logan at the time, and he told me that they were, you know, aware of my history and my background and that they thought that they wanted to start a new division and would I be interested in heading up that division, and I said yes. So, I left and I came, and we started Apparenza, and that was my label and I ran it for three years. It, he described it as being the jewel in the crown of Jonathan Logan, but it was a bridge sportswear. The fashion industry is divided into tiers, and at the top you have designer, and then below designer you have bridge, and then below that you have what would be like a mass market, I guess. It's a designer, then the bridge, and then the mass. And so it's sort of the luxury, the middle, and the lower end kind of, and it's really around pricing. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And that pricing drives the kinds of fabric that you can utilize and the end channels of distribution, so whether or not you'd be in a better specialty store like a Neiman's [Neiman Marcus] or a Bergdorf's [Bergdorf Goodman] or whether you'd move down a notch and be in Bloomingdale's and Macy's, or whether you'd move down a notch and be in Kmart and Target, and those kinds of things, and so I tended to target the bridge to designer because that was my own personal taste level, and so we targeted the bridge market. Bloomingdale's was the store that launched us. I did in-store appearances at Bloomingdale's, both here in New York [New York] and down in their Boca Raton [Florida] store, and my line was similar to Adrienne's [Adrienne Vittadini] but with my own aesthetic. So I became the merchandiser. So, I was the design director and the merchandiser. And, the second year of doing it, they brought Peter Max to me, the pop artist, and Peter had had clothing in the '60s [1960s], and was interested in coming back into the industry again with his artwork on clothing, and so we went up for a meeting, the president of my division and myself, and we had a great time. I loved his artwork. He loved my knowledge of art, and we made a deal and I was the design director for his label as well, and Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue] was the store that launched his label, so I had the Apparenza collection and the Peter Max collection, that I ran for a couple of years together, and then-- Speaker 1: Your line was called the Carpenter, Patti Carpenter Line? Speaker 2: No, it was Apparenza. Speaker 1: Apparenza, yeah. Okay, spell it for me. Speaker 2: A-P-P-A-R-E-N-Z-A, which means appearance in Italian. Apparenza. Speaker 1: And tell me what year this is. Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-six [1986] to '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 373333 Speaker 1: You're running Peter Max and the Jonathan Logan line [Apparenza], and tell me what happ- any stories about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stories (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: I've got lots of stories. This whole thing is fraught with stories (laughter). There were, well one of the things that I did to, to sort of establish my aesthetic was because of my art background, I did a lot of going to museums and galleries and looking at art work because I love it, and I would use an artist every season that I would use as the inspiration, so we used people like Gauguin [Paul Gauguin], we used people like Monet [Claude Monet] and Manet [Edouard Manet], and some of the great sort of historical people, and we used them not only for the, we could literally take an excerpt from a painting and blow it up and use that as a pattern on a hand knit sweater, and then I would come up with small patternings that would sit with that and be the patterning on the sportswear, the cut and silk sportswear that went with the sweaters, and that's really what drew Peter to us and because I used artists as my inspiration, Degas [Edgar Degas], all kinds of people, and so when I first went up to his office, we started talking. He said to me, "Why haven't you ever used a Peter Max as inspiration?" (Laughter) I said, "Well, I was reaching a little further back, but we could." (Laughter) And so, that was one of the joys of working with him as we were allowed to go up and go through archives and archives and archives of all of his work from the '60s [1960s] and I could pick the very iconic pieces that people immediately would recognize as his artwork, along with things from his sketchbook that we just like the look of, so sometimes we do very brightly colored pieces that were like his big paintings and other times, if I use something out of his sketchbook, I would just make the group in black and white because he just sketched it on a page in black and white and I thought it translated nicest in that way, and so it was really fun, and that was at a point in time when he was also starting to work on licenses for other things, so he got a watch collection at that point, and it was just nice to sort of see how things that we had selected to work with in the clothing, the watch people would then take our lead and so he would have a matching watch that, you know, went back to a collection, and at one point he did umbrellas and, you know, so there was also, if we picked out a companion print sometimes I would ask him to create a print if I took a sketch from his book, and often we used the female face because he did a lot of wonderful illustrations of women, and so if she had a flower in her hair, I might pull that flower out as an all-over pattern, so he'd have to draw something new specifically for us. So, to sit and watch him sort of play with it and create and craft it and me kind of be able to say to somebody as amazing him, "Could we make it bigger, could we make it smaller," you know, and to work with his, the woman who was, at that time, the art director for him on a, Willis [ph.], who was an amazing artist in her own right and a dear friend still today, have (unclear) then worked with me on color, and it was at the time when computers were just really starting to be used more in creating pattern and print, and his office was up in the Upper West Side [New York, New York], and he had this wonderful top floor that was all surrounded by windows and the first time we went up there we could literally roller skate in this huge open space, and then he put in all these multi-screens and he was flashing all these great images all the time, and it was at the time when he was working on the various Statue of Liberties that he did that he did some and you know, they hung all over the world, but he was starting to do more of that kind of stuff, so just to be in that environment with this incredibly creative and prolific person and be inspired by all of that was really great fun, and then during the time that I was at Apparenza, to be able to start to do some different kinds of travel because then I started out not only, I mean, I was always still going to Europe, not just Asia, but to start to be able to broaden where I could go to Europe and shop for fabrics, and attend the Pitti Filati, which is one of my favorite shows. It's a yarn show in Florence [Italy] that takes place in an old fort, and to be able to walk through those kinds of, you know, those old streets that are so filled with art and stand in front of, you know, old masters at the Pitti gallery [Palazzo Pitti, Florence, Italy], or to stand in front of the 'David' [Michelangelo] and just sort of realize what you are a part of as you created some more art. Certainly I don't liken what we do to that really, but the inspiration from all of that, the colors that one sees at sunset on the market place in Florence would, you know, I would come up with a color story for print, or the patterning of the cobblestones, you know, we used at one point as an inspiration for print, you know, so those kinds of things, you know, really started to influence how I saw the world and how I think it really, really made me realize how much I wanted to do what I've gone into since I left fashion. But, it was, that was a very exciting time and then during that time I met and married my ex-husband [T. David Reese] (laughter). Story_ID: 373334 Speaker 1: Can you talk about licensing a little bit? What it is and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What it is, um-hm. Licensing is a process through which anybody can, but you think of it traditionally from the designer's standpoint, a designer, and I'll use Ralph Lauren, because he's probably the most prolific because of licensing people and I work with him. They have a line of collection, what their couture collection is that you find in his shop on Madison Avenue [New York, New York] as an example, but people in other industries find value in his name and his aesthetic. So, Ralph himself doesn't sit and make a perfume because that's not his strength. That's not his forte, but someone who makes perfume recognizes that his name has a cache and his name has an aspirational value to people and so they will approach him and say we'll pay you x number of dollars a year to license your name to put on a fragrance, and then depending on the designers, they can sit and be very, very involved in what that smell is, or they cannot be, and in a case of someone like Ralph, of course he is very, very involved in it. But it also, you know, he may not make a watch but there're Ralph Lauren watches, and the two divisions that I worked with him on are with the Lauren division and the Ralph division and those at one time were both licensed by Jones New York, so they spent a tremendous amount of money and they paid for the name of Lauren and the name of Ralph, and then there was a whole other group of us that were designing that weren't sitting in his Madison Avenue design studio, but we spent a lot of time there and we would create that and then they would, you know, you pay depending on how big a product that can be. I mean, we were making hundreds of millions of dollars off of, you know, the clothing, the sales of that clothing. So, that's how his people would determine how much that license costs and different companies who made like product could vie for that product so, you know, another, Liz Claiborne, as an example, could have come to him and said we'd pay you if we paid, I don't know what the numbers were, I don't want to give out numbers, but, you know, if we want to pay, we said, I'll just use round numbers, if we want to pay you $100 million for a license at Jones and somebody comes and says we want to pay 125 million, he can make a decision of does it make more sense to give the license out for more or give it to somebody who has the ability to make more because on top of that, he still gets royalties beyond that on whatever we're able to sell it, so our connection to the department stores, our proliferation around the market allows us to have, you know, presence in every department store you go in with his label. He's making, you know, incremental money on all of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's what licensing is-- Story_ID: 373335 Speaker 1: So after you, after 1989, so where do you go now? Or what do you do now, I should say. Speaker 2: I do go, actually. (Laughter) I got married in '88 [1988], and I moved with my ex-husband up to Andover, Massachusetts and I married (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your husband's name? Speaker 2: David Reese, R-E-E-S-E, T. David Reese, actually, yes. Speaker 1: And you moved to-- Speaker 2: We moved to Andover, Massachusetts, and we moved to Massachusetts because David had gone to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]. He loved New England, though his family was from Atlanta [Georgia] (laughter) in the South, and neither of us being from New York [New York], and both of us expecting that we would have children, raise children and a family, didn't really want to raise a family in New York City. We wanted our kids to have the ability to run outside and play and to have a, to be children for a while. Kids in New York grow up very, very quickly. You have to start being very aware when you're a child in New York very early on, and so we had this discussion and decided that we both were more of the feeling that we wanted to raise our children outside of New York and so we started thinking about New England, and he wooed me and took me up several weekends and we did little bed and breakfasts all over New England. It's a beautiful, beautiful part of our country, and I personally love the change of seasons, so I liked the idea of the East Coast versus the West Coast, and we started to do some, you know, put some feelers out. When I met and married him, he was a vice president at Citibank, and he used to leverage buyout, so he had a broad skill set from that, and he had an engineering background, you know, his degree from Dartmouth. So, there were several different things he could do and I was looking at what I could do in the garment industry that was located in New England, and found The Limited corporation [The Limited Inc.; L Brands Inc.]. Mast Industries [Mast Industries, Inc.] has now been absorbed by The Limited, because Martin has, Martin Trust, who is the owner of that, has retired, but at the time Mast Industries was the largest arm of private label manufacturing for The Limited corporation and what that means is that we work with the buyers at The Limited; all the different stores The Limited owns and those include things like Victoria's Secret, The Limited, the Limited Too, Express, Structure, Henri Bendel, Abercrombie and Fitch, Lane Bryant, all those are under The Limited umbrella that Les Wexner owns, and so we would work with the buyers of those different divisions, Bath and Body Works is another one (laughter), and develop product and manufacture that product that then went into their store. That's called private label, when you're only manufacturing with their name in it, and many companies do that for other big labels, but we were just The Limited and, because they are such a huge, you know, range of stores it employed a lot of people, and we literally could make a million units of one thing for them, for The Limited. I went up to work on Henri Bendel, because it was the highest end and the most designer-like which is here on Fifth Avenue in New York, and at the time there were four Bendels, I think, and I went up to do knitwear. That was what I was hired to do, and when I got there, they decided they had a hiring freeze and I couldn't work on Bendels and I was really pissed off (laughter) because I didn't want work on The Limited, I'm not a mass market person and they knew that I had all the background that I had and they wanted to put me on a label where I would have more impact to their bottom line, and I was very much against that. So we had a lot of toing and froing with the human resources department, because we had moved cities to do this, and my ex-husband had found his work there, you know, and they sort of thought they had me over a barrel by me being there, and so what happened was after much back and forth, they put me on Abercrombie and Fitch, which was a new label for them and it was right at the turning point of Abercrombie becoming what it is now. I don't know if you remember but old Abercrombie was like old Banana Republic, and it looked very casual and it looked very, like the Banana Republic, lots of khaki and all of that, and it was kind of staunch though, it almost had more of a Brooks Brothers edge. It was a very crisp version of that, and when we went in to work on it, the woman who used to be head of Ann Taylor was the president, and she was, her whole driving force was it seems to be more casual. We're coming in to a much more casual time, casual Fridays were coming into play, and all those kinds of things, and she's a very bright woman and so we went into, literally we'd go in each door and roll up that outside cuff that hung on the, that was on the outside to the customer, to make it look more casual, and then we stopped ironing everything and put things in wrinkled and we shrunk things and we frayed things and all of that, and that was the beginning of what now Abercrombie has become very famous for. And so, it was interesting working on that. It was a higher price point than the rest of The Limited stores, which I liked because I was working with nicer fabrics and they had said that the hiring freeze was going to be on for a year and so in a year I went back to them and said, "Okay, can I move over to Bendels now?" and then they said, "Well, why would we move you over from a label that has," I don't know probably fifteen or twenty stores at that point, it's more now, I think, "to a store that only has four. I mean, the impact that you're going to make on the bottom line in terms of product you're developing and what we can sell is much higher," and I was really, really devastated by that because I had held them to their word and I had taken less money to move out of the city. Story_ID: 373336 Speaker 1: The other thing that they had said was you know, I'm taking a lower salary but I'm going to have more private time. We're going to raise a family, all of these things, and then, of course, you work nonstop (laughter). One night at two in the morning, the phone rang and, of course, I was asleep and it was my Hong Kong office because it's two in the afternoon there, and they had a question for me. My ex-husband [T. David Reese] just took the phone from me and he said, "She does not sleep with her folders. Please do not call here again at two in the morning." (Laughter) He put the phone down because that's how, I mean our workdays were insane. It was more work than I had probably done since the '80s [1980s], you know, when I was staying up all night for fun (laughter) and so, when they came back and said that they didn't want to move me over to Bendels [Henri Bendel], I really had second thoughts about being there and, even then, the, you know, it was the kind of place where we moved to Andover, Massachusetts, that's a suburb of Boston [Massachusetts], you're about forty-five minutes north of Boston in a tiny little town where Andover Preparatory School [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] is, no diversity. There were probably three other black people in the company, and everyone that came used to come from New York [New York] and they would all already know about the rest of us and they came searching us out. (Laughter) You know, and that's how I went, "I know one person, you know, look up so and so." And so it was just, you know, it was one of those things where one of those things where what am I doing this for, and I got really depressed about it and my ex-husband being, you know, coming from banking and leverage buyout negotiations said, "Stay home tomorrow." And I went, "What do you mean?" He said, "Just stay home. They promised you something. They didn't give it to you. You are really in a quandary about this. Just stay home." And I did. And they called, "Where are you? What are you doing?" And when I came in the next day, I sat down with the president of both those two divisions, and I moved over to Bendels. Story_ID: 373337 Speaker 1: So you go to Bendels [Henri Bendel]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, just tell us about the meeting. Speaker 2: The meeting? I sat in a meeting with the president of both of those divisions, who still works with The Limited [The Limited Inc.; L Brands Inc.] today, and I quoted to him what had been told to me by the human resources person who had recruited me here in New York [New York], and at the time, it was a very specific man who had a very specific way of talking, and I hadn't been, you know, there that long to know this and when I quoted exactly what he had said to me with regard to being able to move over, the people in the room kind of all looked at each other because they realized that I was obviously telling the truth about this and they knew that I had been promised something and that they really needed to deliver on the promise and so that's how I was able to move over and work on Bendels, and during the time I was there we sold more, I did their private label, knitwear development, and every year they would have a silk sale and a merino wool sale twice a year, and we sold more sweaters in the four stores than they had ever sold in the previous history of their private label sales during the time that I was designing those, because I really felt like I had to, I had to give them a bang, you know, because I had moved over. I had to show them there was a reason to be over there and out of four stores we barreled through a few hundred thousand sweaters, which is a lot of sweaters to be sold out of four chains of distribution. Speaker 1: Wow. Okay. So, after that point tell me what happened. Speaker 2: I worked for Bendels for a year. I, my husband [T. David Reese] and I started having some issues towards the end of that year, and I didn't want to, part of the issues were stemming from the fact that I was travelling so much. I was gone a lot. I was in Hong Kong and Asia, Hong Kong, Korea, and Taiwan during my sweater development, and with Bendels then that added Europe, and I spent a tremendous amount of time in Italy, in Milan [Italy], because we did high end sweaters and so I would work with the spinners to develop the yarn. What happens if you put in 5 percent of cashmere, what happens if you put in 6 percent of silk, what does that do to the yarn, and I loved that work but I was gone a lot and I knew that if I didn't stay home more, there would probably be more issues, so I decided that I wanted to see what else was in the area that I might do, and also because I was happy to do Bendels, but I didn't like, I had a bad taste in my mouth from what had happened with the original going up there and I just, I didn't feel committed to The Limited brand in the way that I had hoped to feel committed. So, I looked around to see what was also in the area, in New England, and Timberland [Timberland Boot Company] is actually in New Hampshire, and so I got an interview with Timberland and I went and took my portfolio and I went dressed probably pretty much as I am today, because at Mast [Mast Industries, Inc.] we had to dress a certain way, you know, you had to evoke that business look and I had an interview with Michael Jackson who was so funny, this white southern man, whose history was with our President Jackson [President Andrew Jackson] (laughter) and he had come from New York [New York], had worked at Banana Republic, and Michael had on a plaid lumberjack shirt and jeans and these big Timberland boots and he was reared back in his chair and he threw his feet up on the desk and he said, "You don't look like you live the Timberland lifestyle." (Laughter) And I said, "How can you possibly know what my lifestyle is? I'm coming on an interview from a job that I have and this is the way we dress at the job that I have. If I work here and I can dress like you and I choose to, then I might come to work like that, but you can't judge what my lifestyle is by the way I've come on this interview." And he, "Hm." (Laughter) And so we had a lovely chat, and then probably one of the best interviews of my life happened, and that was the interview with Jeffrey Swartz, who is the CEO of Timberland now, he is the grandson of the founder [Nathan Swartz], and after Michael met me and talked to me and then went back to human resources, then he said, he came in and said, "I'd like you to meet Jeff." So, I go in to meet Jeffrey Swartz, and Jeff says to me, first he goes through my book and we talk about my background and then he kind of closes my book and he says, "So Patti [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter], tell me. How are you gonna feel about being the only one that looks like you walking through the halls?" And I was so struck by that question, I said, "Well, Jeff, I'll tell you. It's not the first time in my career, because you don't see a lot of black folks in the fashion industry in New York, but the fact that you've asked me makes me aware of the fact that you recognize that and that's important to me, so already that makes me feel like I would enjoy working at Timberland," and they hired me. Story_ID: 373338 Speaker 1: And I worked there for three years. I went in as a design director for women's and ultimately when I left, I was a vice president of design and merchandising for women's and for all accessories, and it was one of the best working experiences I've ever had. They're a wonderful company, they're committed to some very good things and their principles follow through. You get, at the time, anyway, you got two paid vacation days a year to work on a community service of your choice, which I just thought was amazing. When Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had that, the idea of the urban Peace Corps that he put forth when he was president, the manifestation of that was City Year in Boston [Massachusetts], and that was a year that you took off between high school and college to go back and work in your community and Timberland [Timberland Boot Company] was the largest donator to that. They donated a million dollars a year to that program. I got the second black person in the fashion department was a young man that came to us through that program and he was a hoot, and a very, he came from the inner city in Boston and a very bright young man, whose life would have been completely different if he had not come through that City Year program and then come to Timberland, and during that period that I was there, the article was written in The New York Times, I don't know if you remember that there was a famous article that a reporter came up and spent a couple days at Timberland, walked through the halls, talked to the people, but he came with a slant and the article that he wrote was very prejudiced and he, the backlash of it was that urban, it was right at the time, really, that the urban kids were starting, excuse me, to wear Timberland and his article had the backlash of rappers saying, you know, ban Timberland, don't wear Timberland, and he totally misrepresented what Jeff [Jeffrey Swartz] and his management team had said, which was Jeff always said he never targeted the urban market with Timberland. He wanted an authentic brand that was targeted at people who needed all the various values that the product brought to it; the waterproofness, the durability, the various technical fabrics that we worked in. I mean, we developed clothes for the Iditarod [Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race] in Alaska that people ran that Iditarod dog race in that, you know, kept you cold and wick moisture, all those things. He wanted all of those intrinsic values of an authentic brand. That's what he wanted to bring to the table, and if there was an urban population that wanted to wear it, he was fine with that, but he was not targeting that market, but the way that he twisted made it sound as though he was against that market and to add insult to injury, the photograph that he used with his article, was a photograph of a counterfeit Timberland sweatshirt. It wasn't even one that we made. He hadn't done any research to find out that that wasn't even one that we made at the time. And, the young man that was on my team wrote a letter to the editor of The Times to refute what this man had written and they never published it, so I wrote a letter to The Times and they never published mine either, but saying this young man lives in this culture, and he is telling you that what happened was incorrect, and as the first black person that Timberland hired, I'm telling you that what this man wrote was incorrect, and it was very interesting. It was a very interesting time. So, I have nothing but the best things to say. At the time we had buttons there that said, "Stamp out racism," in several different languages, and they were given out at all the stores worldwide that Timberland had, because we had stores in Germany, and it was written in German and we had stores in Tokyo [Japan], and it was, I mean, they really, Jeff is really about something and it was a very, a very good company to work with and if they had not been in the woods of New Hampshire, I might have stayed there longer (laughter) but after three years and a divorce, and being like, yeah, one of very few black people you ever saw, because as my friends teased me, if I moved to New Hampshire, I would raise the number, the percentage point would go up on the folks of color that lived in the state, because it was that few of us. I made a decision that I need to come back to a little bit more civilization. And some of that was also just in the town. Oh, I have to share this story with you-- Speaker 2: Well, what year are we in? Speaker 1: We're in '89 [1989], '90 [1990], '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, sorry, '90 [1990], '91 [1991]. I came back here [New York, New York] in '95 [1995], so we're in from like the years of by Timberland, it was '90 [1990], I came in '95 [1995], '94 [1994], '93 [1993], '92 [1992], '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: So from '90 [1990] to '92 [1992] you were at Timberland. Speaker 1: From ninety--from '92 [1992] to '95 [1995] I was at Timberland, those three years. The rest of that time prior to that I was at Mast [Mast Industries, Inc.]. We went up at the end of '89 [1989], so I worked '90 [1990] and '91 [1991], and then '92 [1992] I was at Timberland (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Okay. So you left The Limited [The Limited Inc.; L Brands Inc.] in '90 [1990]. Okay. Story_ID: 373339 Speaker 1: So, about the town-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Which town is this now? Speaker 2: Andover, Massachusetts (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Where the prep school, Andover Prep School [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] is. There is very little diversity. There was one black family that was from Andover, and they went to my church; the church that I went to, and they were significantly older than me and had grown children, and I had short natural hair at one point while I lived in Andover, and when I went I had short, straight hair and I am a fairly medium, light to medium brown complexion and the family that was from there was a very brown skinned family, Janice [ph.], was much browner than me, with short straight hair and much older and I would routinely walk through the grocery store and have people just go, "Hi Janice," and at some point David [T. David Reese] and I would just look at each other and go, okay fine, what are you gonna do (laughter)? So that was one of the things that would happen at the joy, you know, the joy of living in small town New England. The other, which is probably my favorite story, is I went to this beautiful little Episcopal church and I decided, my husband and I decided that we wanted to lead the youth group, the high school youth group at the church. Some of it was because we had no children and being black we were not going to be readily accepted in the community if we didn't have something else that brought us in and we figured people would want to know who we were if we were working with their children which, of course, happened. And, so I was very involved with the church and, you know, at coffee hour one Sunday I had gone from having my hair short and natural to beginning my locks, so they were little tiny springs all over my head and I'm in coffee hour and I was very dear friends and still am with the assistant rector of the church, who was a white gay man, who had come from Chicago [Illinois], and so Lionel [ph.] and I both found ourselves sort of outside of the norm (laughter) in this little town and we bonded, and he was on the other side of the room and I had gone to get coffee and I was sort of making my way there and I was chatting with people and there was a woman who had come up from the southern part of Virginia and her husband taught. She was an educator and her husband taught at Andover Academy, and so I'm standing there talking to her, her first name was Helen [ph.], and she, I'm sipping my coffee and we're having conversation. I think we were sort of near the Christmas bazaar or something and she just looked at me at one point and she said, "It's very interesting what you're doing with your hair." And I said, "Yes Helen?" And she said, "Is that what they would call nappy?" (Laughter) And I paused and I took a sip of my coffee while I tried to figure out now how does one answer that? And I just looked at her and I said, "Why yes, Helen, it is." And I walked away and went over to tell Lionel and he lost it and the two of us were cracking up in the corner, but I couldn't believe she was, "Is that what they call nappy?" Well, I'm not going to be able to stay here too much longer. And people would routinely come up as it grew and pull it and talk about it and I had one woman who was just lovely and she meant nothing by it, I loved her to pieces. She was on my team at Timberland [Timberland Boot Company] as it started to get longer, because I started dreading it while I was at Timberland and it didn't lock initially. I have kind of fine hair like my mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] and it didn't lock and I, you know, with short natural hair I could wash my hair every day and jump in and out of the shower and I've just never been a hair person, never liked dealing with it, and of course spending time around, there were many more important things to do with your day than fuss with your hair, so when I decided to do this it was really out of nervous twisting as I was going through my separation with my husband and I said, "Okay I'm gonna lock my hair." My sister [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter] had done hers here, and so there was a woman on my staff and the first time that I started it, after a few weeks of not being able to wash it, I had to wash my hair, because you're not supposed to wash it until it locks, and I had to wash my hair and it all came out because they weren't locked, they were just these springs. I had to sit and twist it again so I told this story to somebody on my staff and, and so every morning then from that time on, I made this vow I'm not gonna touch it until it locks, and Lynn [ph.] would stick her head in my office door every single morning, "Has it locked yet?" and then go to her desk. And the day that I finally said, "Why yeah, Lynn, I think it has." "Yeah." (Laughter) It was amazing to me that it could draw up this kind of support but it did (laughter). Speaker 1: That's funny. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 373340 Speaker 1: After you leave Timberland [Timberland Boot Company] so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I moved back to New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In '95 [1995], I moved back to New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I worked for a private label company that only did private label also with The Limited [The Limited Inc.; L Brands Inc.] which, at the time, is called Cygne [Cygne Designs Inc.], C-Y-G-N-E, Design and I worked with Cygne for not quite two years. At the end of the second year, they started having some financial difficulties, especially as The Limited was starting to look at moving Mast [Mast Industries, Inc.] to in-house, and so they were giving less and less to other people, and so I made the decision that I need to look for another job, but they were kind enough to have moved me back to New York, and I was a vice president there over at knitwear division that made knitwear for The Limited, Limited Express [Express], Limited Too, and at the time they owned The Avenue, so large sized knitwear, and so I knew that I could see the handwriting on the wall. Being in management, we knew what was going on, so we were watching the stock plummet (laughter). Gotta do something else. So, I left there and I freelanced for just a short period of time while I was looking and ended up going to London Fog and I was a vice president of women's for London Fog and worked with London Fog just so it turned the corner and left there and went, as vice president, to Andrew Marc, another outerwear company, and was vice president of men's and women's design and merchandising, doing leather and cloth outerwear for men and women and there for a couple of years and then got called by Jackie Nemerov [Jackwyn Nemerov], the woman who I worked with back at Gloria Vanderbilt, and at that point she was head of Jones New York, and she said, I want you to come and work on the Lauren line [Ralph Lauren] and I said, "Jackie, you all are structured differently," and the woman that I would have reported to had a routinely bad reputation in the industry of just being really difficult and I was at a point in my career as I just didn't want to go into working with somebody that you knew was going to be difficult and she said, "Well, we are restructuring and if we restructure in the timeframe that I believe we are, would you be interested?" And I said, "Call me when you do," and she did and I went, and I worked with Ralph Lauren for a couple years and in 2000, I went to Brazil with [HistoryMaker] Charles Randolph-Wright, my dear friend. We decided we wanted to bring the millennium in someplace we both wanted to go for years and we went to Brazil and I stood on the beach and I sent my flowers out to (unclear) dressed in white with four million other people and I gave thanks for all that had happened with me in the garment industry, but I said I think it's time to go and I came back and in August of that year I left the fashion industry and I started my own international development consultancy firm [Continuum Home Incorporated] and I started with a little bit of background, because I'll back up a little bit and say in 1995, I started working as a volunteer with an organization called Aid to Artisans, which is thirty years old and based in Hartford, Connecticut, and I would go up a couple times a year and be part of what they called a designer round table for a day, and ATA works at bringing product, building economic development through product at the grassroots level from mostly indigenous people in developing countries, and they get funding from all kinds of places, but USAID [U.S. Agency for International Development], our government does some of the funding but the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], private investors, all kinds of people fund different projects that they work on, and what they would do is bring product from those different countries that they would either had a project in or were thinking about a project in, and twelve of us would sit around this wonderful big table and we would evaluate the product for quality, for type and talk about where it might fit in the market if it had a place in our market, and I did that for off and on during those five years, from '95 [1995] to 2000 and I really loved that work and that's really what sparked this whole idea in me, because over that time I met several people who had started their own companies through working with these indigenous people and these different kinds of products, and so in 2000, when I decided, I called them and I said I can go and sit in a country and do the development work now, and I've been doing that for the last seven years, and I work in Central America, South America, and Africa, I've travelled all over the globe, I travel very differently than I used to in the garment industry, I make a lot less money, but I love what I do with a passion. Story_ID: 373341 Speaker 1: And in 3- 2003, I started my own collection of Carpenter and Company, which is products made with indigenous women in first Bolivia, and now we've layered in Guatemala and I work with weavers and embroiderers, and hand crocheters that make the product that we sell on our line, and I do home decor mostly. I've moved out of clothing, I found that it was more stifling to me as I moved up in it and as I stayed in it longer and the industry changed, so instead of going into a meeting with color swatches and inspiration and sketches, I was going into a meeting with numbers and that wasn't what kept my battery charged and fed my creative energy, and so it's part of what the decision making was, was to get back to my roots of being a creator and to sit with these mostly women. I work with probably 90 percent women in the places that I go, though we do work with some men, and we really sit there and we help them to determine through assessment of their product and their capabilities and their capacities, should they have their product in a local market, or are they able to expand from a local to a regional or from a regional to an export if they've got cooperatives or groups of people that can come together and work on that product and whatever the quality level is, et cetera price points, and so I've been doing that now for these seven years and I love it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which you've always had a love for textiles anyway. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely. Textiles, I mean, I've worked actually on a lot of different products. The beauty of doing this work is when ATA [Aid to Artisans, Hartford, Connecticut] brought me in, they brought me in first on textiles. I made two promises to myself in 2000. I wanted to leave the fashion industry and start this work, and I wanted to get to Africa, because I had never been to Africa, and two months later I was sitting in Mali, working with artisan producers and I was in heaven, and they started me out on textiles. Mali is the largest, third largest producer of cotton in Africa and they were not getting the value at it from it, and we have the AGOA Act here in our country, African Growth and Opportunity Act [African Growth and Opportunity Act of 2000] and that states that in the countries that fall under that act, you can bring in product from Africa that's African made that doesn't have a duty and a quota attached to it, so it helps it to be more competitive in a market place where China and India and Indonesia and people like that can flood the market with lower priced things, and so they sent me over there to work on cotton products to see what they could make out of cotton that they could bring in to the country, and that was my very first time in Africa, my first job as a consultant, and it's just gone on from there; but yeah, I started in textiles, but now I've worked on wood, beading, glass, ceramic, metal, I think that, almost every kind of material you can think of, a little bit of resin but because you're working with artisan producers, you're really working in natural products, candles, and I've worked on all kinds of things and it's been amazing. It's like-- Speaker 2: When you say you worked on them, what do you mean? Speaker 1: What does that mean? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What I do is I go into a country and I am introduced either through the government of that country if that's who brings us, or the organization that brings us to a variety of artisan producers, and I go to where they work more often than not, unless it's really broad, and then the bring them in to me, and they show me the product that they're making. We discuss the raw materials that they have available to them, we discuss the capacity that they have available to them, and we discuss the quality that they're capable of making, and then I will work with them to, if it's gonna stay on the local market, try and just bring it up to be the best thing it can be for a local market, but since our tastes are different than what the local market might bear if it's something that they're going to do regionally or export, then I work with them literally on the design of something, so I may often design something new but that retains the intrinsic value of, and identity of the place that it comes from, so that it's, because that's part of the reason that it exists in the world is that it has that identity that's not the same as some other country or not the same as, you know, as some other country even though some other country may make the same kind of thing, and so we encourage people to tell their story, to write their story on hangtags, because that connects with the consumer, often encourage people to sign work, because that lets you know it's handmade, and you're also educating on this side the consumer to appreciate a handmade something versus a machine made barreled out thing, and so when I say I work with them on all those levels, we do small business development, we help them understand how to price, we help them understand how to market, we help them understand marketing tools, how do you, do you have to put a code on everything so that if somebody buys something you know exactly what it was and how to make it again. We help them, you need to take a photograph of it if you're going to try to bring it outside of the country so that you have a reference point. We talk to them about developing collections of products, you don't just come with one thing and if, you know, a buyer didn't like that one thing what do you do, but if you build a collection of them then you have a more of a chance for sales. You also, within a collection, will have more of a chance for sales because if you, as an example, a small, medium, and a large, then someone may appreciate the handwork but can't afford the large, but may take the small one to make sure that they have something that reminds them of whatever it was, and who knows if it's a store, they may test the small and come back and buy the collection, which often happens, and so that's how I work with them. Story_ID: 373342 Speaker 1: Your personal line [Carpenter and Company], though, your business. How is that one, how is, how are the products made (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Made? Speaker 1: Are they made out of the country also? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Absolutely. I started with Bolivia in 2000, mid-year, or 2001, 2001. I got sent to Bolivia to La Paz [Bolivia] with an organization called ACDI/VOCA [Washington, D.C.], which is predominantly a volunteer organization that deals with agricultural issues, but the group that requested a designer, that I work with now, are all artisans, are all farmers, but they do something else on an artisan side to bring more money into the family, but these are very poor, very rural, indigenous Indian [Native American] descent people from Bolivia, and so I went down to work with this one cooperative, and under the umbrella of the cooperative, they have people who weave beautiful alpaca, which is what I ultimately put in my line, they crochet alpaca. They have woodworkers, they have rug weavers, they have knitters, they have ceramic very rudimentary low fire ceramics, and those are the things that they got together as a group and formed a cooperative, and they have a small shop, or the first small shop was on the main street in Bolivia, in La Paz where the tourists come to buy tourist items, and they wanted to come up with something that would be different than everybody around them to help raise their sales, and so they asked for a designer to come and help them work on some better product, new product, how to improve what they had, et cetera. So I came and I met these wonderful, wonderful people. Again, (unclear) they are made up of men and women, but it's predominantly women and the first thing that I really flipped over was this wonderful alpaca product. Alpaca is a luxury yarn akin to cashmere in our marketplace, but it's something they take for granted because it's very light weight and it's very warm and every woman there wears it like a shawl and carries the groceries home in it, the baby in it. It's everything in addition to keeping them warm, and they often make it out of the natural color because that's the least expensive of the yarns. Often it's hand spun, but it is available machine and industrially spun and they make, they just made this same size that they wear to, for their shop, so we talked about changing sizing, we talked about a consistency in quality, we talked about making it softer. We talked about the fact that they had different levels of women who could weave. Some people wove better than others, so we'll have certain people make certain things and have a different price point on those that are higher quality and of better value and have a different price point on the others, and I worked with them for three years like that, and at the end of the three years, the project was gonna be over and that's when I decided that's what I said in 2003. I made the decision that I didn't want them, I don't wanna go away from them. We'd made a connection, a lovely connection, and I wanted to bring their product to market. I thought that it was something that needed to come to the market. So in those three years, part of what I had also been doing was kind of courting the fashion director of Bloomingdale's, just talking to her when we'd see each other at trade shows about the ATA booth, the Aid to Artisans [Hartford, Connecticut] booth at the Javits [Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, New York, New York] show, what I was working on and how I was working, and she was very intrigued, so in 2003, I finally called her and I said, "I have a product I'd really like to show you," and she said come in, and I showed it to her and she loved it and she said let me get the buyer, and the buyer came in and we were able to, to get them interested and they told me they were going to place an order-- Story_ID: 373343 Speaker 1: Went back over to Bolivia and I had a three week stint there and I hadn't gotten this order, and I was waiting and waiting and I told the ladies we're going to get an order from Bloomindale's, you know, and this is going to be amazing. And, waiting and waiting and literally the day before I left, the fax comes in. Now, she had said to me, you should probably order around five hundred pieces, which is a huge thing for us, and that got several towns weaving. It was wonderful. And, when the order came in it was for five colors and six hundred pieces, and I was worried because I had worked with the department stores all my life, I know what it means to have stuff in the department store and the department store has a lot of criteria that you have to meet in order to get your product in, and one of them is if it's a minute late, they start deducting money from what they owe you. If they send you the tags and they tell you to put it in the lower right hand corner, and you put it in the upper right corner, they deduct money, and I mean, that's just how they work. And so I knew this. And so I said to the ladies, "I'm going to write back," after we jumped up and down and cried, "I'm gonna write back and ask her if we can do four hundred." "Senorita Patti [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter], why four?" They want, I said, "Because we want to do this right. We can't screw this up. They'll never let us have another shot if we screw it up." So, let's do it, and so I wrote her back and I asked if we could four and she said yes, and they reconfigured it and we got 'em in on time, and we got 'em, you know, they sent us the tags and we did everything. We boxed it the way we needed to do everything, and we did it, but in the interim, that was such a hard first order [through Carpenter and Company]. I had to hold the hands of both sides, so I'm holding the hands of the ladies in Bolivia, sort of couching, you know, coaching them through, and because they don't have the money, I mean, alpaca's expensive yarn, making four hundred throws, they're thirty-four inches wide, which is the width of the loom. They weave it on a foot loom, and eighty-nine inches long because the traditional size of a throw is forty inches wide and sixty inches long, and since we couldn't make it forty, it would have entailed building all new machines, loom, for them, so we decided to give them extra length, and then we put a macrame, hand macrame border on each end, so some of the ladies couldn't do the quality of macrame that we needed, but of course all of them can macrame, so the diplomacy of saying, "Senorita, this one should do the macrame, but senorita, that one should do something else," you know, and we narrowed it down into two different weaves, so we have a herringbone weave and diamond weave and, you know, just making sure that the consistency and the edging was beautiful and all of that, and then it has a hand done fringe on the end, and so making sure that all those things were in place on this side so I'm holding this hand, and then the Bloomingdale's side, they sent me a compliance notebook that's about three inches thick and things are in it like are your fire exits clearly marked and, you know, they live in a hut, the front door is the back door and everything. It's like, no, it's not a fire exit. They're making these at home in a cottage industry. Story_ID: 373344 Speaker 1: We were just talking about, you know, how you made that decision, you know, as far as funds to buy a house and start a business (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah. No, it was a big decision. It was one of those things where, and especially as I was, I was, you know, by the time I left the industry at Jones [Jones New York] I was making a very, very nice salary. I had, you know, stock options that kicked in every six months, and friends were going stay six more months and you'll get, you know, more--at a certain point you have to make that decision, and I had some savings and it was really a decision of do I buy a place to live or do I start a business, and I made the decision that I wanted to start the business certainly with the hopes that it will afford me to buy the place in the not too distant future (laughter) because living in New York's [New York, New York] getting more and more expensive, but it was something I felt that was really necessary to do, and there is money out there and several people now started to talk to me as I go looking for money, because all the money to this point has been my own that's been in my business [Carpenter and Company], but what I am starting to learn is that especially because I do training and development work, that there's money that's available for training and development work, because I work mostly with women there's money for support of women, especially in developing countries, and especially since I've started doing more work with governments of countries. As an example, I just came back from South Africa in November, and that was with the government of South Africa and the South African International Business Linkages [SAIBL] and their Department of Trade [Department of Trade and Industry], and some of those people do have funding that helps small producer groups. Sometimes it's not given to them outright. Sometimes, it's given to them by way of here's a booth so you can participate in a trade show. Here's a plane ticket, so you can fly to somewhere to participate in a trade show, or we will give you, if you can put it up, we'll give you 80 percent of it back. You know, those kinds of things are often what's out there for the producers. But there are, you know there certainly are some small and medium enterprise kinds of funding that go on out there. But the people that I've worked with have been mostly people who have a project like an Aid to Artisans [Hartford, Connecticut] or the International Executive Service Corps [Washington, D.C.] or VOCA [ACDI/VOCA], or Associates in International Research and Development [sic. Associates for International Research, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts], that have funding that comes in and then they allocate it for various things, so small business development, product development, et cetera. Story_ID: 373345 Speaker 1: Tell me how the World Trade Center incident [September 11, 2001 (9/11)] affected you. Speaker 2: Oh, that was devastating. I live in the West Village, Greenwich Village, in New York City [New York, New York], so I'm not that far from it and I'm below that 14th Street mark where they sealed off the city when it happened. I was home. I was actually on the phone with Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Randolph-Wright], the same friend that I went to Brazil with, because we live in the same building, and watching 'The Today Show' ['Today'] in the morning and saw the first plane go in and I don't know who called who. He called me or I called him, and we were on the phone and I realized one of my dear friends lived four blocks from there, so I called her to see how she was, and what was going on in that area and she said she was just waking up. We had been out the night before (laughter) and she was just waking up and she said she had a roof garden. She was on a really tall building down there on John Street and she had a roof deck, and she said, "I'll run up on the roof and I'll call you and I'll tell you what's going on," and just as we hung up, that second plane went in and I went, oh my God. And so I called Katrina [ph.] back and said, "Don't go up on the roof. Get here now." And she literally caught probably the last taxi one could have caught out of that area in her pajamas with nothing but her pajamas and her bag on. She came to me and she stayed with me for a week and we went back in, we went down there. Two days later, they allowed people who live there to go back into their apartments to get things, and I went with her and it was just devastating to walk through that at that point, but I mean, from the moment it happened, you know, you couldn't call anybody 'cause cell phones weren't working and lines were busy, and, you know, we walked outside and the people were walking up Hudson [Street] coming from the World Trade Center [New York, New York], covered in the white ash and just looking like ghosts and the blank stares of people who just couldn't believe what they have come out of, and calling all around and desperately trying to find friends that worked there, and we actually did lose a very dear friend, Kevin Bowser [Kevin L. Bowser], was lost and he is the brother of one of my best friends, Denise Irish, whose son is my godson, so I've known their family for many, many years, and because I was where I was strategically and Denise lived in Westchester [Westchester County, New York], then St. Vincent's Hospital [St. Vincent's Hospital Manhattan, New York, New York] was one of the main hospitals that they were bringing people to because we were downtown, and that's walking distance from my house, so I spent a tremendous amount of time at St. Vincent's trying to find him and when they set the things up on the West Side Highway [Joe DiMaggio Highway], going over and doing, you know, and sticking his picture up all over, and doing all the calls because she was, she was in Westchester, but the hardest part was that he commuted from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] every morning, so he had a wife [Stephanie Bowser] and two very small children [Kevin Bowser and Pharr Bowser] at the time who were in Philadelphia, and so they couldn't get here, so I really had to be their eyes and ears and legs, and we went and stood out on the West Side Highway, and handed out sandwiches and drinks to the firemen and policemen that were going down and we went over and made sandwiches for the volunteers at the hospital and, I mean, it was one of those times where you really saw New York in a light that you might never have envisioned that camaraderie and that sense of pulling together was so powerful, and Katrina moved away from the city. She's from Memphis [Tennessee] and she just, when that happened, it shattered her and she said I can't live here, and she moved to Memphis and she's never come back. So, that was a really powerful time. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: My boyfriend had to walk with his oldest son home, who was in a private school on the Upper East Side [New York, New York] and he went up and got him. He's a designer as well so he worked in the garment center. He walked up and got Evan [ph.] and they walked across the Brooklyn Bridge [New York, New York] and home into Brooklyn [New York] that day and that was just, you know, he said just looking back and seeing everything was blowing across into Brooklyn at that time, so just, that was a time, that was a time. Story_ID: 373346 Speaker 1: When you look over, over your life, what is one thing that stands out to you most, that you remember most? Speaker 2: One of the most impactful things I would probably say is I've always kept a journal and when I was fifteen or sixteen, I wrote in the journal that I would one day like to work with artists in another part of the world, and I found that recently and it was one of those be careful what you wish for, kinds of aha moments, as Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] calls them, because I was in Mali for the second time, and I was sitting in the hottest, I'd never been so hot, the hottest market. It was smelly. There were flies all over me. I was dying of thirst and I was working with this amazing silversmith. He's a Tuareg, and that's a nomadic tribe that moves through the Sahara and they do incredible silverwork and incredible leather work, and they do these really fine markings on it and he made jewelry and sold in the market, but he also made cutlery and flatware for the people in the embassies and things who had the money to do it. You know, he would buy a stainless steel fork, but he would make the sterling silver handle for it and we would try to come up with some different things that we might bring to the Aid to Artisans [Hartford, Connecticut] booth at the next gift show, and I thought I would die. I was squatting in this place and the sweat was just pouring off of me, and I said, "Can I please have some water? Is there a bottle of somewhere?" And we just the happy and the best disposition, "Wait my sister. I will get you water." And he ran off to find water and I'm sitting there squatting and I had a flash of that journal entrance of, one day I'd like to sit in a foreign country and work with artisans and I said, be careful what you wish for, 'cause you don't know how it's gonna come, but at that point it kind of lifted and I was just pleased to be there (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, is there anything that you want to do that you haven't done yet? Speaker 2: I want to keep travelling. There are so many places I want to go. The interesting thing about working out of Bolivia and working out of Guatemala, which is the second country that I've layered in now, I work with weavers, I work with embroiderers, men actually embroider our pillows in Bolivia. They do embroidery for the carnaval costumes at the same time that we have Mardi Gras. They have a carnaval [Carnaval de Oruro] because it's still very Catholic and there's a lot of Catholicism in the country, and they don't use that sewing skill any other time of the year except that, and I wanted to come up with something where we could use a skill that they have to keep bringing money in year 'round. So, they embroider some of our pillows, and Bolivia was never on my radar or someplace I wanted to go. Guatemala was never on my radar as someplace I wanted to go, and now I've actually tried to figure out how I can live in Guatemala about four months a year. My goal is to build a place that we furnished with all the different kinds of things they make there, 'cause they can make anything. It's incredible. And, live and work there from the four months that I would be there, but open it up to buyers so they can stay in it and live with the product and understand it as a place of sourcing and keep those art forms alive in the world. So, there's places that I still want to get to. I have never been to Morocco. That's always been on my list. I've never been to Ethiopia. That's always been on my list. I've never been to Greece, and that's on my list, so there are lots of places in the world. I love different cultures. I love learning about the art from different places, and I love that human connection. That's partially why I really love what I do. I'm not going into anywhere that I'm going as a tourist. I get brought right into the heart of a culture, and I'm working with those people who have been there and some of these traditions are thousands of years old, and standing in these places. I mean I went to Tikal in Guatemala and stood where the Mayans, you know, Mayan ruins were and saw and touched something that somebody hundreds of thousands of years ago had made. I love that. There is nothing better than that, so being able to continue to do that work, I'd like to bring some more folks into it and I'd like to certainly build my company [Continuum Home Incorporated] and work with some of the young people that I work with at the high school fashion industries and FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] and Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York], you know, to sort of have designers think about this as a way that they can use their skill and not just the traditional path of going into, you know, those traditional industries. Story_ID: 373347 Speaker 1: Since this is an interview that is being done for the future generations, what would be your message to the future generation? Speaker 2: Oh wow. I guess sort of the same kind of things I say to my mentees in the Adopt-A-Student program. Really hold tight to your beliefs and understand that you can do many, many things and people, you know, it sounds rather cliche to sort of say you can do anything you put your mind to, but in this time of globalization where the world is so small, understanding that we can't sit here and have an elitist attitude about the world, that we really need to get out in it, and make sure that we understand it's workings, probably more than we ever have before, I am not political really in any way, but I recognize that doing this work has made me much more political because I under- I learn about the culture of a place I am when I go there, and that culture especially in developing countries is often driven by policy makers and politics, so to really open yourself up and to young people of color, particularly to recognize that education is very important and the choices that you make as a young person will impact the choices that will be available to you to make as you get older, and by that I mean, you know, I love music and I said earlier I like all kinds of music, but as an example sort of the hip hop culture and that turning its back on other culture, that sense of if you turn your back on something now, we don't always have the ability to have the entree back in again. Other cultures do. A young white child who makes a decision, you know, they can cut their hair and change their clothes and be brought back into a corporate kind of a setting very easily, and young black and Hispanic kids, particularly, don't necessarily have that kind of entree available to them when they have made those choices, so be mindful that the choices that you're making are choices that you want to make, and also be mindful that they can impact the choices that you'll have in the future, and make them wisely, and make them informed, you know. Do it with an idea of doing something positive in the world, because I believe you should be the change that you want to see. Speaker 1: Okay, great. Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about? Speaker 2: No, no I guess not. I feel like I've been talking for so long (laughter) I can't think of anything in particularly. Speaker 1: Well, in that case, we'd like to thank you for taking the time because we know that your time is very valuable, but this is also a very valuable project that generations will be able to have your information, so we really appreciate you taking the time and I want to thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you, and I appreciate you all inviting me to be a part of it. I think it's a wonderful, wonderful endeavor. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 373348 Speaker 1: This is an article that was published in Black Enterprise in April of 2005. It's a shot taken in my apartment of the licensed collection of ceramics that I do through the Phillips Collection and those are ceramics that are made in Nicaragua, with a traditional technique in Peru, with a traditional technique, and then there are some inlaid wood pieces from Nicaragua and the bowl that we did in Tanzania, with a group of artisans and that was done in my apartment. Speaker 2: This is a shot of me taken by the photographer, Dorothy Shi, of my very first collection of alpaca embroidered pillows that we did with the indigenous people of the Altiplano of Bolivia, and those are actually embroidered. It's an alpaca and wool blend base, and they're embroidered by the men in Bolivia who have a tradition of doing this embroidery, style of embroidery for the costumes that they use in Carnaval [Carnaval de Oruro] that happens during the February season like we have our Mardi Gras here in the states, but they don't use this skill at any other time in the year, and I wanted to be able to utilize this skill, so I worked with them on the patterning and I chose this design of this concentric circle because that has a great deal of meaning in various cultures around the world. Most often it refers to continuity and longevity and as I want to continue to keep these art forms alive in the world; that spoke very closely to me and that's also why I chose that name of my company to be Continuum [Continuum Home Incorporated] along this space and time an art continuum. This is what we're all doing together now...