 Story_ID: 57568 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Mary Cecelia Curtis, M-A-R-Y, C-E-C-E-L-I-A, C-U-R-T-I-S. And I go by Mary C. Curtis. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 4th, 1953, Baltimore, Maryland at Johns Hopkins Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I'm an independent, multi-media journalist. It's just what I do. I've worked for journalism organizations. Right now, I'm on my own, but I primarily write for 'The Washington Post'. I'm a regular contributor to the 'She the People' blog at 'The Washington Post', which is a blog that specializes in women's views on most everything. My specialties seem to be politics, culture, and race, but I'm interested in all of those and where they intersect. I also write for 'TheGrio.com', the NBC site, and I have a regular spot on the local Fox, the Charlotte Fox affiliate, 'Fox News Rising'. And I also do speeches (laughter), and I also make appearances on shows at MSNBC, CNN, etc., talking about usually my work and opinions on social issues. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is May 8th, I believe, 19--2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time--and you don't have to give your address. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're at my home, my living room in Charlotte, North Carolina where I live with my husband, and my son, when he's visiting (laughter). Story_ID: 57569 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up, and they- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Great. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Wow, that's actually a tough one (laughter). I'm a gourmet cook, and that's my relaxation or semi-gourmet cook. But I have to say I enjoy eating and cooking fish because I grew up Catholic in Baltimore, and I ate it all the time. So you either love it or hate it. So I enjoy that. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I'll say blue. I'm wearing a blue dress (laughter), and it's the color of the sky. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh, Autumn, no doubt. My birthday is in autumn, and some people say it's death, you know, it's the harbinger with the leaves turning of, the darkness of winter. But I just think it's gorgeous. I love the autumn colors. I love the Christmas in the air, and I just am energized by the fall. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I do, but I'll never go there again (laughter). I accompanied a friend of mine when she was doing a story on Missourist (ph.) in the South of France. And we went to San Tropez [France], and I would love to go back, but I doubt I ever will (laughter). But it was wonderful. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I think I like the quote from Luke in the bible, "To whom much is given, much is expected" [Luke 12:48], or something very much like that because it's something I feel is true. I feel that even though I may have not--I may not have grown up with all the material advantages, I had two loving parents, and they set us right. And I feel an obligation to pay it forward and do for others. I feel if I leave this world, this earth, and I haven't helped anyone, why was I here? Story_ID: 57570 Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna--I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately so we can keep them straight. And then we'll bring 'em together. Speaker 2: Great. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Evelyn Cecelia Thomas. That was her maiden name before she got married, E-V-E-L-Y-N, C-E-C-E-L-I-A, T-H-O-M-A-S. And then when she got married, she became Curtis. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth was, oh, gosh, July 6--I'm blanking out here. And it's on the paper. I believe it's 1916. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was born in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories about the things that they were doing? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's side of the family, I know much more about than my father's side, which is kind of mysterious. And most of them died or I didn't know about them. But my mother's side, I know a little bit about because she was raised by her mother, the woman I'm named after, Mary Cecelia or Mamie they called her. And her Aunt Della, she would always say maiden aunt. And her mother's mother, her grandmother, who was Addie Price, Adewade (ph.)--I'm not sure exactly how you spelled it, but they called her Addie, A-D-D-I-E, Price, P-R-I-C-E. Story_ID: 57571 Speaker 1: Now, that's your- Speaker 2: My great grandmother. Speaker 1: Great grandmother, okay. Speaker 2: Her grandmother. And the story about her is that she was born a slave and that when she was a little girl, the Emancipation Proclamation was passed [1863]. And so she became free. So, and my mother would always say that she never saw, you know, she would always wear long clothes and her head covered. And she dressed in a really old-fashioned way. And there were stories, stories handed down about her, the main one being that her mother, who was a slave, was the daughter of another slave and the master. This is Addie's mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This would be, I guess, my great, great grandmother. And that she was on a plantation or a farm or a property in Maryland and that a freed black man who was a craftsman would come there to do work. And he fell in love with her. This is Addie's mom and wanted to get married and wanted to pay to free her, pay the master to free her. And the master though found out that Addie's mom was pregnant with Addie, and even though this slave was actually his daughter, he saw her more as property. And he knew that if she gave birth to the child as a freed person, that child would be freed, but if she gave birth to the child as his slave, then that would be his property. Speaker 1: And more money. Speaker 2: More money. So he refused to let the man marry her, buy her and take her away, and basically shooed the man away and forbid them to see each other. So, I mean that was the inherent cruelty of the institution of slavery, where people are seeing their flesh and blood as property worth money as opposed to, as human beings. So she was born a slave, and then after the Emancipation Proclamation [1863], as we've seen in many of the history books, people went looking for people. And she did eventually find the man, but by that time he had moved, he had married and started another family, though he still owned and took care of and helped and loved, you know, Addie, as his daughter. But, you know, that was a family broken up by the institution of slavery, and this is a part of the history of this country. And it was very sad in that way. So she never married again, and then the little girl, Addie, grew up and was my great grandmother. So that was one of those--I'm sure that story is repeated all over, but it's heart rending in its way, I think. I think it's tragic, but resilient also. And so that was Addie, and then she--her, she had my grandmother, Mary Cecelia, Mamie, and Mamie and her husband, Clarence Thomas, my grandfather, were married, and they divorced when my mom was about five or six. Actually, my grandfather (laughter), Clarence, left my grandmother for another woman. It happens. And he got married, remarried again. So my mother was basically raised by then, but he still saw her 'cause he was still in Baltimore [Maryland], but my mother always worked really, really hard. I saw pictures of her when she was really, like little, maybe a--I don't know, a pre-teenager on roller skates. And she told me that she would work, she would collect insurance payments. You know how in black neighborhoods, they would have small policies so you could get buried. And she would collect those in the neighborhood. She just always had jobs. And her mother worked hard, but they didn't really have very much at all. Story_ID: 57572 Speaker 1: Did she collect them on roller skates? Speaker 2: Well, I, well, that's how she would get around the neighborhood. I saw a picture of her with just, in pigtails and roller skates. And she would, that was her means of transportation (laughter). But, you know, my mother--and this extends, you know, up until she died. She was the, probably the most positive person I ever knew. She never said a bad word about anybody, and even though she had a lot of trials in her life, she had this optimistic attitude, that, you know, I can't--as much as I would try to mimic that, I could never, you know, be as she was because she just was very optimistic, and she really was a very, a woman of faith. We were Catholic. She was a woman of faith, and she really put it to the test because when I was a little girl, the woman that her father had left her mother for, died, and my grandfather, Clarence Thomas, came back to my mother and asked for her help in getting back in the good graces of the Catholic Church. And she helped him. And I thought that was great. And he was an incredible--and then I got to know him. He was my grandfather, Clarence Thomas. He was a very strong, smart person. He was, had been a longshoreman on the docks in Baltimore. So he was a person of physical strength, and he--I think I have a picture of him I'll wanna show you, of four generations. But he was also illiterate. He couldn't read or write. He knew numbers, but he couldn't read or write, and my mother went through his mail and helped him out, and did those sorts of things. So that was my grandfather, Clarence Thomas. He owned his own home. He died, he was in his early 90's. He was still driving. He was on his own (laughter). He was really strong. He was born in St. Mary's County, Maryland, which was the country. And we would go there for family reunions. So that was her, and she didn't really, she didn't--I didn't have aunts or anything on that side or uncles. But that was my mother's side of the family. She was an amazing person. She was, you know, met my father. She had--and we'll go into his side, but she had five kids, four miscarriages. And she took care of her mother. Her mother died pretty young of cancer. She died when my sister next to me was--the year she was born. So she was like four months old. So I had--wasn't born for another few years. And they said that if they had another girl, they would name her after Mary Cecelia. So that's how I got my name, and that's one reason why I always use my middle initial sort of as a tribute to my grandmother. I never knew her. Also, because I went to Catholic schools, and there were so many Mary's that you kind of were known by both names or else every time somebody said Mary, four people would turn around, right, the nuns. But my mother went to high school at [Frederick] Douglass High School in Baltimore [Maryland], which is one of the black high schools at the time. And she went to some college, but she worked. Story_ID: 57573 Speaker 1: Where did she go to college? Speaker 2: Well, she had--I'm not sure where she went at first. But she stopped because she was taking care of her mother, and, but when I was a young girl, very little, she went back to college. She went to Community College of Baltimore [Maryland], Coppin, and took classes, and she became a teacher. So she had this whole other career, and she had worked some, a little bit. At Christmastime, she would work in the Post Office during Christmas rush to earn extra money and those kinds of things. And also she even did some day work, cleaning houses when an aunt of mine--she wasn't a real aunt, Aunt Ada, got sick, the people that she had done day work for, who had said she was a member of the family, like a member of the family, told her that if she--if they needed someone in the meantime, while she was recovering, even though she was like a member of the family, they would have to get somebody else. So basically, my mother worked and took her place, to hold her job for her as a maid, as a cleaning woman. So that's something, nothing she particularly wanted to do, but she worked hard and she did it and that was in Baltimore [Maryland] too. But anyway, she became a teacher and started teaching at the Catholic grade school that I went to, St. Pius the Fifth [Baltimore, Maryland]. So she had this whole other career. But she was very optimistic, and she had always said that one thing she wanted to do was go to Rome [Italy] and see the Pope. And the year before she died, the church went on a church trip to Italy, and she actually got to do that. And she brought me back a little rosary that I can show you that was blessed by the Pope. So she was, quite an inspiration. She was a very practical person. I guess, personality wise, I was more a daddy's girl, but I always admired her, no more so than after I became a mother and sort of--after I got, after she died, and I realized in a way, just all the sacrifices she made and all those things she had done to be a good mom. So. Story_ID: 57574 Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's go t your father's side. Then we'll ask you some more questions about 'em both. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name was Thomas Eugene Curtis, T-H-O-M-A-S, E-U-G-E-N-E, and then Curtis, C-U-R-T-I-S. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It's December 10th, 1910, and I believe he was born in St. Mary's County, Maryland. They both came from the same place ancestrally, and I think once they figured out that they probably were like twenty-seventh cousins or something, but, yeah, but he lived in Baltimore [Maryland] all his life. And he had a really pretty rough life, very rough. His mom died--he was the oldest of--well, he wasn't the oldest. I think he had an older sister, but there were four of them. But his mom died when he was really young like seven or eight. And his father really, you know, those were the days the father wouldn't exactly just take care of the kids on his own. He kind of traveled, and I'm not quite sure what my grandfather did exactly (laughter). He wasn't close to him, and he was in and out, I think, of his life. And so he lived with relatives, this one and that. But, obviously, when you're not one of their child--children, you're almost on your own. So he was always extremely independent, but extremely entrepreneurial. He always got little odd jobs, and he told me a story about (laughter) once for Christmas, he bought himself presents. He worked and bought himself presents because he wanted to have a good Christmas. And he put 'em under the tree, and when he woke up, the relative he was staying with had taken the tags off and given 'em to like her children and said, "You can't have all of them for yourself. You have to spread it around." And (laughter), and he told me this great story that one of them was this coat that he had wanted, and she gave it to her kid. And he took the coat, and he cut it up into little pieces (laughter) and flushed it down the toilet which gives you a little insight into my father's personality. He was great, loving man, but he was really a tough guy in some ways. But it was, he had a rough life. So he- Speaker 1: That's a tough situation too. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he pretty much went on his own after eighth grade. He left school. He was what, about 13 or so. And he started living on his own. I mean, and I think of that, I think of my own son or me when I was that age and how rough that--I mean how impossible that seems, where you're pretty much on your own. But he worked. He always worked. Speaker 1: Just 13 years, you know--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was on his own. And he later went back and got his GED and all that. He was a very smart person, but he wasn't an incredibly educated person. And he could, he could fix anything. And during World War II, he ran a laundry for nuns, a convent laundry. I think that's how he got a deferment because he was their livelihood. And he always could fix anything, and he became a stationary engineer which was in charge of the boiler rooms in the City of Baltimore [Maryland] in the public high schools. And he was particularly, at this high school, Carver Vocational Technical High School. And he ran the boiler rooms. And he could just fix anything. He was one of these people who would put toys and things together without looking at the instructions. We once gave him a card that was like, "When in doubt, try reading the instructions". And it was so perfect for him because he would always do that. But I remember getting, him getting calls to troubleshoot at schools when, you know, a winter morning when the heat didn't come on, things like that. And he was great at that. So he was a stationary engineer. And I always thought that if he had had a chance to go to college, he would have been a great engineer because he had that kind of mind, but he just didn't have that opportunity. But it was interesting because somebody that, who had had that kind of childhood either they are hurt by it in ways and repeat the behavior, but he was just the opposite. To him, because he didn't have much of a family, he vowed the family was it. So he was an incredibly devoted father. We used to always kid him and say, you would want all of us to get married, move back home with our families, with our children, with our spouses (laughter). And he would say, sure, yes, you know. And sometimes, my mother would say, "Tom, you love those children more than you love me." And he would say, "I mean, probably, you're kinda right," (laughter), you know. And he would--it was a joke, but not really. Family meant everything, and I always thought it was because his family was so amorphous, so scattered. You know, he didn't have that experience so he vowed to be the best father. And I was, indeed, a daddy's girl. I really was, and my childhood is filled with incredible memories, some tough and some joyous. Story_ID: 57575 Speaker 1: We're gonna get to the childhood, but I wanted to go back to how your parents met? Speaker 2: Oh, well, they went to--the black community in Baltimore [Maryland] was, you know, it was a segregated community at that time. So it's not that you would know everybody, but say if you were a Catholic, you would go to one of just a few churches or whatever. And I think they met through St. Peter Claver. It was a Catholic, black Catholic church. And she was the innocent. She was the darling. Everyone loved her, Evelyn. Like I said, she was a sweetheart. She had this, she didn't drink. She didn't smoke, she was just going through life just as this lovely thing, lovely girl. The nuns liked her, the priests liked her. And my father was a little rough. He had been on his own. He smoked. He would take a drink, and he had been married before. He was older than my mother. He had been married before. His first wife had died. And so when he started seeing her around the, you know, neighborhood, as it were, and was interested in her, I think my--he talked about getting visits from the priests and so forth saying, "Okay, now, leave Evelyn alone because we know what you're after, and she's a sweet young thing." And, of course, that never works though. She went after the bad boy, and he went after the sweet young thing, and they were married for forty years--well, it would have been forty years, but he died of lung cancer. But, so, that's--they just met in the Baltimore [Maryland], black community neighborhood, Catholic community and married in 1939. And I have a wedding picture there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And- Story_ID: 57576 Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939]. Now, when you think about their personalities, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, how they look, you know, even, who do you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father. You'll see the cheekbones, the high--my mom was rounder. She was five foot [5'] tall, five feet tall. That's it, and I'm the tallest of the girls. And she had the round, pretty face, and he was more angular, taller, and I look more like him. You know, I think I have both of them in me, but I definitely look more like my father and probably personality wise too. He was a, a sharp sense of humor, a little bit sarcastic. I see it in my son mostly. I want--sometimes he says things, and I say, "Oh, my gosh, you're Tom Curtis. You go to the edge and you take it over the edge." And he was like that, and we, the quips came--went across the table like that. And he didn't mind if they were tough, but they had to be funny, they had to be good. You had to reach a good level. And my mother wasn't the, she didn't get jokes that easily. And he used to joke and say, never tell your mother a joke on Saturday night 'cause she'll get on Sunday morning in church and start laughing. And she was like that, and the same thing. She never, she didn't really drink. She would go to a party and she would order a whiskey sour and--which wasn't hardly a drink. And then she'd keep refilling it with ginger ale. So she would always have a drink, and she didn't smoke. And he did. He smoked Camel's which was the death of him. But part of it is when you're on your own when you're 13, you do whatever. You do whatever. And so he started smoking as a kid, and it became a habit. So even after he had his first cancer operation and was supposed to quit smoking, he started smoking filtered cigarettes. And then he started breaking the filters off. So that was that. But so, that, his personality was more sarcastic, and her's was sweeter, I guess. But they still--he had a great heart. And I remember once when I broke my wrist and fell down, I was skating. He picked me up and he came in the street, and he was crying and saying why couldn't it have been me? He was very sentimental in that way, particularly about his children or any child, actually. I have to say that. He could never stand to see a child suffer, and when even he would see a news story about some child being abused, he had to leave the room. He was very attuned to the mistreatment of children. And he would always say, "No child ever asked to be born, so they are owed something when you bring 'em into the world." They are owed your love and maybe that, you know, goes back to his childhood as well. But- Speaker 1: (Unclear) tended to think that he reflected on that because of what happened (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah, and my mom, you know, was--had, was, had--even though her father was in and out of her life, he was there. And she had a lot of love from her mother, her grandmother and so even though financially, I get the feeling from what she told me that it was, it was really touch-and-go. I mean they lived in an apartment like over a store. It, you know, it was tough. Both my parents really, financially had it rough. And I think it's amazing that within the one generation all of their children attended college. We didn't all finish, but we all did attend college. I finished. My oldest brother is a lawyer. All the kids in my family went further than any of the other family members, extended family members. Story_ID: 57577 Speaker 1: Can you name them all and put yourself in the order for us? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my oldest brother is Thomas Eugene Curtis, Jr. (laughter), junior, as my father, T-H-O-M-A-S, E-U-G-E-N-E, C-U-R-T-I-S. And he's the oldest, and he went to, he went to actually a Catholic high school that was in Wilmington, Delaware, called Salesianum because he wanted to go in Baltimore [Maryland], but they were segregated. So he would take the admissions test, which you had to take admissions tests to get in, do well, but show up and not be able to go. But there was one that was integrated. So he ended up taking a commuter train every day from Baltimore [Maryland] to Wilmington, Delaware, ended up second in his high school, although he really was first. That was kind of controversial, too. And then he went to Loyola College [Loyola University Maryland], ROTC, then Villanova Law School [Pennsylvania] where he was one of very few [black students] and became a lawyer. I, he's still alive. He's great. He's my oldest brother. He's a semi-retired administrative law judge. He became an administrative law judge. He did some teaching for a while at the University of Delaware Law School and he's married with children, including a niece I'm very close to. And my next brother is Douglass, D-O-U-G-L-A-S-S, Anthony, A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, which is my son's middle name, Curtis. Speaker 1: It's Douglass with two s's? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's like Frederick Douglass. I mean it's not always the two s's. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think--I will have to check for sure, but I'm almost sure. But the reason I'm not that sure is that he didn't go by that. He was always Tony. His middle name is Anthony. So he was Tony Curtis, the real Tony Curtis, as he would say 'cause the movie star was named something different, right, Bernard Schwartz. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he was the real Tony--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Yeah, Bernie Schwartz. He was the real Tony Curtis, and he's deceased. He died a few years ago. He had a stroke, and he lived for a few months and then died. And, yeah, yeah. And he went to Carver [Vocational Technical High School, Baltimore, Maryland]. He went to the same high school as my father worked as a stationary engineer. And then he went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] for a while, maybe a couple of years, but he didn't finish. But he ended up having a career with the Social Security Administration which was based in Woodlawn, Maryland, although he--when he died, he was working for the branch in Atlanta [Georgia]. So, we would see him. He would--he was married a couple of times, divorced, no kids. So he would often drive up here to Charlotte [North Carolina] to spend like Thanksgivings with us, things like that. So miss him a lot. We'll talk more about him later. He's the one that was arrested a couple of times in the Civil Rights sit-in's. And then my next is my sister, Joan, J-O-A-N, Theresa, T-H-E-R-E-S-A, Curtis, C-U-R-T-I-S. And she went to Catholic, all-girls high school, St. Frances Academy [Baltimore, Maryland]. Now, it's integrated. It was the only one that was. It was taught by a black Order of nuns, a high school, and that- Speaker 2: Is this the one taught by the Oblate Sisters? Speaker 1: The Oblate Sisters of Providence. They taught us all in grade school. We all went to the same grade school, St. Pius the Fifth [Baltimore, Maryland], which was taught by the Oblate Sisters of Providence which is a black Order of nuns founded in 1829 by Sister--Mother Mary Lange, a Haitian-American nun and a French priest, Father Joubert, to educate African American and Native American children who weren't being educated at the time. So we all went to St. Pius the Fifth, but we all went to different high schools. And she went to the high school, St. Frances Academy, run by the nuns. I think right now it's coed, but it was then all girls. And she went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], but didn't finish, Morgan State [University], the historically black college in Baltimore [Maryland]. And she then worked mainly in office jobs, and then she married, divorced, had a daughter--married, had a daughter and divorced. And she's out in Los Angeles [California] with that daughter who's in the film industry. But she, for a while was doing catering on film sets, but she now is disabled. She has emphysema, so she's on disability. And then my next sister, Janice, J-A-N-I-C-E, and her--she goes by Janice Curtis Greene. She's married, so her last name is G-R-E-E-N-E. And she's the one next to me. And she went to St. Pius [The Fifth, Baltimore, Maryland]. Then she went to Western High School in Baltimore [Maryland], and then she had--she got married out of high school, but she's since gone back and gotten an Associate's degree. I'm not exactly sure where. And she worked for many years for Social Security Administration, met her husband there, who worked as an accountant there, had several children and she's retired. But in her retirement, she's very creative, and she became, she's a griot now, a storyteller. She's a storyteller and quite a good one. She's Janice, the griot. And so she's a storyteller, and we're very close. Her husband's from Columbia, South Carolina. So they, when they come to visit his family, they stay here too. They come and visit here. And she has three sons. Two are deceased, and the youngest is Aaron. And so they're like brothers to my son. All of his cousins, the cousins are very close. Story_ID: 57578 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about your sister, Janice- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then- Speaker 2: And that's the five of us, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and where do you fit in? Speaker 2: I'm the youngest. Speaker 1: You're the youngest, okay, all right. Speaker 2: I'm the baby, come on, Mary Cecelia. Yeah, I'm the one--and when Janice was four months old, that's when my [maternal] grandmother died, and that's when they said if they had another child. But my mother was--had four miscarriages. So we were big--good Catholics. She got pregnant a lot. Speaker 1: So, now, do you--and you were born in 1953? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 57579 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, it was such a long time ago (laughter). Oh, I just remember being one of this big family. And we just did so many things together. I remember my sister reading to me when I was little. One of my earliest childhood memories was my mom taking me to Enoch Pratt Free Library [Baltimore, Maryland] to get our library card. And, yeah, I do live a life of words and a life of reading. And I was about three, and my sisters and brothers and mom had already been reading to me. And I looked at TV, I looked at, well, what was the educational TV then, like 'Romper Room'. And so I wanted--she took me to the library. She realized that was important. And we went to a branch in our neighborhood. And the woman gave her the card to fill out, and I filled it out. I filled my name out. I already knew how to print. She had taught me how, and you know how when you're little, you sort of fill the whole space with your name. And I filled the whole space with "Mary Cecelia Curtis." The woman was quite impressed, and- Speaker 1: You're three years old. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm like, three, four years old, yeah. Speaker 1: Then you wrote your name? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: And you're given your library card. Speaker 2: And I'm getting my library card. And I spent a lot of time--it was a safe place. And I loved to read and also because we didn't--we had a nice life, but we didn't really go on vacations and things like that. That wasn't, when people went on--when I hear people talk about, well, we would get in the car and we would go to Disney [World, Florida], I was like, we did none of that. (Laughter) We had some, we had our fun, but, so I could read about every place, and I was very curious. But that was probably my earliest memory of doing something. And then I remember the, during the summertime, because Baltimore [Maryland] was very hot. And we didn't have air conditioning in our house. My mother got a fan because I always did suffer from the heat. I didn't do well with heat and humidity which is not a good thing if you're in Baltimore. So you always, families would come out on the stoop, those white marble steps that they have in Baltimore, every night during the summer. And you would play jacks on the steps, and you would, you know, play those games like Hop-Scotch, and Red Light and all those. And then when the Freezee Palace truck would come, you would get soft ice cream. And you'd stay up, be allowed to stay up really, like eleven o'clock because you had to wait until the house cooled down, and you could get the breeze and the cross breeze. And I remember that. I remember the nightlife of the street and the neighbors knew each other and, you know, Ms. (unclear) O'Mara across the street and this one and that one. And so I remember that a lot, and I remember just, you know, running with my friends, going to Druid Hill Park. You know, those were the days, I guess people didn't worry as much. You know, you would--in the morning, there weren't a lot of summer programs. Your mother would put you out, and you would run around with your friends and run around in the alley and go to the park and walk downtown. You could walk downtown, and then come back in the evening before dinner, take your bath, get all cleaned up, you know, and get ready for dinner. And I remember that a lot. And I spent a lot of times with my siblings, who were wonderful most of the time, but because I was a, the youngest, I did get picked on. I did get picked on. And I never had my own room. The oldest would, there was--we had a boarder on the third floor, a teacher. That's it. And we only had one bathroom, and I shared rooms because I was the youngest before everybody left. And I was able to get my own room, and I do remember hitting, knocking on the bathroom door a lot because, you know, you would--you had to get in line (laughter). And my brother, Tony, had the room at the end of the hall, and I would always accuse him of knowing I was coming in and sneaking in. So, you know, so it was fun. I, it was simple, I guess. I remember getting ice cream, you know, going, looking, going to the drive-in and sometimes not having money, but being on the hill above it, and looking down. Although my father didn't get a car till I was, yeah, we used to ride public transportation. Story_ID: 57580 Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your neighborhood? Did it have a name? Speaker 2: Well, it was West Baltimore [Maryland]. I mean you might be familiar with it. It's the same area where they filmed 'The Wire', which it had gotten a little bit--well, that was, I grew up before the drugs really kind of took hold. It was a working-class, black neighborhood, and I think the people there did things like work in factories, crossing guards, Post Office, hair dressers. They were working people, and they worked those kinds of jobs. Speaker 1: So you grew up on Dolphin Street, I think, right- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you said near Druid Hill Park? Speaker 2: Well, no, we--you had to take the bus to go to Druid Hill Park, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: And downtown is where you could take the streetcar, although we would walk often because my mother would walk us down with all those kids. We would have energy to spend. We'd kind of hop all the way downtown. I say, I only remember skinny kids at that point (laughter), you know, it's like--because you weren't inside with no video games. It was too hot to hang around, so you were active all the time. And, plus, you know, my mother was a great cook. She was a Southern cook. We did a lot of frying and gravies, but she was a good cook. So, I didn't even know there was a broiler on it until I grew up (laughter), until I moved away. Speaker 1: Okay, is this like row houses- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: I lived in a row house although we lived, we had a break in ours. There was an airway that went down the middle. So the two houses on the edge of that were a little larger, and we had one of those. So it was only attached on one side. So it was a little larger than the average row house, which was kind of neat. But it was one of those, you know, straight back, shotgun. And we had a big yard, and my father would always, you know, we hung the clothes there, and we played there. And I remember my birthdays because he--every time I had a--we would have birthday parties, big birthday parties, but they would often be themes. I remember one year I was a princess, and my father had a, like a Paper Mache wishing well that he made. They were very elaborate and were great parties (laughter). Yeah, like I said, they were very creative. So I had no sense of not having a lot because, yeah, we could, he--it was a fantasy. It was great. Speaker 1: That's interesting. He made a wishing well out of paper mache? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he did, yes, he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we have parties every year. Story_ID: 57581 Speaker 1: I've always--we ask this question all the time, and you've almost answered it already. But what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, it was that, you know, the party. It was, you know--we were very creative as a family. I think even among the families on the block, we were thought to be a little weird because we made our own fun. And say, for Halloween, we would do theme costumes, and my sister and I would--you know, my sister had to take me. In some ways, my family was, you know, they kind of hated me, loved me because my sister next to me--we're very close now. But I can imagine if you're like six years old, and they, and you're like at thirteen, and they say, "Take Mary with you", like my mother would say. She would roll her eyes. But she would make fun of it. I remember like one year I was a beatnik or something for Halloween. And we would answer the door, and we would go to the door and I would say, like, "Trick-or-treat", you know, something like, you know. We would come up with scenarios. This is true. Also, the Royal Theater was around the corner on Pennsylvania Avenue [Baltimore, Maryland]. So she would take me all the time to those stage shows because that was the time where a lot of the black acts didn't always play in the white venues. And when they did, blacks really didn't go there a lot. So they would do the stage shows where they would--you would go and there would be a movie and then a show and a movie, and a show. And you might have the Motown show or whatever. So we saw, you know, Tommy Hunt and Smokey Robinson and Dionne Warwick and Stevie Wonder. And she would often take me. So she and like a teenage friend would take me and a little girlfriend or something like that. So those were great fun, and I remember seeing that. I remember going with her to see those shows. That was cool. And how--that's young, and I can take you a little older, but (laughter), but- Speaker 1: Well, you can take us a little older. Then we'll go back to school, back--(simultaneous)- Story_ID: 57582 Speaker 1: Yeah, but, yeah, I was--I think I have a picture. I was a teen model at a department store downtown, which was fun. And Baltimore [Maryland] was a lot of fun downtown. And it was a city that was interesting in that it--people think of it as Northern, but it's kind of a Southern city in its aspect. So, race was a piece of it too, always. You were aware of that. I was on 'Romper Room', which was started in Baltimore, by Bert and Nancy Claster, and they then syndicated it. It was a Bert and Nancy Claster production. And she was the original Ms. Nancy, and my mother--when I was, as I've told you, we used to look at 'Romper Room', and I wanted to be on it. I wanted to be one of those little kids that said, "Do be a good Do Bee, and don't be a . . . " And she- Speaker 2: That was like a kindergarten of the air or a nursery school (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Yes, it was like a 'Sesame Street' or whatever, but this was, it was great. And you had--like I said, she syndicated it around the world eventually, 'Romper Rooms'. But it started in Baltimore [Maryland]. And they would film it there. And I wanted to be one of those little kids. So my mother, my mother was great. She never thought that someone would say, "No." You would have to say, "No," to her face, which is why she would, you know, have my brother apply to this school or whatever. You would have to go and say, "No." She wasn't going to self sensor it. So she sent my name in to be on Romper Room, even though there weren't really black children on 'Romper Room' as a matter of course. I'm not saying that there weren't any, but I don't remember any. So my name came up when I think I was in kindergarten. And she took me, you know, I looked like gorgeous. I had a big bow in my hair every day, Crinoline skirts out to here. I was like, you know, (unclear) black folks. When we got there, we wanted to be clean (laughter), right? And so she took me, and Ms. Nancy welcomed me beautifully. And I was the only little black child that time. And she always had me in the middle of the group. And my father, to this--to the day he died, told the story of "Show and Tell". You're bringing "Show and Tell". And some kid brought in a "Show and Tell" with a car with the top down, and Ms. Nancy asked, "Well, what is this called?" And no one knew. And I said, "It's a convertible." And they, my father just bragged on that, "No, none those white kids knew." (Laughter) And it was great, Ms. Nancy was great. And even though I think there was a little bit of shock because as a rule Baltimore was, by culture, a little bit of a segregated city. Speaker 2: Now, did you become a neighborhood celebrity with the other little kids? Speaker 1: I don't know that I became a neighborhood celebrity, but there was a little notice in the paper, like in the "Afro American" that if you look at 'Romper Room' this week, you'll notice a little brown face. You know how they (laughter) wrote about things in those days. So it was- Speaker 2: What about your neighbors, I mean the other little kids that watched it on television--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: I don't remember that. Speaker 2: They didn't say, "Hey, I saw you on TV." Speaker 1: I don't remember that. I don't remember that, but I do remember it was, it was fancy. It was a big deal, and there a little note. Can you imagine that? Just to have a black kid on the little show in a city that was a black as Baltimore [Maryland], even then. Speaker 2: Let me raise something else here. I remember being five and wondering how pictures came through the television. In fact, earlier, I guess, in my--I would look behind the TV, you know, at two or three, you know, to see. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Now, did you--did being on 'Romper Room' demystify television for you at an early age? Speaker 1: I don't think I was ever mystified by it. I mean I, I grew up in the era of TV. You're accepting of it. And I was too little when I was on there, in a way, to think of it, to be marveled by it. I just thought it was cool. Speaker 2: I'm just thinking, not many little kids had a chance to be in a studio. Speaker 1: I know. It was, it was kind of neat, and I do remember the lights and the cameras and things like that. And they gave my mother presents, and they went, you know, accompanied me there. And I wasn't afraid at all, and it was- Speaker 2: Did you ever think when you watched other television shows that there were cameras in the room and that sort of thing? Speaker 1: Yeah, I noticed the cameras, but I was very natural. Speaker 2: I mean did you, when you watched other TV shows, did you think- Speaker 1: Oh, oh- Speaker 2: --about the fact that there are cameras there? Speaker 1: No, I'm not sure that I did. I'm not sure that I did. Speaker 2: All right, I'm just (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it wasn't my goal at that point to be on TV. I was more a print person. I came to TV later as print started to go down (laughter). But- Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so- Speaker 1: But, yes, it was a racial component. I didn't, growing up as a little, little child, I didn't really have a lot of white friends because our neighborhoods were segregated. But as I got older, I did. You know, my high school was predominantly white, and I started to, you meet people. Baltimore's interesting. It's a big city, but it's a city of neighborhood. So you can grow up there and not ever meet somebody from another neighborhood, oddly enough. And there're some neighborhoods like Highlandtown or Hamden or those neighborhoods, Hamilton, that were working-class white that you really wouldn't go into. I remember we had a field day, one day a year at Patterson Park in one of those neighborhoods in East Baltimore, that all the Catholic schools would meet for, you know, dodge ball and races and that's when you would see--you might be against an all-white Catholic school. And that's when you would interact. Story_ID: 57583 Speaker 1: Okay, let's see. So, now, you started school at- Speaker 2: St. Pius. Speaker 1: It's called Saint- Speaker 2: Saint Pius the Fifth. Speaker 1: Saint Pius the Fifth, okay. And that was a Pope, I guess, right? Speaker 2: He was a Pope, the Fifth. There was a Tenth, a Twelfth, but I think there was a St. Pius the Tenth school in Baltimore that was white. But St. Pius the Fifth was predominantly, pretty much all black. Speaker 1: Okay, and run by the black nuns, right? Speaker 2: Yes, the Oblates. And all five of us went there for grade school. It was just two blocks from our house, so we could walk. And the facilities weren't fabulous, but the standards were very high. So we got good grounding. I remember all my, you know, Sister Bonaventure in kindergarten, and Sister Carmella. Somebody just got in touch with me on LinkedIn and said, one of the nuns died. She was 90-something. Speaker 1: Yeah, we were--about three years ago, we interviewed somebody who was in their 90s, nearly a hundred- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but I can't think of her name right now. That's, so, well- Speaker 2: And I was, you know, a top student. I was good. I was always a good student. I loved to ready. I was always a good student. I enjoyed school, I enjoyed studying. Speaker 1: Well, you were ready already, being able to read at three, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I went in school reading pretty well, by the time I went to kindergarten. So- Speaker 1: And did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: I liked them all. I liked every subject. I liked math. I guess especially English because I did like to read. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But history, I enjoy. My son's a history major, interestingly. Story_ID: 57584 Speaker 1: Okay, did you have favorite books growing up? Speaker 2: I liked biographies. I liked mysteries, and when I was pretty young, maybe about 12 or so, we had some books in our house. We didn't have a big library, but we had a library. But we had books in our house, and I read 'Pride and Prejudice' which is the Jane Austen, which was so different from my life. You know, we're talking about England and all these matters. But I loved the writing. I loved it. It's a book I come back to often, not only for the lovely writing, but, you know, when she talks about, you know, Elizabeth Bennett and her yearning in her inner life. I liked books with female heroines that had, that were very smart, but perhaps didn't always have a chance to show it or weren't great at, you know, presenting themselves. I guess I related, but I was pretty shy. So, I think a lot of journalist are, and you become a journalist because it gives you chance--when I ask somebody a question, I'm not myself, in a way. I'm not a shy, little Catholic girl who's trying to make herself known in this chaos of a family or I'm a person--I'm Mary C. Curtis. This is my job. I get to play that part. And so it's, I think--I've found a lot of journalists who are actually shy as shy people. And being a print journalist was easier. Now that I am on TV sometimes, and people come to recognize me, I have to make an effort to put myself out because my natural instinct is to shrink because it's--I'm just a shy person. But I also got involved, my older brothers and sisters were involved in the Civil Rights Movement. And I became an observer of their lives and so those kinds of books about Civil Rights history became interesting to me, and very fairly early on, glommed onto Ida B. Wells, the crusading black, female journalist as this incredible heroine. Maybe I, the first thing is I saw that beautiful picture of her with her strong face and beautiful demeanor. And I liked that. Speaker 1: So did you read about her as a young person? Speaker 2: I did, I did. I do like heroines. I do like real-life and fictional heroines. And, not that I don't like the guys either, but, you know, you're drawn to them as a girl. You know, I guess some little girls like horses or whatever. I liked that. I was never big into animals or things. But I, yeah, I observed them and what they did in the Civil Rights Movement. Real life was more interesting to me at that point. I memorized all the freedom songs they would practice. It was interesting because my parents were pretty conservative. They were Republicans and so--Republicans of that era, the "Lincoln Republicans" and, but conservative in many ways. But my father would always say, these young people are doing what we should have done. They're so brave. And he would welcome them to meet in our house. So I did see white people in the sense that integrated groups of black and white Civil Rights workers would meet in our house and practice the songs and make the signs. And I was very little at that time, but it made a real big impression on me. Story_ID: 57585 Speaker 1: You started school in 1959, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At the age of six? Speaker 2: Yeah, about five. Speaker 1: So, five, at age five? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Kindergarten or- Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, my birthday's in September, so just- Speaker 1: Okay, so that would have been '58' [1958]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, did you--now, were, is that the era where the Civil Rights people were meeting in your house? Speaker 2: Yes, I think it was then, early '60's [1960s], late '50's [1950s], early '60's [1960s], I would say. I couldn't put it exactly, but, yeah, they were meeting. And they would come and have meetings and talk strategy and talk about whether they were gonna picket the Montgomery Ward or, you know. I remember there was a department there, Stewart's, that they picketed because they would wait on--they would wait on black customers, but they didn't have black people working behind the counters, things like that. And in Baltimore [Maryland], apparently, there still were restaurants that were segregated. I don't have the experience myself, but I--that's where my brother [Tony Curtis] was arrested at two different restaurants when he--when they picketed, they sat down--the sit-in's. And they came and said, you've gotta get up, and they wouldn't. Then the cops took 'em away. And So I have, particularly, the first time he was arrested, which was shocking in my law-abiding family that, that someone would get arrested. Speaker 1: Now, this is--he was involved in something called the Civic Interest- Speaker 2: Interest Group, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: CIG [Civic Interest Group]. Speaker 1: Were they affiliated with the NAACP [National Association of the Advancement of Colored People] or- Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: --CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or- Speaker 2: But they were one of the different groups that would organize and picket. Quite a few, my oldest brother, Thomas, Tony and Joan were involved in it. And they would organize sit-in's and picketing. They would picket and stand with their signs and circle places in all kinds of weather. I remember when [President] Barack Obama, going way much--in 2008, when he gave his speech in Denver [Colorado] , in the Mile High Stadium, accepting the [Democratic presidential] nomination, I was there covering it. And I called my sister, Joan, on the phone and held my phone so she could hear the speech. And she was crying. And I started to cry for a couple of reasons. One, she was saying, when I was walking in the cold and the snow and the heat, I didn't imagine this moment, and, two, we were both crying that Tony didn't live to see it, my brother, Tony, didn't live to see it. And so, yeah, they marched, and he was arrested twice. And the first time my parents were at a church dance, and they came home to screams from his girlfriend and his siblings, "Tony's in jail, Tony's in jail." And I think Juanita Jackson Mitchell, the Civil Rights lawyer, married to Clarence Mitchell, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lobbyist, helped get him out. And it was a high bail, which in those days--I think that was in the early '60's [1960s]. And it was, it was seeing--I was really young, and I just loved it. I took it in. It was dramatic. I couldn't imagine anything more interesting. As I got older, I realized that he was in danger and everybody was afraid for good reason. But (laughter), you know, and I think a part of it, I always say that that's why I became a journalist. I loved to observe, and I was always aware of life and things. A lot of, I think position in the family has a lot to do with it because when I would talk to a lot of people my age, if they were the oldest, they would have no idea. And I would say how could you not know what was happening, my goodness. But their experience was different. Being the youngest, this was going on, and I could learn from that. And I- Speaker 1: It put you in an observation position- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, where--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: --where you're not expected- Speaker 2: --I think people were- Speaker 1: to do so much, but- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, and also because it was happening. If you were the oldest, it just wouldn't be your experience. Just as I talk with whites sometimes and I--my age, and I said how could you not know. But, of course, their life experience was different. They weren't having, they didn't have siblings marching. So they were just living a life. I talked to a contemporary who was older even, and he said, you know, there weren't many blacks even in our little town. We didn't even consider it. So it's kind of interesting how your life experience can shape you just where you grow up, which is why one of the things I believe that the media should be diverse because people bring a whole variety of historical institutional knowledge and those ideas. Story_ID: 57586 Speaker 1: Did your family get the 'Afro-American' [newspaper] at home and- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --'Ebony', 'JET' and all- Speaker 2: All of those, yeah. Actually, when I was in college, I was an intern at the 'Baltimore Afro-American'. Yeah, yeah, and did some writing for them. But, yes, we got the "Afro", and we also got all the papers, 'The Baltimore Afro-American', and then we got the Balti--the--there was a morning and an afternoon paper. There was 'The Sun' and 'The News American', that's it. And we got all the papers. So I grew up reading papers too. I enjoyed that. I liked entertainment things too. I really liked the Arts, and that's a big deal to me too. And I, that's another thing I haven't really discussed. I've talked more about politics, but I say I cover "politics", "culture" and "race". And the culture is a big deal to me. I took tap lessons. I took piano lessons. When I went back as Neiman [Foundation] fellow to Harvard [University], I took more piano lessons with a graduate student. I loved to go to things, to the movies, to theater. One of the nuns took me to an opera, my first opera when I was like six. I went to Peabody School of Music [Baltimore, Maryland]. I still remember it. That's a big memory for me. I saw my first opera at the--it was a student production at Peabody which 'Magic Flute', Mozart's 'Magic Flute' which is gorgeous. It's kind of confusing to follow, but I love the music. And when the Queen of the night sang her Aria, I was mesmerized, and I remember that totally. And I love the opera, and my son goes to opera, my son likes opera. He goes to the opera with me. I sign in choirs and glee clubs. I acted. I do acting. I still act sometimes. I just did a play here, a stage reading. And I think they were surprised--they asked me to be in it for publicity purposes for this benefit. And I think they were surprised that I wasn't bad or (laughter) I (unclear) very good actress. I, when my, when I was 16 years old, and my mother asked me what did I want for my birthday, I said, I want to go to New York to see a Broadway show because I had been reading about--I'd been reading all my life. I'd be reading in the papers. And my mother said, yes. So we got on the train, and we went to New York. We didn't--that's all we did. We went, we got there, we found a hotel room. We went to the Broadway, and we got tickets to the David Frost Show. We got tickets--she wanted to see 'Hello Dolly' with Pearl Bailey and Cab Calloway. We saw 'Cabaret', and we saw Woody Allen, 'Play it Again, Sam', which my mother still didn't get the jokes. But I thought it was pretty funny with him and Diane Keaton and Tony Roberts. But, so my mother was--it was interesting. I think the older kids and I had a different mother in a way because she was more the housewife they knew. And then she went back to college. She became a teacher. She was up for anything. My mother was up for anything. And when I said that, who would say, "Oh, yeah, let's get on a train (laughter) and go?" That is so neat. I think that's so neat, and I love the Arts. And I was just in New York this past weekend. I saw my son, and we saw a show. When I worked at the 'New York Times', I went to everything. And I still go up a lot. I'm on the board of Actor's Theater here in Charlotte, North Carolina, and I just--that's one thing that gets me when some folks wanna cut Arts and sports and things in schools. And they said reading and writing is the most important, particularly in a poor school. Get that, and you don't need the rest. And they wouldn't say that for their own child because I know from personal experience how the Arts can fill your life, even if you don't become an artist. It's great, it's, you know, Jonathan Green, you know, the painting I have, the lithograph. It's, it's beautiful, and you have to know about all our wonderful artists, the Gordon Parks, and the Elizabeth Catlett's and things like that. And also Arts and sports, these are ways that some kids get into the studies. They, they--that's how they become good students because that speaks to them. And the Arts, it's a huge part of my life, and I think often, politics, culture and race intersect because it's very interesting to me how African Americans are portrayed in the popular culture. And that really speaks to our image of ourselves, and that's a piece of it. Story_ID: 57587 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, were there any people who were particularly important as mentors to you in grade school, you know? Speaker 2: Well, I liked most of my teachers. I did. I liked most of my teachers, like Sister Wilhelmina, I liked a lot. She was a little, yes. She was great. I liked all of my teachers. Sister Harriet was fantastic. She, we had several teachers who were actually Cuban refugees. And she was one of them. They were Cuban Americans, and that was--black Cubans. And they taught, they were Oblates [Order of nuns]. And in high school, actually, it was a white nun, Sister Mary Augustine, who was the moderator of the newspaper, 'The Setonia'. I went Seton High School [later Seton Keough High School, Baltimore, Maryland]. Our newspaper was called 'The Setonia'. And- Speaker 1: So, was there a middle school or anything or- Speaker 2: No, you went to grade school, to eighth grade and then high school- Speaker 1: Okay, so- Speaker 2: --and you tested to go into high school, and I went to Seton [High School, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Now, you neighborhood, St. Pius [The Fifth, Baltimore, Maryland] was in the neighborhood, and you- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --could walk to that. Well, where was Seton High School? Speaker 2: It was on Charles and 28th in Baltimore [Maryland]. I took two buses, took a bus and transferred. But Baltimore had a very good public transportation system. So a lot of people took buses to school. And it wasn't a school bus. It was just a city bus. I went down to the end of my block, I walked like a block, took one bus, got off and transferred to another. And it still only probably took me a half hour to get to school. It was a, it was easy. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is, Seton was more of an integrated school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, predominantly white. Speaker 1: A white school with black students--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: And it was taught by a white order--well, an Order of nuns that knew--they weren't segregated, I guess, but they were white and lay teachers. All schools had lay teachers because you could, had to supplement. So I had a variety of 'em. But that was taught by the Daughters of Charity, St. Vincent DePaul. And they were founded by Mother Elizabeth Seton, and their Motherhouse was in Emmitsburg, Maryland. And she actually wasn't a Saint at that point. We had to pray--the whole thing in the Catholic religion where you have to have so many confirmed miracles before you--so you have to pray, you know. She's a Venerable, she's a Blessed, come on, give me that, give me that miracle (laughter). And she's a Saint now. But I was taught by the Daughters of Charity, St. Vincent DePaul. And, actually, you test into the school. That's how you used to do for Catholic high schools. I'm not sure if you have to, but--and you put your first, second and third choice. And you could be refused. So I picked Seton [High School]. I got in, and apparently, my test scores were high enough because I was put in the "gifted class", which we all kind of stayed together. And it was interesting though. When my mother and I went to get my books and everything, about halfway through, they took us aside and said, "I'm sorry. We had, you were supposed to be in the gifted, but we've been giving you the normal, so you can be in the gifted if you want." But a nun did tell my mother, "Now, the gifted is very difficult. And maybe the test scores were off, but you might wanna start off in the moderate." And my mother and I looked at each and rolled our eyes, and said, "No, we think she can handle it." And I was the only black person (laughter) in the gifted. And I did, I excelled. I ended up being the Valedictorian, the head--the first in my class when I graduated. But I had some great teachers, Sister Mary Augustine, as I said, was not a teacher but she was the sponsor of the newspaper. And I used to poke my head in and, in the newspaper office and say, "What you doing?" And she eventually said, "Well, why don't you write up something for me? Why don't you write a review? Why don't you write a story?" And she's the one who actually promoted me as trying to--wanting to be a journalist. She saw that in me. It was something I enjoyed anyway, but she encouraged me. And she was a little bit strange (laughter), I thought. She wan eccentric nun. But she was quite good, and she was good at--(unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Is there a story about her eccentricity, you said something- Speaker 2: Well, she just, she was, seemed to be, she was an eccentric kind of a person. And the newspaper office was like under the stairs almost, and she kind of went around and did her little thing. And they, it was a place for kind of quirky people. And I, she asked me to come in and do it. She recruited me to write for her. Story_ID: 57588 Speaker 1: And did you like to write as a youth, you know- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --I mean before you even got to the newspaper? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. Yeah, I liked to write. I liked to write papers and I--and so it was natural. And I did reviews for her. I did little stories, and it was a high school newspaper. But we did win some awards for a high school paper. And we had a lot of censorship because it was a Catholic school (laughter), so, but it still was pretty good. And a byline is a byline. When you start getting those bylines, it's pretty good, Mary C. Curtis. And--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Now, I see the paper where they're announcing that you're gonna be the editor- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the 1970-'71' [1971] year. Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s], yeah. It says I was a co-editor with a young woman, with a girl, Kathy Scally (ph.), who I'm still friends with. She still--she lives, oh, somewhere down South. But we're Facebook friends. That's the great thing about social media. Our school year has a Facebook group, and we keep in touch. And it's funny. And at the high school reunion, they all looked, you know, I could point everybody else out. And the high school athlete was a nun, so that was pretty cool. And I had a great English teacher, Sister Loretta, and she was the debate coach. And I excelled in debate, and that was great. And I had--I remember my math teacher. I was very good at math, even though it was something I wasn't as interested in. I was then getting more interested in English and writing, but I was quite good at math. And after every test, she would seat everyone in the order in which they made the test, which was kind of awful in a way 'cause with the lowest score in the front. So you had to pay attention more, and the highest in the back. And I was always either in the last seat or the next to the last as making the highest score. And I was the only black person in my accelerated math class. And once she kept me after class, and she said, "Mary, are people in your family smart or what," 'cause she was trying to explain how I was doing so well (laughter) in math. So even though the school was integrated, it was predominately white, and I did feel that kind of tension. Yet, other things. I remember a history teacher who once, who was from the deep South, and she would always talk about the South during the Civil War. And she had kind of this romanticized view of the South, and it struck me. And I would argue against her, and once--not argue, but in a respectful way. And once on the report card, she gave me a score that was a lot lower than my test scores. And my mother, we went to the school and complained. And she said it was my attitude and had, it was amorphous. And she did not change the score, but I got ninety-nine [99]'s from then on in. But we did complain. Speaker 1: But she lowered your grade because of your attitude, and your attitude wasn't disrespectful. What did she say it was? Speaker 2: Just question--I would--well, she said it was disrespectful, but it wasn't. I was just, when she would talk about the South, and, you know, "The great Cause", and I would say, "You know, but the cause was about owning human beings." It wasn't--being enslaved. And I would just bring these issues up because I read, you know, I knew these things. And she, yes, I think my test averaged at, was like a ninety-six [96] or a seven [97] or eight [98]. And she gave me like a ninety [90], and I was, what, what, you know? And so I complained. And my mother and I, my mother--like I said, my mother was up for anything. We went to the school, and we saw the vice principal, I remember. And we talked about it with the teacher there. And she didn't, she refused to change it, but then from then on in, I got--I think 'cause we pushed, you push back. You have to push back. That's the way I was with my son. You have to, you know, if the only reason treat you right is because if we don't, well, the mother will be in here (laughter), that's good enough, right? And so, so, but overall, it was good. I was popular. I was vice president of the National Honor Society. I won debates, I won, you know, I won trophies in debate. And I was in the choir. I was in school musicals, and had a lot of friends, and ended up being Valedictorian and voted "Most Likely to Succeed" (laughter). And most of my classmates were white, and were from some of those neighborhoods that weren't really that hospitable to blacks. Socially, I did have a party in my West Baltimore neighborhood and some of the white girls came, you know. I invited everyone and them, and some did and some didn't. And I would do overnights at some of their homes sometimes. My best friend was Rosemary King, and I stayed overnight at her house a couple times. So it was interesting. But it was in a changing Baltimore [Maryland]. This was in the '70's [1970s], so it was changing. I do remember one, one of my classmates, that I'm still close to, Delores McKee, would work in the summers at Ocean City, Maryland, which was the resort, the beach town. And I had never been to Ocean City because Ocean City--the Maryland shore was pretty segregated. And that was not a--I remember when my sisters and brothers used to demonstrate, when they would go to some of those Eastern shore towns, it was like the South. And they would, really, it was tough. And people would jeering them and things like that. And so black people generally did not go to Ocean City [Maryland]. We went to the [New] Jersey beaches, Atlantic City, Wildwood, those beaches, which were better, you know, more hospitable. And I'm not sure that Ocean City [Maryland] was segregated by law, but at that point, it, you just wouldn't--we just hadn't been used to going to Ocean City. And so she would go there and work in the summers, you know, in the beach town and come and talk about it. And I realized that I had never been. I only went once as a--later, and then I felt, what's the big deal? (Laughter) But it was those kinds of social things. But I have to say I made some wonderful friends that I'm still friends with. Story_ID: 57589 Speaker 1: Okay, and you wrote a piece on the class reunion. Would this have been the fortieth or- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, class reunion, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was great to see them and to see-it was only three black girls from that class that went back. There couldn't have been more than ten of us all together in the class of not quite two hundred. And, but three of us were back. They were all getting on us 'cause they thought we looked great without the wrinkles (laughter). But they all looked great, and one--the class athlete who was in the gifted class, Regina Lavic (ph.), who was really nice was a nun, and she was great. She was beautiful, and she had, her mission now in the Order--she got to stay home and stay care of her developmentally disabled sister and her elderly mother. And that's something I like about Catholicism, the good works piece of it. And she had really a beautiful aura about her, and she would make jokes about playing hurt and things like that. And I saw the class president, and it was a room full of a lot of people in the helping professions. And a lot of people with a lot of kids (laughter), well, not all of them, but more than--I think the hostess, the woman who was the, in her house has a bunch. She had like six or seven, whatever, you know, and so--but a lot of nurses, teachers, things like that. And this young woman came up to me who had become a teacher. And she started a newspaper in her school. And, Sheila, and she said, "You know, you were an inspiration to me as a journalist, and as a person." And I didn't realize how much I was liked in a way because I always felt a little bit apart. And one, one girl, Kathy Wen (ph.) who was in the class too, came up and said, "How tough was it? I know now that it must have been tough. How tough was it being there?" It was a great experience. I almost didn't go. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, it's good that it turned out to be a good experience. Speaker 2: It was, and also I wrote about it. That's it, I don't--you know, I don't open the refrigerator, I don't get out of--I don't do anything without writing--no, I'm kidding. But actually, my son, when he was growing up, you know, it was, he reminded me, when I worked with Anna Quindlen, at the 'New York Times', she once said, you know, she wrote columns. She once said, "Yeah, my son says, 'I'm going in the refrigerator to get a glass of milk. You gonna write about that?'" And at that certain point, I had to ask his permission because, you know, he--a teenage boy does not want to turn up in his mother's column. So, and I respect that. I would ask permission, as I asked my husband before I mentioned him. So, that's, but it was great. Story_ID: 57590 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of counseling did you have about college? Speaker 2: Probably not as much as I could have because a lot of it was geared towards Catholics, the colleges. But at the same time, a lot of people stayed in Maryland from my school. So they went to Towson [University, Maryland] or Notre Dame [of Maryland University] or Loyola [University Maryland]. And after I had visited New York, I really wanted to go to New York. I just was fascinated with this idea of New York. And so I got counseling at schools in New York, but mostly--I went to Catholic school, you know, Fordham University [New York], which was the school my family knew. And my brother had been interested in. And it was taught by the Jesuits [Society of Jesus], and so- Speaker 1: Okay, so other people in your family had experience with Fordham [University, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, my brother at one point had wanted to go to Fordham, but he ended up staying at home and going to Loyola [University Maryland] which was a Catholic school in Baltimore. So I was the first one to go away, but I really wanted to go to New York. I really wanted to go. I just wanted to go to New York. I, after I had gone on that theater trip, it just was a city that fascinated me. I read about it, I visited it. I just wanted to go to school in New York. So I'm not, so I went to Fordham, yeah, and it was a Jesuits. And- Speaker 1: Okay, now, you graduate from high school in 19- Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: --'71' [1971], okay. Speaker 2: You're giving away all my age secrets here (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, that's all right. Speaker 2: You say (laughter). Speaker 1: So you start Fordham [University, New York], this is fall of '71' [1971]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and so what was Fordham like? Did you like it? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. It was in New York, but there was a certain amount of protection because it was a Catholic college, and obviously, there were many lay teachers as well as Jesuits. And I think the thing with Fordham [University, New York] is--oh, you know, the Jesuits just want to make sure you think, not how you think. But they wanna make sure you think about things. So I think I was counseled to be very thoughtful, whatever the topic was, and that was good. And I really liked my roommate who was from upstate New York, Glens Falls, New York, Sally Perry. We're still in contact. I--well, she wasn't really my roommate at that time. I had lots of friends, but she became a good friend because we were both interested in the theater. And we would go to many shows. We had so many play bills, our parents probably wondered were we going to class. But you always could get--that's the thing about New York. It's a very expensive city, but it also can be very inexpensive. You can always eat in an ethnic restaurant and theaters had a lot of student, rush tickets and things like that. So you could go on a song. And we went off Broadway, on Broadway. We saw everything. I remember when my mother came up to visit me, my roommate, Sally, and I took her to see the original production of 'Pippin', with Ben Vereen, and she really liked that. Like I say, my mother was up for anything. She visited me. So I liked it, yeah. I majored in communications. And I worked on the radio station, WFUV. I was a community affairs director. And I had a talk show. And I interviewed people in the black community for the most part, you know, business owners, people who came on campus, that kind of thing. And I also worked for the alternative newspaper. I didn't work for 'The Ram', which was the official paper. I worked 'The Paper', which was more edgy, and I did some opinion pieces and things like that. And, you know, I met my husband (laughter). Actually, he was, he had been to Fordham [University, New York], dropped out, then had gone into the [U.S.] Army for three years, and he came back. So he was a little older, when I met him. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 57591 Speaker 1: And started dating him. Speaker 2: This is- Speaker 1: I got married right out of college though. I got married pretty young, 22. I got married in 1976. So, yes. I guess people did that then (laughter). But we're still married, so you just met him. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, and what does he do? Speaker 1: Okay, he--well, I started getting internships when I was in school, as a journalist. And one of the internships was with Associated Press. So they offered me a job. So I had a job right out of school. And his area is, he has an English--Masters in English, but his area is more the printing area and the computer end of printing and journalism. So that's more what he did. And he's also worked in libraries. So right now--he worked in newspapers. When I was at 'The New York Times', he was at the Bergen 'Record' in New Jersey. And we actually lived in Bergen County [New Jersey], and I had to commute. When I worked in Baltimore [Maryland] at the 'Baltimore Sun', he worked for 'Towson Times' [Maryland] Publishing. So 'The Charlotte Observer' [North Carolina], you know, they hired us as a package deal from New York. So we--that's the first time we ever worked at the same place. But we worked in different divisions. I worked in the editorial, and he worked in production and computers and that. And now, he works at Queens University of Charlotte. He is systems manager for their library system, and he also does some grant writing and things like that. And it's not too far from our home. He bikes, rides his bike to work. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, so, yes, so he's similar professions, different areas. And I don't know so much about the computer--well, you know, I've had to learn more. I have my own website, and I administer it and things. But he's, he knows that so well, and he's gotten another degree in computer information systems at Queens University [North Carolina]. And he's getting another Master, this time in Library Sciences. It's a--yeah, when I worked at the 'Arizona Daily Star' where my son was born in Tucson, Arizona, he worked at Pima County Community College library [Arizona]. So parallel, but different. Story_ID: 57592 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, were there any special teachers or mentors at Fordham [University, New York] that you remember? Speaker 2: Father Matthews was a priest. He was really interesting. He was good. There was--I had a good journalism professor that we didn't get along as much, but he was tough, but good, Father Raymond Schroth. There was, I had a professor, Harry Arrow, who had been a working journalist, and he was great. And I remember getting a lot of tips from him that I still remember because he had been a working journalist, you know, the whole--some of the best parts of an interview come when you've packed everything away, and they think it's over, and they keep talking. That kind of stuff. I remember those lessons from Harry Arrow, that kind of thing, yeah, yeah, there are some, particularly, in the communications area that gave me some good, practical advice. And, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were in, when you were in school, there were some great stories on the national scene, I guess. Well, New York, I think New York was going bankrupt or something, at one point--(unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: Mayor [John] Lindsay [New York City mayor 1965-1973] had to bail the city out and-- That was- Speaker 2: Wasn't that while you were- Speaker 1: Was it Lindsay? Was it [Mayor] Abe Beame [New York City mayor 1974-1977], maybe? Speaker 2: Was it Beam? Speaker 1: I don't- Speaker 2: Okay, I thought it was John Lindsey. Speaker 1: Yeah, no, we had good speakers. I remember we had, you know, the time of Watergate [1972]. That was all of that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So we had national speakers about that. We had Howard Baker and Senator Howard Baker [Senator 1967-1985] and Sam Irvin [Senator 1954-1974] talk about that. You know, you had good speakers. And artistically, it was an interesting time. But like I said, I love the Arts, and I did spend a lot of time in New York on that. I remember we had John Cassavetes and Gena Rowlands and come screen (unclear) one of his films there. William Friedkin came, Gloria Steinem spoke. It's interesting because I recently had a, sort of a literary (unclear) country tone with Gloria Steinem. And then we met when she spoke to the Journalism and Women's Symposium where I'm on the board. And we had drinks and sort of resolved it over this article she wrote. And I--in the 'New York Times', and I wrote another one in the 'Washington Post'. But I originally met her when she came to speak at my school. And then she also brought a black feminist there because that was also a lot of race issues. And I remember the big thing was, are you a woman, you know, are you a feminist or for black power? You know, it's like, you have to choose kind of thing. And should black women be more supportive of black men as opposed to talking about being a part of the Women's Movement? And it's interesting to me because you still have those strains that come up because of that. Does the Women's Movement, is it cognizant enough of the needs of working-class and low-income women in general and black women? And that was kind of what my piece in the 'Post' was about, you know, when Barack Obama ran against Hillary Clinton, there were some feminists saying, well, it's Hillary's turn, kind of thing. And Barack Obama should step back. A lot of people got upset because Oprah Winfrey was for Obama, and some of the women who supported her was like, okay, okay. And I wrote a piece that more white feminists should be coming to the aid of Michelle Obama who was under a lot of personal attack at the time because, if you're going to be a feminists, you have to be for all women. So, but I saw her there. And so, yeah, we were talking about issues of culture and race and politics. It was a whirling time, and it was a very strong black student union, and I loved having, as a professor--I had as a professor, Ed Bullins, the playwright. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ed Bullins. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, he did--he taught like a couple of classes one year. And I took a class. And we used to go see every play down in, up in, you know, in Harlem [New York], and he would take us to see off-Broadway plays. And, yes, so it was a very interesting time. I also appreciated getting to know people--black people of many cultures as far as West Indians and African, of African descent, and, which I wasn't as exposed to in Baltimore [Maryland]. So that was a great--I, I--my best friend in college was from Barbados, and, you know, I dated a guy from Jamaica and just getting to know the different foods and music. I dated a guy from Haiti and just had friends from all over the Diaspora. And I learned more about that. I think it broadened my cultural reach, yeah, then going to the studio museum, these kinds of things. It was--the city--I'm glad I went to New York. It was a great education, just all the people you ran into, all the speeches you could go to hear. You know, even when we--our college version of the Society of Professional Journalists, we could have a Mike Wallace and people like that come to speak because it was in New York. And I remember all of that. So- Story_ID: 57593 Speaker 1: And you were there on scholarship too. You had a full- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --scholarship- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because of, you know. Speaker 2: 'Cause I was smart (laughter). Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And also I think at that time, there was an acknowledgment that, to give an opportunity to African Americans who may not have had as much money. And I'm not sure now that there's even that commitment because with the economic situation, everybody pulling back. You see the lay-off's and people like that, that diversity becomes less of a priority, I think, because everybody's worried about everything. And that's a shame because you do--but in a way, like I said, I think it's great social mobility. I mean my, my grandfather was illiterate. My mother, you know, my father went to eighth grade. My mother was a teacher, you know, all of--my brother's a lawyer. You know, and we all, we skipped. You know, my great grandmother was a slave. My son's getting a graduate degree at Yale [University, Connecticut]. I mean this, and he knows all of this. And he's so proud of all of that. And he knew my brother before he died, his Uncle Tony. So he can say, my uncle was arrested in the Civil Rights Movement. He's--and he's very involved in social justice and issues of unions and equal pay and Hurricane Sandy relief and I think a part of that is because of, you know, who he came from. But I, I'm amazed. As I said, you know, my parents--I think we were off-camera, both with limited resources, nothing inherited, no inherited wealth in a segregated time, raising this family, and this family union--unit, and bought a home and succeeded in so many ways, I think they're heroes. I find it astounding. When people talk about Civil Rights heroes, I--my parents really are my heroes because to have not only survived, but to have thrived in the society that had so much pulling them down, economically, socially, culturally, I'm astounded. But they were great, and like I said, they had really open minds and eager to learn, eager to set--learn from younger people. What a tribute to me. Story_ID: 57594 Speaker 1: Okay, let just--before you get you out of college, did you admire any journalists or writers in college or who were the ones that you thought were the best? Speaker 2: Well, so many, really. As I said, I read a lot. I read all the newspapers. Speaker 1: Was there anyone that you wanted to write like or wanted to, you know, have the same kind of impact (unclear)? Speaker 2: I think it's more like I take different things from different people. It's not like I wanna be like that particular person. I wanna have this person's turn of phrase. I want to, you know--it's hard for me to look back because I'm so much a person of the present. I almost, you know, who do I like now, in a way (laughter). But, hmm, that's one I'd have to think on. I know someone who is a little above me that I admired both for historical reasons and for journalism reasons is Charlayne Hunter-Gault, yeah, who, of course, integrated University of Georgia, worked at 'The New Yorker', whatever. And she's someone who I admire her work, then and now, someone who, it's been a thrill to meet some of these people (unclear), the faces towards figures (unclear). Someone like a, you know, Robert Maynard, when I was involved in the Maynard Institute [For Journalism Education] and actually got to know him before he died. His trajectory of not even going to college and making his mark at 'The Post' and his wife, Nancy Hicks Maynard, at 'The New York Times'. I guess a lot of these journalists of color that you see succeeding and think maybe I can do that too. And just being top-notch journalists. These are some people that I just, you see the byline. You know their story a little bit. The journalists you see on television too, make a mark. Of course, the journalists you see on the evening news like a Walter Cronkite. But then you would, I mean I just, the few times minorities are on TV. You know, locally, there was a Melba Tolliver in New York, you know, and she wore a "natural", and she did her own thing. And even though I didn't have really a desire to be a broadcast journalist, you admired that, you know, getting out there. Of course, Ed Bradley, who had such integrity, such marvelous interview questions. I admired him a great deal. Yeah, I think he was an icon to so many. There's a host of them, white and black, but I guess I took note of the black ones because I was trying to see if I could make a living at it. I mean my parents were a little bit anxious about my choice to be a journalist because they didn't see a lot of black journalists out there. So they wanted to make sure I could make a living. Plus, I had, was smart, so I remember I had a doctor who had been a Tuskegee Airman, Dr. McDonald, and I went to him from when I was little. He had no children, and he would always say, you're gonna be a doctor. You're gonna take over my practice. And I probably could have been a doctor. I'm not thinking I'm the most brilliant person in the world, but I did well in math and science. And he was like a journalist? Really? (laughter) And my mother was like, a journalist? Really? You don't wanna be a doctor? You don't wanna be a--I think she really had this idea that I would be a doctor for some reason (laughter). But I think that was because you didn't see--when I started to make a living as a journalist, I think she was very proud and would come to visit me. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here. Story_ID: 57595 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Associated Press, now tell us how this job came about? You graduated in 1975- Speaker 2: Yes, well- Speaker 1: --with a BA [degree] in journalism. Speaker 2: Yeah, and communications. Speaker 1: And communications. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And were there--did you graduate with any special honors or- Speaker 2: Yes, summa cum laude. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Yeah, I graduated with, yeah, I did well in college, too (laughter). And I had had an internship while I was in college. One semester, I got, one of my classes was a--counting as one of my classes was an internship at the Associated Press in New York. And I worked, they hired me afterwards to work on the general desk. Now, in general, they didn't start you off in New York. They would give you a job in a bureau. But they, I don't think they had anything in a bureau at that time. So I did work in New York until a bureau job came, a bureau in Hartford, Connecticut, and then I was, went to work in the bureau in Hartford, Connecticut. Speaker 1: Okay, Hartford is the place that Mark Twain lived and Harriet--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Yes, I've been to- Speaker 1: --[Harriet] Beecher Stowe and--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: --the Mark Twain House. I have been, whenever any would--any time anyone would visit, you'd--I went there more times than I could count 'cause that was the main place. But in New York, besides being an editor on the general desk, I did do occasional stories and interviews. And I did a very memorable one. The first one I did for Associated Press was I interview Mel Blanc, the voice of Bugs Bunny (laughter) and Porky Pig, and it was great because he did all the voices. And he had a little tie pin with Porky Pig on it, and he was amazing. It was great. Isn't that great, to have your first interview be an interview with Mel Blanc? Speaker 1: He was a genius. I remember Mel Blanc. Speaker 2: Yes, and he did all--he talked, I remember he told me an anecdote about how did you come up with the voice of Bugs Bunny? And he said, well, they wanted Bugs Bunny to be kind of a tough guy, and the toughest accents I knew were the Bronx and Brooklyn, so I mixed the two. So to me, he said, Bugs Bunny is a mixture between a Bronx accent and a Brooklyn accent. Isn't that great? (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's- Speaker 2: That's one of the--when you're a journalist, you get to meet people you would never meet. So I got to meet Mel Blanc. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so was that--that was sent all around the country, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it was Associated Press. It was sent all around the country, although I primarily did editing for them. And they wanted me to have the bureau experience. See, New York is so big that it contains so many things. So, but that was at 50 Rock [Rockefeller Center]. I went to work in Rockefeller Center, and I lived in Jersey City [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Now, this is--now, when did you come back to New York to do editing? I guess this- Speaker 2: I just segued right from school to- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to work. I worked, I mean that's the thing. I didn't go home. I went to work, took care of myself, always. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--so you were at the AP [Associated Press] from '75' [1975] to- Speaker 2: To '76' [1976] when the bureau job came open in Hartford [Connecticut]. Speaker 1: All right, so '76' [1976], you're--I'm sorry. You're where in '76' [1976], you go to- Speaker 2: Hartford, Connecticut. Speaker 1: Hartford, okay- Speaker 2: Yeah, to work. Speaker 1: --that's still for AP, right? Speaker 2: For AP, for the Associated Press- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, right. Speaker 2: --for their bureau in Associated--in Hartford, Connecticut. And when you're in a small bureau, you do a little bit of everything. You cobble together stories for members. You do some reporting. And Hartford [Connecticut] also is the capital. So although we had a capital reporter, you do stories when you can. You write longer pieces. Yes. So, and I worked at the--you do broadcast. You work nights, weekends, and it was interesting, and I figured that if you could survive that, working in a bureau for the Associated Press, you could do anything. But it wasn't for me, both for the kind of work it was and for the personalities. I have to say some of them--it's funny because one of--my news editor there, I have since become very good friends with. But at the time, it was just, it was too, it was tight. It was a lot of work. It was a kind of work and, it was, it just wasn't for me. But it was, like I survived it, I did find, but it was, just wasn't for me. It's funny because later (laughter), a few years later, I got two checks from the Associated Press because the women and minorities had sued (laughter) sued them, so I got a little check. The prorated how long you'd worked there, and I got a little check for being black, and a little check for being a woman (laughter). Story_ID: 57596 Speaker 1: That raises a question. How were you treated? I mean did you notice, you know, discrimination as a woman or as a black person and- Speaker 2: I was young, a young black woman, and sometimes when I went out on stories, you know, after I'd set up stories, people would be surprised when they got there and I was black and young. And if you--I looked like a teenager, and I was twenty-one or whatever. And it did startle people, and I don't think my bureau chief was as nurturing. He was an older gentleman from the South. And I'm not gonna ascribe anything to him. I think, you know, because it's not up to me. And I don't know. But I think I was just different for him. And that's it. You know, sometimes, particularly, with older, white men, you don't resemble their daughters or their wives or--and even if, a guy you can talk about sports or whatever with. It's almost like--I've come across this in people throughout my career, early in my career, that it's not like that they're prejudice or anything or they're discriminating, it's just that they haven't really dealt with people like you before professionally in that way. And so it's almost like, sometimes they look at you like, what are you exactly? And I--so it's up to you to make your way. So I think it, like I said, I think being at the Associated Press in Hartford was a good experience in that it taught you how to handle anything that came along. The first time I ever took hockey 'cause it was the 'Hartford Whalers', took, take hockey stories over the phone, that kind of thing. It's, I did a lot of things. But I, I think I realized that maybe the wire service wasn't for me. Story_ID: 57597 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now, did you consider, since you had a radio show in college, I mean did you ever consider doing media more, being, having a radio show or TV show? Speaker 2: I didn't, and I'm not quite sure why. It just didn't--I'm not sure why because now I love radio. I love it, I love to do radio. And I've gotten used to doing TV a little bit. But it wasn't something that appealed to me at that time. I loved print, and I took actually a break from journalism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A brief break from journalism. Speaker 1: So when was that? Speaker 2: In the late '70's [1970s], until '81' [1981]. So maybe '77' [1977] or '78' [1978], till '81' [1981]. And I worked corporate. I worked as a journalist, but corporate. I worked for the Travelers Insurance Company that is based, of course, as a lot of insurance companies were booming then, in Hartford, Connecticut. You had Aetna and you had Travelers and I worked in their corporate communications department. I didn't do releases. I did different things. At one point, I did some ghost writing of speeches for executives, but primarily, I was an assistant editor for their magazine. They put out a magazine called 'Protection' for agents. And it was just like a magazine though. They had stories on products, on news in the insurance industry, and they had feature stories on personalities, which I did, which was like writing feature stories. So I really enjoyed that. And I got to interview people and write really good stories. I interviewed a really interesting client they had, Jessica McClintock, who does the fashion. She was a fashion designer, and she was a client. And I flew out to San Francisco and looked through her, went through her factory and spent time and did an interview about her, her life, her work and her dealings with--you know, you always have to put in a few graphs about, "And the Travelers covers her business". But it was basically a feature story. And because they had a printing facility right next door because they used it to print policies. But they also used it to print the publication. So I got to learn a lot about the printing aspect of, from type to, to get the photos in, to all of that. So it was actually quite interesting. I enjoyed it as a matter of fact. But being in that made me realize how much I missed journalism and news. Story_ID: 57598 Speaker 1: So, and that's when I applied for the editing program for minority journalists at the Maynard Institute [for Journalism Education] and got back into journalism. Speaker 2: Okay, so--well, now was this the first time you had met Robert Maynard? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, it was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, you apply--and this is, I have a picture of the class. It was an amazing experience because, you know, I knew about him, and so I applied for this program that had started, I guess in Columbia [University, New York]. But it's, they had a program for reporters out of Berkley [California], and they had a program that was then based at the University of Arizona in Tucson for editors. And it's for folks who had had some journalism experience, and it was so they could be editors, copy editors, which was the path to editing and management. And that was the focus. The reporting program was more for people who wanted to become ground-level reporters. And this was for people who had been reporters, wanted to become editors and wanted to get on the track to be into management. And it was something that was a boot camp, but you had to apply. I applied for it, and you went out, the finalists, and you took tests and you did interviews. And Nancy Hicks Maynard did some interviews, Steve Monteil (ph.), Bob Webb was the 'Washington Post'. You had these people, you know, sit you on a panel, and I did well in the tests. And when I sat--a lot of, they were questioning me a lot about my commitment to journalism because of the fact that I had left journalism. So I thought I answered well, but I remember talking to my husband, then husband, now on the phone back in Connecticut, saying I don't think I'm gonna get this at all because I don't think they think I'm serious. And I came back, and they told me that I had made it. And it was great, it was great. And you spent this boot camp in Tucson with these other great journalist. And it was all minorities so it was Asian Americans, Hispanic Americans, and now it's an editing program for everyone. So there weren't white in that particular summer. But it was wonderful because we had a group of student reporters from the University of Arizona and we assigned them, and we edited, and we put out a paper called 'Headline', that we acted--we were our own editors of a paper. And we all had different views. And we had the best journalists in the country come out and spend time with us. It was like an eight, nine-week program. We had Eileen Shanahan from the 'New York Times', who was a brilliant, now late, economic journalist come out and talk to us about numbers in stories and how to handle those and how journalist are scared of them, about percentage and economic news and business news. We had Cheryl Eves Butler come out the 'Washington Post', a brilliant layout and make-up editor and talk to us about putting a page together. We had Bob Webb from the 'Washington Post'. We had Bill Connolly from the 'New York Times' who helped found the "Science Times" section, come out and talk to us. And he was great, and I focus on him particularly because it's through him I later worked at the 'New York Times' because he kept in touch with me, and anyway, you had the best of the best. Our director was Steve Monteil, and he was the, our editor, I guess, overall. He was the program director. And I just, my fellow journalists, I learned from, Elaine Ayala. I'm still a dear friend of hers. She was one of the program, student--fellow editors, as myself. And she's in San Antonio [Texas] now. Milford Reed, who's, he's in Minneapolis, I believe now. He was in Louisville [Kentucky] then, Glenn Awl (ph.) who was in the West coast. Now, he's in Louisville [Kentucky]. I still, I still see these people. I still keep in contact with them, Marian Mel Rodriguez, who's in Puerto Rico. I have been there to visit her. She has been here to visit me. She was in Houston at the time. These are great journalists, of all levels. They were at all levels and ages, that I just learned from. It was an intense experience because you're living and working together. I'm away from my family. I'm there. We took a side trip to the Grand Canyon [Arizona] one weekend, but it was great, and it was--Casey Jones, that I knew a little bit because when I was at the AP in Hartford [Connecticut], she was at the Bridgeport [Connecticut] paper. So we would exchange stories and things, so we knew each other from phone. But we got to know each other, and eventually, we worked at the 'Baltimore Sun' together. And then I made my best friend, which was Gail Westerly, who I have a picture with her, of her. She was a student editor and later we also both worked at the 'Baltimore Sun' together. And I was god mom to her son. She died of colon cancer way too young, when she was 40 years old. But these were--it, the Maynard Institute [for Journalism Education] does such wonderful work because it helped me just focus and figure out what was important and what I wanted to do and what I wanted to be. And it gave you, it helped you become confident in your skills. It helped you to become confident in your skills because you're surrounded by all these people who believe in you and who are gonna give you what you need to succeed. And they're gonna be there even after you leave the Maynard program. I went back several times to be a teaching editor at Maynard [Institute for Journalism Education]. I went back several times. It's, it's wonderful, and at that time too, after that, some other programs came along that were diversity skills programs. But at that time, there weren't that many. And so you could, at a certain point, go to many publications or different areas and pick out the minority journalists. And a large percentage of them would have been through some Maynard program, you know, because they had the reporting, the editing and then a management one. So Rob[ert] Maynard left a great, great legacy. He spoke at our graduation. Casey spoke, and she gave a great--every, all the students vote for one of the editors to speak for them. She spoke for us, and then Bob [Robert] Maynard gave a speech, and it was, it was exciting. It was exhilarating. It was chilling. Story_ID: 57599 Speaker 1: Okay, were there participants there from the black newspapers or mostly black reporters or minority reporters from major newspapers? Speaker 2: I think there was a variety of experiences- Speaker 1: I just wondered if anybody was there from say the '[Chicago] Defender', the [Washington] 'Afro-[American]' or- Speaker 2: I don't remember that there was. Speaker 1: --or the 'Courier', or any of those papers? Speaker 2: I don't remember that there was, but there could have been. That's, if I look at the picture--and some of them weren't from sponsoring papers. You were either sponsored or you, they helped you get a job in that they set up interviews. And I was one of the people who went there without a sponsoring paper because I was leaving, I was coming--I had left the AP [Associated Press], and I was coming from corporate communications. So I needed to have a--I went there without a job, basically. And when I was there, I really liked Arizona, and my husband and I had come through a tough winter in Connecticut. We didn't have any kids. So I got a chance to interview with the 'Arizona Daily Star' in Tucson. So we decided to look, to discover a different part of the country. Why not, right, and a part I had not known, both interesting culturally because of the Hispanic culture that was prevalent there. Obviously, Arizona didn't become a state 'til, I don't know, 1917 or something. I don't know, I'm not sure of the date, but- Speaker 1: Do you- Speaker 2: --the Hispanic culture was very prominent there. And the weather, and it was just, it was an adventure. I was at the age where you're still up for an adventure. And as I said, I didn't have a child. That came in Tucson [Arizona], but (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1981? Speaker 2: Yes, I was in the program in 18--1981. Speaker 1: Okay, 1981, okay, so okay, you're the copy editor for the 'Arizona Daily Star'? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I work on the universal desk, but I also did some writing. It was great, and I got to know a little bit more about the culture. I did some, I did some writing for the feature sections primarily. And I did some copy editing and filled in at different times on the features desk, pretty much, and the entertainment desk, met one of my dear friends, Susan Albright, who was an editor there and now in Minneapolis [Minnesota]. She, that's where I met her. You always pick up some great friends, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you remember two '[Arizona Daily] Star' reporters won a Pulitzer Prize in '81' [1981] for a story about the Arizona--University of Arizona football coach, Tony Mason? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was right before I got there. Speaker 1: Okay, that was between, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I knew who they were, and I met them, but they were--that was before I got there. But, yeah, so they always have a Pulitzer Prize-winning paper because they did win a Pulitzer. And I worked with Clark [Hallis], Clark, one of the reporters, his wife, Barbara [Hallis], I worked with her a little bit. She was an editor there, yes. Speaker 1: That's Clark Hallis. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, I--yeah, it was a good paper. It was a Pulitzer [Prize] paper actually. And there was an afternoon 'Gannett' paper, 'The [Tucson] Citizen', the 'Tucson Citizen' [Arizona]. Story_ID: 57600 Speaker 1: Now, what did you think, well, just give me your thoughts about Janet Cook. That was in 1981, Janet Cook, 'Washington Post', internal--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a really, a really great and sad story about Janet Cook and me (laughter). I didn't know Janet Cook, but remember when that happened that you all of a sudden had a lot of stories. And there was one in the 'Wall Street Journal', is the fact that Janet Cook lied, does this mean that there's a problem with Affirmative Action? It became, Janet Cook became a stand-in for all African American journalists, which is ridiculous because you have fabulous of all races and Stephen Glass didn't become a stand-in for all white males, whatever. But I don't know if you--if you recall, that was a lot of the talk. And the same way as later, Jayson Blair became this talk of, there's a problem not with Janet Cook, but with that we're letting in unqualified minorities. So that was happening right about then. And I've written about that because when I went to work for the 'Arizona Daily Star', the copy desk chief, Don Bennett, who is--we became friends, but when he was introducing me to the copy desk--, and my name is Mary Curtis, right? He was introducing me to the copy desk my first day, and he said, "We have a new editor, I want you to meet Mary Cook" (laughter). So I was starting off from behind. And that was the way--yeah, that, and that was a Freudian slip, I'm sure. But- Speaker 1: It indicated he's- Speaker 2: --it revealed something. Speaker 1: --keenly aware of Janet Cook. Speaker 2: Yes, and of the fact that I'm an African American woman, a little interchangeable. So, you know, I do find that's true with black journalist. No matter what your background, when you go in, you do have to prove yourself. You have to prove yourself. Story_ID: 57601 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, of course, that's just--it's just the fact. And I, yeah, I did. I enjoyed it, I made friends. I was a good editor, good copy editor. And when I filled in on features, of course, I had a feel for it, and I did some writing, and I did some reviewing. I did some interviews. I did an interview with, when Roger Wilkins wrote his book, one of his former wives, he wrote about at great details and is a, was an artist in Tucson, Arizona. And I found her, and I interviewed her for a cover story. And that did well. Speaker 1: What was the angle on his former wife? Speaker 2: Oh, it just, it was interesting because he had talked about her, and this woman who was an artist in Tucson [Arizona]who went back to the light and this and that. And, she had been a big part of his personal life, and I just, I found it--you know, when you're reading a book, and then they say something, and your city shows up in it. And I said, I wonder if she's around and what she thinks of her place in this historical man's book. So I went to interview her, and she was a stained-glass artist in, you know, in Arizona. And actually, I'm still in vague touch with her. People I do--when you're a feature reporter, people tend to talk to you and tell you things, and I don't know that you become--it's, you're still this journalist, whatever, but--subject, but sometimes, you kind of become friends. And so I did that. And I really enjoyed it, and, but I have my son there which was also something that will always--it also got me, let, gave me a chance to learn a different culture. The Hispanic culture is very deep there, also Native American culture. There's a reservation not too far, San Xavier Del Bac [Arizona]. We, you could visit--the border was 60 miles away. We went into Nogales [Arizona], the border town. Speaker 1: These are Navajo or- Speaker 2: No, no, it's not Navajo. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we went to the border. Then it would--I'd say that it was easier to cross then in a way than now. It was, you didn't have as much of the border anxiety. So people would go down and just walk across to shop and come back. I think when my mother came out to visit, we went to lunch in Mexico. There was more of that. But it was, you know, how--I enjoy exploring a different culture, and that was very interesting to me. There's a little city within Tucson [Arizona] called South Tucson. That's primarily Mexican American. That's an incorporated city within the city, just, I enjoyed just learning parts of different culture that was different from what I knew. And it was interesting to be in an area where African Americans were a smaller part. It's, you--yes, you had African Americans, particularly since it was a university town, the Wildcats. But it was not a big minority. You were a minority of a minority, which was kind of refreshing in some ways. And then also I got pregnant. I was married first, and my husband moved out and got the job at Pima Community College [Arizona]. And I have my son, Zane, in Tucson [Arizona] Medical Center. So, as I said, Tucson will always--I always loved it. It was a beautifully, relaxed and stunning city, less urban than say a Phoenix [Arizona]. So you got more of a sense of the desert. We lived in the foothills of the Tucson mountains, and I loved it. I, when [Gabrielle] Gabby Giffords was shot, and they had that incident, it was very sad because you hate for a city you loved to become one of those cities where something happens. And like I said, my sons was born there, and I kid because he's a desert rat. Even though we left when he was quite young, he loves the desert. We've visited quite a few times, and I kid him about him eating Mexican food when he was a baby. But it's a place that's close to my heart. Story_ID: 57602 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, what brought you back to the East coast? Speaker 2: Well, part of it was expanding our family. I had a son, and my husband's family's in New York, and my family was in Maryland. And I wanna bring back Bill Connolly that I had met from the 'New York Times'. At that point, he had left the 'Times', and he was the managing editor at the 'Norfolk Virginian Pilot'. And he talked to me about coming back for a job. But at the same time, my hometown paper had called me too, the 'Baltimore Sun'. And they wanted me to come back and work as an editor in the features department. And it was attractive to me because it was my hometown. My mother was still alive. I had a child. It was a good paper, and my husband's family was in New York, and so it was a great time to get back to the East coast. It was a bigger paper too, obviously. But it was that, plus family considerations and professional considerations, all came together. And I loved Tucson [Arizona]. No, there was nothing about it that made me leave, and I liked working there. But it was maybe time to move up to a different paper, a bigger paper, and also a chance to come home, which my mother unexpectedly died in the, within a year or a little more than a year after that. So in retrospect, I'm really happy we came back because my son got a chance to know her a little bit, although he was, you know, not quite three when she died. So, of course, we didn't know that then. But- Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, the--so did you have brothers and sisters in Baltimore [Maryland] too? Speaker 2: Yes, at that time, yeah, at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My--I think both my, everybody was there at that time when he was really little, yeah. We've all scattered since. I still have a brother, a sister there. My one brother [Tony Curtis] moved to Atlanta [Georgia], then deceased. And one sister, Joan, is in Los Angeles [California]. But at that time, and it was great because my sister Janice had three sons, and my--you know, they were cousins, and being my son was an only child, he had a really nice relationship with his cousins. And I remember my older nephew, Calvin, was at Morgan [State University, Maryland], and we lived not too far from there. And he used to come to our house a lot, take care of our son, take him trick-or-treating, things like that. So it's great. Speaker 1: All right, so you were there for, from eighty- Speaker 2: Three [1983]. Speaker 1: '83' [1983] through '85' [1985]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and I was in the features department at the 'Baltimore Sun'. And even though Baltimore was a large minority presence in the city, right before I had gotten there, there were people from the African American community picketing because there weren't very many African Americans that worked at the 'Baltimore Sun'. And when I went to the features department, there--I don't think there were any. And I think there had just been one, William Rhoden, who's now at the 'New York Times', had worked there for a while. And I had known Bill since--when I was an intern at the 'Baltimore African--Afro American' when I was in college, he was working there 'cause he had gone to Morgan [State University, Maryland]. So the world of black journalists is fairly--it's not like it's that small, but you either know something or know someone who knows someone because it's not huge. So- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so, you have most probably (unclear). So I went to work at the '[Baltimore] Sun' as an editor in an area where once again, you're proving yourself. Once again, you're one of the few minorities. But- Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here. Story_ID: 57603 Speaker 1: All right, so--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Unclear) my hometown. Speaker 1: So, I have a note here that says in 1984 is when you joined the National Association of Black Journalists? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's true. Okay. Well, tell us about that and about NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]? Speaker 2: Well, the first convention I went to I think was the one in Atlanta then. And I went with my friend, Gail [Westerly]. I think we roomed together and that's when I--the National Association of Black Journalists was around, but I, that's when I started getting involved with it. And it's a great organization, of course. I enjoy it because it is like these reunions because you have black journalists at places all over the country and different media outlets. And they, when you get together, you might be the only one at yours or one or two at yours, and when you get together, you, if you can just--it's like you exhale because you have a lot of the same experiences. And you can give each other tips on how you deal with certain. And also professional, it gives you a lot of professional development and professional tips. And it's always been about that. I've missed a lot--some of the last few, I have to say, but for a while there, I was going to every one because as you're making your way, particularly, in the beginning of your career, it really is helpful. And, although now, they have a lot of workshops that help career development all through. It's just right now I have other groups I'm also involved with, but I enjoyed going there. As I said, you, for the practical reasons and particular tips, but also for the sense of your home, and- Story_ID: 57604 Speaker 1: Now, this is something I hear from a lot of black journalists, that they really feel, there's a particular kind of loneliness working at a white newspaper, basically, where you just don't have the--they feel, you know, it takes a lot of stamina to, you know, to stay, you know, withstand it, I guess, and you know, that's what I--that's what people keep saying, that it's a lot of pressure (unclear) (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure I'd use the word stamina as much as, you know, you are, you're doing your job, but say, if you're talking about news judgment or how a story is played or you wanna make sure that when you have people of color in the paper, that you--I'm in features. So most of the minorities you would see on the pages are in Metro or news, when they're doing something or is the face of welfare or poor people or--I mean not always. But it's usually news. And to me, I love features because it humanizes people. And you have the universal experiences. We all garden, we all cook, we all go to church. We have these experiences we share, so it's especially important that minorities are represented in stories in the food section, in the feature section, in the faith section, you know, all of these--in the entertainment section, and all of these sections. So you see people doing the same things you do. When you have a home story that is about a minority family in a home, these kinds of things. So you're always trying to make sure that happens, to make sure if you do a feature story, say, on romance, on couples, that there's diversity, and not just diversity of race, but of income level, of geography, so you're not just picking people from some part of the city, certain neighborhoods, of age. So if you have a romance story, maybe older people, and so you're mindful of that. But when you're making that, you're making that case every day in the newsroom, and you are doing your job and trying to make people understand that this is just not an extra to be put in a story, but it makes the story more complete and more accurate. So it's good journalism, and sometimes that's pressure because people are under deadline pressure. People, of course, relate more to people like themselves, so when you are alone in the newspaper or in any media organization, you're it or there's a few of you. So it is, I would say it's not stamina, but it's every day, it's--it takes energy. It takes energy, and I do think, you know, people kid about the parties at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], but part of it is the relaxation of being there and of knowing, when you say--it's, you're talking in a shorthand because when you say, I was trying to convince my editor, and they say, oh, I know, you know (laughter). So it's a meeting, you don't have to explain yourself. You don't have to be anyone but yourself. And I think there's a certain comfort level in that. It's the people, the way, reason people belong to any club. And I think a misnomer when people say, well, we, there's no national organization of white journalists. Well, first of all there're people of every color that belong to NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]. White people do belong to it, Hispanic people, it's, if you believe in the mission of diversity. So it's not an exclusive organization. It's an inclusive organization, just like NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or any of those organizations. It is inclusive. It's about the message, and it's just nice knowing you're with people that, people who, that particular message is important to those people. And so, yeah, I think it is relaxing, and when, that very last night before you come back, there usually is a dance. And there's music and people are dancing, and it is a release of sorts. And I think there's nothing wrong with that. You know, you've worked hard, you're--you know, even at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], you're wearing your business clothes. You never know who you're gonna run into, that give you a future job. You're going to the job fairs. So it's about business and it's about skills development, but it's also about being with folks, you know, who--I like to say it is a shorthand. And it's about catching up with people that you haven't seen for a while because the nature of the business is that you travel to different places. You get a job here or there. So it's saying, oh, my goodness, you know. I haven't seen you. You're working in Detroit [Michigan] now, that kind of thing. So I, it's work and it's therapy (laughter). We all need that, so I agree, I agree. It's, you know, I've never--I don't think that newspapers or media organizations are any more discriminatory or whatever as any part of society. But I do think sometimes we have to emphasize that they are, indeed, a part of society. So it's not as though the people who work there--I do think sometimes journalists think, we don't have those problems because we're more open minded than that. Well, the people are human beings. When you go into the door of whatever organization, you don't drop society's roles. You don't drop any prejudices at the door because you're a journalist. You hope to, and you work at it, but we all bring something to it. So that's a part of it. Story_ID: 57605 Speaker 1: Okay, so it's inevitable that there's a cultural tension, I guess, in a situation like that where there's a black journalist and a majority white newspaper and- Speaker 2: There can be. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There can be, and I don't think it's something like every--it's in the front all the time. That doesn't mean you don't make wonderful friends. But, you know, when I--skipping a little ahead, when I was the features editors at the 'Charlotte Observer', I think we did our first story on Ramadan when I was there because we do have a Muslim population here, Muslim American population. When we started our "faith" section, I wanted to make sure it was inclusive. And when did have a feature story about romance or whatever, about anything, I did insists--sometimes I would see a story and say, where is the diversity? And you'd see the eye rolls, and I would make the point. I'm not asking you to stick on something extra. This is because we want to tell the story of the whole community. And it, coming from me, as the editor, that was a good thing. But, you know, privately there's probably somebody saying, boy, does she wanna stick a black person into everything? Yeah, so, and then sometimes, you'd see a note go out from some reporter or whatever saying, does anybody know a - (laughter) he wanted to say, do you know. Expand your Rolodex, please, because part of it too is, you know, when you're going for experts in a story, if you want an expert from academia, perhaps reach out to someone from a Historically Black College, reach out to a woman, reach out--just to make sure that we're getting all the points of view. And as I said, it's not, I look it as a point of being complete journalists for being fair and telling a story that's accurate because if we only have certain people in certain stories, that is not an accurate story. But when you're saying that to an experienced journalists and you could tell, you're trying to have to convince them, you know, it's tough. Story_ID: 57606 Speaker 1: Okay. What was the most significant, I think thing that happened at the 'Baltimore Sun' when you were there in terms of your career? Speaker 2: Well, I think when I went from the copy desk to being the first travel editor they had--they started a travel section. But they really didn't have a travel staff. So it was mainly freelance. So you were kind of an editor of one. But then I was made an arts and entertainment editor, feature editor for arts and entertainment. So I think that was it, working with different critics, working on entertainment stories, getting back to an area that I felt comfortable with but also I enjoyed a great deal, and, which also led the way for me to go to the New York Times. Bill Connolly had left Norfolk to go back to the [New York] Times, and he called me and said, you think you wanna come to the [New York] Times now? So (laughter). Story_ID: 57607 Speaker 1: Now, this is a big deal. The New York Times, not just because it's the 'New York Times', but arts and entertainment, you're involved in arts and entertainment at the New York Times, right, in shaping- Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear)--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: --the section, I think, or reshaping it? Speaker 2: Well, immediately you go as a copy, I went as a copy editor 'cause I had been a section editor. So I was like whoa, do you want me to come as a copy editor? But they said that's how you get to know the style, and it wouldn't be long before I would do, you know, more things. So I took the copy editing test. I guess you had to, to get on the 'New York Times', which I've, I test well, as you know (laughter). And it was actually good personal timing in my life too because my mom died when I was there. And so we left almost after that. So it was a good time to not be reminded of, to go. And it was the 'New York Times', and my husband's family lives in New York. So all in all, it was good. Yeah, so, to go to the 'New York Times', which is the newspaper I had grown up reading. I had gone up reading the writers there, from reading Janet Maslin and Vincent Canby and people like that, and I was editing them (laughter). And it was, I started working as a copy editor in the arts, features department, the arts sections, the daily arts sections. And fairly soon, I was working weekends. So when you would be an editor on the weekend, that's, it--you were handling things. So if a news story happened that was an arts story that needed to go on page one, you would be handling that. So it has happened, like a David Susskind dies or something like that, or there's some, I think there was this story where a young Midori [Goto], the violinist, got a chance to play a solo at the last minute. And our arts critic did it or I think John Rockwell did it, at the 'New York Times', that's the kind of story that they put on the front page. And you get to handle it because you're working. I worked a lot of late nights too. So I was handling deadline reviews by Anna Kisselgoff in dance, Don Hannahan in classical music. This was big, Frank Rich, I edited his theater reviews often. And they, the people, they were great to me because I did love the arts, and I went and I knew the arts. So I, they knew I could catch things because I was knowledgeable about the subject matter. Also, everybody there was very kind, you know. If you had a story about, that had a foreign name or something, you'd go and ask an editor on the foreign desk. And he was a copy editor, and he was great, and then you realize, some many people, they were so interesting in other ways, that the guy on the foreign desk, Ted Shabad, that was so nice to you, that answered your question about a foreign name, is an expert in geography and had written all these books, yes (laughter). So you were always meeting so many interesting people, and I really enjoyed that. And it happened to be in New York. We lived in suburban New Jersey. As I said, my husband worked in New Jersey, but I spent, I went into New York every day, and often, one day on the weekend, to see things because you did get to buy house seats, and so you got to see--you bought them, but they were great seats. And, you know, whenever something, they say something is sold out, they're really, it's really not sold out. They have some hot (unclear) so you get to go. You get to go to screenings of movies. I remember my son going to screenings of the Disney movies in screening rooms, and things like that. And when we first moved to Charlotte [North Carolina], he was like, do they have screening rooms here? I says, "No, honey, I don't think so." If you go to a screening, you go to the theater, right? You just, and the people, like I said, the critics are nice because they know you enjoy those things. So they're happy to do it. You can talk "dance" with Anna Kisselgoff and if she's not gonna go to a--once she's done her review, she'll give you the tickets, that kind of thing. It was--because they want you to know more about the things too. And I was very good friends with the art critic, Michael Brinson, and he would teach me about things that I didn't know about, certain sculptures. Oh, so and so has a show. So I like to say it was such an education, and as a journalist, I got to work with a lot of great journalists also. And when I first went there, Abe Rosenthal was the editor. That was at the very end of Abe Rosenthal. And then Joe Lelyveld and Max Frankel. And I worked with a great head of the copy desk, Al Segal, who was very demanding, very demanding and a stickler, but very fair. So he treated everybody the same. So if he told you, you wrote a good headline, you took it as fact because it's all about the work. And I've stayed friends with him. I haven't talked to him in a while, but I've stayed friends with him, and his family. So it was, yes, it was a big deal (laughter). And I enjoyed thoroughly, and once you are there, you know, I recall working on some stories where I'd said, you know, this story isn't ready. Let's do some more reporting, and they really listened. They really listened. So it was good, and we did have a few black journalists there that we had a caucus and everything, got to know some--Tom Morgan, the late Tom Morgan and folks like that, worked with him. And that was nice too, that was good too. Speaker 1: So you were there nine years, I believe, right? Speaker 2: Almost nine years, yes. Speaker 1: Almost nine years. Speaker 2: Well, working different jobs. I wasn't always in the entertainment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went over to features and--I mean went over to "living" and worked there for a while, the home section, and edited that. I was the, worked at the "living arts" section in the national edition. When they broke off to have a national edition as the papers did and I was on the original team of about five people that helmed that. So I was the deputy, and then I edited that for a couple of years and "education life". That's the thing. The '[New York] Times' is such a big place that you can work there and have other jobs, and I did. And, but I knew people in every department, knew people in the sports department, took my son to Knicks games, things like that. New York is wonderful. I would have stayed there. For a long time, I had no complaints. Story_ID: 57608 Speaker 1: Well, what--well, this is good, the question is, why didn't you stay? Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting. I was a section editor there, and maybe I could have been a department head one day, maybe not, who knows? But in one week--I did not ever go looking for a job when I was at the 'New York Times'. And usually when you, at the New York Times, you don't get recruited 'cause people figure you're gonna stay at the 'New York Times', but in one week, three different papers recruited me. And one that I was least interested in and hadn't thought much about was the 'Charlotte Observer', and, but it was intriguing. They wanted someone to head their features department. And they asked me to write a critique of all their feature sections and say what I would do to improve them. And I did write a critique, and I came down here and met the editor, Jenny Buckner, managing editor, Frank Barrows. They liked my ideas, and that was when--it was a Knight Ridder paper. It did have a good reputation, and Charlotte [North Carolina] was one of the hot, Southern cities that was up and coming, and they looked at my critique, and that's when the papers had a little more money. And they said, "Why don't you come down here and try to get some of these going? And who can resist someone that says come down here and try to get your vision into fruition. And- Speaker 1: And the salary was bigger, you said? Speaker 2: It was--(simultaneous)- Speaker 1: Or did they offer you more money? Speaker 2: Well, it was, they offered--it wasn't bigger, but it--they made some, they accommodated me well. And also they flew my husband down, Martin [F. Olsen], and it was a package deal, the package deal. And I like to say he did that on his own. He's excellent at what he does. So it wasn't like they threw my husband in. It was, you know, he came down and interviewed separately, and they offered us both jobs. And we decided that if we were gonna make a move like that, we would do it now because just to see a different part of the country. We still had one more adventure in us, I guess. We're adventurous people. We have one adventure. Speaker 1: Now, how old were--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Although my son's a New Yorker. Story_ID: 57609 Speaker 1: How old was your son then? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, he was 11, 12-ish. He went to middle school and high school here. But he is a New Yorker. He, you know, 'cause you grow up, and you grow up rooting for the Yankees and the Knicks, and he went to school with kids of the Giants and it, you know, he loves the arts. He was set. His, he was set in New York. That's, you know, like they say, he was born in Arizona, lived in Baltimore [Maryland] for a while. He was set in New York. He was, those years when you become set, and then lived here. And he liked it here well enough, but he, I--he lives in New York now, and while he's going, finishing Yale [University, Connecticut]. And he loves the art and music. He's comfortable anywhere. He knows people 'cause he knows people from--he has people he knew from when we lived there and when I worked there who he can go to their house at any time. And, but for us, it was different. We, you know, we went to--I'd never--people say, do you have relatives or family in North Carolina? Not really, but we explored the area, and most (unclear)--I mean the paper, we, you know, I started--when I was the editor, we did one of the country's first religion sections called "Faith and Values". We didn't want it to be just about religion, but we wanted it to be about values. We started a garden section. We started an entertainment tab. We expanded the "living" section. We did stories we had never done before. But the features reporter started to own a piece of the front page 'cause I thought, you know, we shouldn't be separate. We wanna be in the news. Any time there was a investigation or a series, we had a piece of it. We won a lot of prizes. I got involved in the Association of Sunday and Features Editors and got on the diversity, was chair of the diversity board there, getting fellowships out. We, it was a lot of good work, and it was a great time. I mean Charlotte [North Carolina] was happening for news. That was when the local theater wanted to put on "Angels in America", and a county commission sued because of the nudity, and then there was an injunction. And we got national press, and so good or ill, you know, Charlotte [North Carolina], you know, the banks were booming. It's a big banking city, culturally, an interesting city. It was a--a lot goes on here. It still does. I mean last year we had the Democratic National Convention. Last week we had or a couple of weeks ago, we had our mayor, Mayor Anthony Fox, being named transportation secretary, nominated and Mel Watt being named to, nominated, you know- Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 57610 Speaker 1: --so, we're--it's a, it seems like every time something happens--but that was when it was really starting. And people were starting to hear about Charlotte even though they were still putting, coma, North Carolina, after it. I think now people just say "Charlotte", and they don't confuse it with Charleston [South Carolina] or Charlottesville [Virginia] (laughter). Then it was starting to really boom. And it was a great time to be a journalist. And McClatchy, I mean Knight Ridder was, you know, the great papers, you know, 'Philadelphia Inquirer' [Pennsylvania], 'San Jose [Mercury News]' [Texas], and that changed, of course. When I was a Neiman Fellow at Harvard [University], I went up working for Knight Ridder, and came back working for McClatchy. That's how it goes. But at that time, it was great. My son did well. We live in a great area, in Myers Park, and he went to Myers Park High School [Charlotte, North Carolina] which is an International Baccalaureate [IB] program, did real well, was a national U.S.A. All-Academic scholar. It was good, and Charlotte [North Carolina] is an interesting city because it is big, and it--but it's livable. It's not wildly expensive. And it's easy to get in and out of. It's a 45-minute plane ride to [Washington] D.C., four-hour drive to Atlanta [Georgia]. You can go to Charleston [South Carolina], you can go to the mountains in Asheville [North Carolina], barely an hour and a half plane to New York. It's very interesting. So, yeah, that's--when I was doing my interview for the Neiman [Foundation Fellowship at Harvard University], you know, and I had one for the Stanford [University] one too , the 'Knight [Fellowship for Professional Journalists'], And the interviews were very different for the fellowships, but one, the one question that was the same was, "So why did you leave the 'New York Times' (laughter). But people do leave and then do different things. And I never look, I never look back in a way. I don't regret things. It's a new adventure. It's a new part of the country to see. I visited, we visited Charleston [South Carolina]. You visit places and, and it gets, like I know a lot of people. My friend from Puerto Rico came to visit here, and she went to a meeting at my son's school with me. And she said, "Nobody there had Southern accents." And I said, "Well, there's so many people from other places, plus, a lot of people in Charlotte [North Carolina]don't." It's a, the cities of North Carolina are very different from more rural areas. And I think people don't get that, you know, the Durham, (unclear) Chapel Hill, Asheville, Greensboro, Charlotte, the cities are quite different. So. Speaker 2: Yeah, Charlotte [North Carolina] seems to be a place where a lot of tech people from all over the world- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --you know, come together. Speaker 1: Yeah, and we also have a really great arts district. We have a great dance company, North Carolina Dance Theater, which is run by Jean Pierre Bonnefoux and Patricia McBride, formerly of New York City Ballet. So someone I used to look at [in] the nose bleed section when I was in New York. I know them. You have the Mint Museum which is a great museum. You have the Harvey Gantt Center for African American Arts and Culture. We have the Tavis Smiley American "I AM" Exhibit. You have the opera, the theater. And you have people like a Harvey Gantt who I've gotten to know who is one of the most amazing people; former mayor here, integrated Clemson University [South Carolina], a part of Civil Rights history. And he's a working architect in Charlotte [North Carolina], part of the first, one of the first integrated architecture firms in the Carolinas. To sit down with him and hear his story is- Speaker 2: I remember his run for the Senate, I guess, against Jesse Helms. Speaker 1: Against Jesse Helms, yeah, telling, you know, he said when the--the 'New York Times' did a story on Barack Obama, and they had a, when he first ran they had a picture of him in law school with a "Gantt for Senate" tee-shirt on in 1990. And when he first met Barack Obama, Harvey said he asked him, you had that tee-shirt on. And he said, "Are you kidding? Everybody in the country wore--they were gonna, they were voting for you." And he almost won. But just to be in meetings with him, to be able to interview him is amazing. So, yeah, it's been great. And then also here, this is where I really started to do much more writing, and had a chance to explore that piece of me. But one thing [about] being at a paper the size of Charlotte [North Carolina], there's really no limit in what you can do because if you're willing to do the work, then you could do the project, you know. It's not as set in stone because there're not as many people or there--at the time, it was a really good time. And I got to work on a lot of interesting projects as an editor, and then as a writer and then to do the Neiman [Foundation Fellowship at Harvard University]. And then when I came back, writing full time, it's, it was great too because as newspapers started to break up, layers of editors were eliminated. But if you had a name, a personality and something like that, a brand, it was much easier to survive post papers. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And- Story_ID: 57611 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the Neiman [Foundation] Fellowship [Harvard University]? This is 2005, right? Speaker 2: 2005, '06' [2006], I went, that- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Neiman [Foundation Fellowship at Harvard University] year. And, well, I, as I said, I had started to do some writing. So I was a writing editor. And besides being an editor, I would also write columns for the feature sections. And it was great. I enjoyed it, and I felt like it was a good time for a transition to do something like a Neiman. And other people I know had done a Neiman, and so I applied for the Neiman and the Stanford [University John S. Knight Fellowship for Professional Journalists]. As I said, I got both, but I went to Harvard [University], and I loved that year. It really worked well. Speaker 1: Well, tell us, what is the Neiman [Foundation] Fellowship [Harvard University] for those young people who are gonna be watching this and wanna know what it is? Speaker 2: It's a mid-career fellowship, one of the oldest, I think the oldest. It started in the '30's [1930s], I believe, the Archibald MacLeish, the poet, was the first curator. They don't call it director. They call it a curator. And it's twelve journalists from this country and twelve from around the world. And you come together for a Harvard [University] academic year, and you get to play. You get to do--usually, you work on a project, but you don't have to. You can take classes in any of the schools. You get, you know, the Harvard [University] I.D. You get to have a variety of activities and lectures. You get to take it all in, and they're the best of the best. And you have a series--you have to write an exhaustive application that includes an autobiography essay, autobiography essay of your life and career. And then you go up and get interviewed by a panel of people for about a half an hour. And you come back and think, what's going on? And then they call you and ask you if you wanna be a Neiman [Foundation] fellow. So that's what I did. But it's great, and you get to, like I say, experience Harvard. I'm not sure if I would have liked to have been a, as an undergraduate. But it was great as a fellow, and you get to be lifelong friends with--I emailed one of the, one of my Neiman [Foundation] fellow fellows, just a couple days ago. We were checking in on each other. You become closer to some than others, but there's people all over the world. We had a Neiman [Foundation] fellow from Gaza [Palestine] and from Tel Aviv [Israel], from South Africa, Cameroon, China, Japan, Canada, South America, Columbia and Brazil as well as journalists from all over this country. So, it was a great experience. Story_ID: 57612 Speaker 1: Do you have a project that you're--I mean did you finish a particular project as a [Harvard University] Neiman [Foundation] fellow? Speaker 2: I did not do a particular project, but I specialized--I took a lot of classes in the [Harvard University] Kennedy School. I liked it. It was adults primarily, and a varied--people from all different countries, very international. And you could have a city council person from Cleveland [Ohio] or whatever. You had people that had been in the military, people who are in the military. I took a couple, many, several classes there, including Michael Acnantieth (ph.) of Canada. He did a class on human rights before he went back to run for office in Canada. I did a piece on religion and public policy in politics with Richard Parker. And it was amazing. You, I did most of the work. You talk with your professor about how much of the work you're gonna do. But obviously, you wanna do the reading, and if there're classes that you can't take, but you are interested in, you sit in. And sometimes you just email the professor. I did that several times because [Harvard University] Neiman [Foundation] fellows are known. So if you email a professor, a famous professor, and say, I can't take your class. Let's have lunch or he'll say, I'll take you to lunch. You're a Neiman [Foundation] fellow. That's a piece. I did quite a bit in the music school. I took a Mozart class in which they played. I took music lessons, and I did quite a bit in the law school. I took Charles Ogletree's seminar on "Race and Justice" which was fabulous. It was small, and it met in the afternoons. He had wonderful guests like John McWhorter. We'd have dinner, John Hope Franklin, which my husband went. He said that was the best we ever, you know, went, 'cause he is John Hope Franklin's lawyer for when he was suing for reparations when his family was burnt out in Tulsa [Oklahoma], in the Tulsa Race Riots. It was, so I did a lot in the law school too. I loved the law school. [Charles] Ogletree (unclear) often says, "You should come back and go to Harvard Law School." "I'm like, oh, it's too late." He says, no, it isn't. And I've since been back to talk at Harvard [University]. I did a panel on elections when they were having a weekend where the guests were Desmond Tutu, Sandra Day O'Connor, and Delores Huerta, who helped found the farmer workers with Cesar Chavez, and this is great, I mean (unclear) (laughter), it's like amazing, right. They have many, many authors there. So I got to, you know, hear politicians, authors, all the speakers. You would look in the, beginning of the week, and look at the calendars and see what you wanted to do. I got to know Skip [Henry Louis] Gates a little, and he was on leave, so I didn't--he was having a medical leave. So I didn't take a class, but then I started to write later for the 'TheRoot.com'. So I know him a little from that. But there were so--I mean I saw everybody from Melvin Van Peebles who came to speak to a--you just--I can't even think of all people I saw 'cause I really took it in. Plus, taking in Boston [Massachusetts], you know. I went to the symphony. I went to the theater. I went to see the Celtics, yeah, and it was great because it was a family affair. My son was in between college and grad school. So he sent a year as a Harvard [University] affiliate which your family members--everybody brings their families, and they can partake in most everything. And he played on a basketball team at the law school with some kids that he had gone to high school with who were at Harvard Law. And, and my husband, because he worked at the '[Charlotte] Observer', he didn't get a stipend, but he was able to take the year off. And he took some classes as well, and also kept in touch with his mother in New York. So it was quite wonderful. And when I went back, I started to write full time, and I had already been writing some series and things, but it became--I was a full-time writer and did some editing- Story_ID: 57613 Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: --and mentoring, but primarily, I wasn't a day-to-day editor as I was before in features. But I can't say enough how much I feel I grew during the [Harvard University] Neiman [Foundation] fellowship. It was just, I really enjoyed it. I also started to write for the Neiman [Foundation Fellowship] 'Watchdog' blog at the time, which they asked, they asked us--they came and said, "If anybody ever wants to write," and I did. I wrote for the 'Neiman Reports', which I still do. I haven't in a while, but do from time to time. It was another outlet, and this year, there's gonna be a seventy-fifth anniversary of the whole [Harvard University] Neiman [Foundation Fellowship] program. I hope to go back up. And we've already been up once, and our class had a reunion. And we have a pretty close class. We have a Facebook page, and we keep in touch, our class. And it's, yeah, it was really fantastic. So I enjoyed it. I love the soundings, when we have to have an evening where we share our life and career with our fellows, and we cook a meal. We do a presentation, and we cook a meal. It's emotionally exhausting, but it's very satisfying. And just talking to Doris Kearns Goodwin at the [John F.] Kennedy [Presidential] Library [Boston, Massachusetts], it's, I can't go, I can't say enough the experiences I had. Speaker 1: Okay- Story_ID: 57614 Speaker 1: So when you came back to the '[Charlotte] Observer' [North Carolina], you came back as a dance critic? Speaker 2: Well, no, no, I didn't come back as a dance critic. I came back as a Metro columnist. Speaker 1: Metro columnist, okay. Speaker 2: The dance critic, I came--that's later, that's right before I left when, as people were leaving papers at that time. They didn't add people. They just added jobs onto what you were doing. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: But, no, I was a full-time writer and got to do two columns a week and work on news stories as well, when something would happen. One column generally was more locally oriented and one of the columns was usually more broad. And it was run on the 'McClatchy Tribune' wire service 'cause they were owned by McClatchy. It had been, they had been on the 'Knight Ridder Tribune', but the McClatchy. So they did appear all over the country, which was great. And some big projects that I particularly worked, I worked on a piece on the fortieth--well, this was, I think may have been before, on the fortieth anniversary of the assassination of John F. Kennedy. And I talked with--there was one of his Secret Service people that lived in Charlotte [North Carolina]. And he was in the stages of Alzheimer's. So I had to tell the story through his wife and children and records and books. And his family really trusted me. I even talked with him a little bit. It was Andy Berger, and did a story on that because it was, they were very close to the Kennedy's and it was, it changed their lives in a way. So it was a really interesting, it ran on the front page, on the anniversary. And the family was very open. And I--that meant a lot because when I first went to do the story, I went to visit his wife, and 'cause he was in a facility. And the kids were there, and she said, if one of objects or if anybody doesn't trust you, the story's off (laughter). But they were quite nice, and so that was great. And I worked on a piece on Confederate heritage groups ['My Rebel Journey'], which was a very regionally-oriented piece that ended up winning the [2004] Thomas Wolfe Award. I was winning of awards nationally at this time. Story_ID: 57615 Speaker 1: So this is a big deal, I mean Thomas Wolfe is a- Speaker 2: The Thomas--yes. Speaker 1: --tremendous (unclear), I mean Thomas--to have your name associated with Thomas Wolfe. Speaker 2: It was pretty interesting. And you almost, don't apply. They just pick the best writing in the state of that year and I, as I said, I was winning a lot of awards at that time, national and award. But this piece was interesting because Confederate heritage groups, people are interested in. And I don't think they realize how different they all are. Some are more for the history, and they wanna put wreaths of graves and things like that. And there are others that, the "League of the South" and so forth, that feel that they--this country went wrong when the South lost because that was the beginning of the moral degradation and all of these things. And they trace a lot of issues back to that. So you go to these different meetings, and you'll walk into a meeting of the "Sons of Confederate Veterans" or whatever, and they'll salute the Confederate flag and sing 'Dixie', and they won't sing the--I asked one, "Where's the American flag?" He said, "Well, you can't serve two masters." And then others are more about, it's about the history, and they march, you know, in the heritage celebrations like when the Huntley submarine is brought up in South Carolina, that kind of thing. And a lot of police officers are very involved in these because they're very involved in the regimentation. So my husband had a joke. When I would go to these meetings, he would say, "Now, you call me in a couple of hours. If I don't hear from you, I'm gonna call the cops." So I came out of the one of the meetings, and I said, "You [don't] need to call the cops. They're all here" (laughter). There're a lot of police officers and former police officers involved in 'em, I found. And I went to a laying of the wreath on graves at Confederate cemetery where the elder women are dressed in the "widow's weeds", you know, the big long wool gowns, and some of these women were older. And it was 90 degrees, and I was, you know, do you want some water, yeah. It's very solemn, and I even talked to a black Confederate re-enactor because there were some black Confederate soldiers and he would go on the reenactments as a Confederate soldier. Speaker 1: Now, this is almost nonsensical 'cause there were no uniformed black Confederates in the- Speaker 2: Well, apparently, a few. Speaker 1: --in the Civil War. Yeah. Speaker 2: A few, and some were going with their masters, and others and who'd served. And he would go and tell their story. And he actually was a former police officer too (laughter). So that, and he was telling me his mixed emotions about when he would go off on the trail with some of them at some of these reenactments. And sometimes, you do get, he would get some cracks and some jokes that he didn't care for. So he was trying to bring the history. So it was a really significant piece, I think, and it had me going into meetings, like I said. But I find that, you know, you also meet some people who work with minorities and others, and they didn't want their names used. They didn't want them, their colleagues to know that they were a big part of this meeting where Abraham Lincoln is being referred to as a tyrant, see. That's another thing. When you go to these meetings, and you realize that in most parts of the country, Abraham Lincoln is this heroic figure, and in some quarters he's thought of as a villain and a tyrant. So that was interesting, both for the story because it got me into places--and people were very open because, in general, people want their story told. So while they, initially, you're a black woman in the Confederate heritage meeting, they might be taken aback. But at a certain point, they're gonna be coming up to you because they want you to tell the story. And I become invisible in that way, and I have my notebook, which is my shield against everything, which is silly, I know. But that's the way I feel. I don't, I disconnect. When people say things, I don't really--I'm there as a journalist. Like I say, I don't have any value to that. Later when you come out, you might think about, wow, they were singing 'Dixie', and they don't salute the American flag. But when you're there--but the aftermath to that was interesting because in the South, a lot of people--the joke is, why don't they talk about the Revolutionary War very much, but they talk about the Civil War a lot, and that's, and they'd say, well, because the Revolutionary War is over, right, and the Civil War isn't. And so, you have people who still talk about it was a matter of state's rights and honor and my relatives fought in it. And there're Confederate heritage groups all over the world. And I heard from all of them after the story ran because I thought it was the reported commentary, it was fair. But some of them objected to some pieces of it, and the way they were portrayed, although I believe it was fair. And- Story_ID: 57616 Speaker 1: What parts did they object to? Do you recall any specific- Speaker 2: Oh, just, you know, I quoted them (laughter), I guess, you know, I guess one gentleman said, "You know, is he a tyrant", you know? Is he a tyrant? Well, anybody can become a tyrant, even Mother Theresa or something like that. I mean they made some interesting comparisons, and I would talk about them. I would talk about the rebel yells and I mean certain things, when you see in the light of day, they just look--they thought because I was saying them that maybe it looked bad. And I was getting some hateful email, and I was getting some really violent email and some sexually violent email. I have never--when you write the Southern cause, you do get that. And I Googled myself and found that there's some Confederate groups and also some hate groups have put my story up with my email saying, write this woman. And you would just click the link, and it would, my email would pop up, so all you had to do was write it in because I was getting floods of them. And I realized what was going on? So I Googled myself and found it. So I do that, I Google myself occasionally anyway now just to be--I got into the habit. And some of the stuff was awful. Now, when you're an African American columnist, and you write about anything, even if it doesn't have to do with race, you'll get great stuff and you'll get horrible stuff from people who see everything through a prism of race. And they will take the opportunity--and I have some bad, I've gotten some terrible things, personally insulting things. But I got some scary things after that story. And I think you talk to any African American columnist--because your name is there, and your picture's there. And some people see that, and they don't think you should have that. I had someone who just went off on a rant about how ugly I was and why do I have my job and that the EEOC and black people are terrible, and why don't I get a job cleaning toilets with the rest of my kind or something. And they just sort of sputtered off into this letter. And you, you just feel a little sad. It doesn't make you mad. But this, you did--it was really violent. And I had talked to some people from the Southern Poverty Law Center, I--that I realized that happened. They had, one woman from there had done some investigations. And they had linked her name to like a, some obscene site, so she was getting upset. I need to stop. It's crazy stuff, and it's not the majority, but you do get some. And I had some raw stuff. I don't even wanna, always put it in the, you know, in the tape here, but it was raw, you know, what they would do to me, what they would like to do to me. And it just, it was disturbing. I don't take any of that personally, but it's not the most pleasant thing. And so that's that. Now, sometimes people criticize you in an email and if it's respectful, but critical, I'll write them back. And usually, they're very nice because they--when people write an email, sometimes they don't realize there's someone on that other side, you know, reading it. And you'll e--and they'll say, "Is all you ever write about the Confederate," this and this. And I'll email and say, "Well, actually, I only did two stories in the last year, but thank you for your comment." And they'll email you back, "Oh, no, I really like your stuff. I didn't mean anything" (laughter). But, so that's, that comes back sometime. But it's--that was a very interesting experience. And one of the most positive experiences I had is, when I did a part of a series of fifty years of the integration, desegregation of Charlotte-Mecklenberg (unclear) Schools and everybody seeing the famous portrait of Dorothy Counts getting spit on and jeered on when she was trying to go into Harding [High School, Charlotte, North Carolina]. That's the famous picture. But I did a piece on the principal Ed Sanders, who was a principal at Central [High School, Charlotte, North Carolina]] when Gus Roberts, a black student, integrated. And even though this principal wasn't--he was from South Carolina. He wasn't the biggest integrationist in the world, but he was the principal of the school. And this was his student. And he did everything to make it easy for him. He told the football team the summer before, if any--you watch out after this kid. If anything goes wrong, you're not gonna have a season. He gave him good teachers. He gave him a homeroom teacher from the North. He walked him that first day. And when some kid threw, knocked his hat off, he said, "Listen, any, you do, or anybody does anything like this, then you won't, you will be expelled, and you won't go to any school in Charlotte," which then, of course, I'm sure their parents, you know--he made it, because basically, it was his job. And I interviewed him, and his wife had just died in a facility, and I interviewed him. And he got a little resurgence of publicity after that and had a media room in his school named for him. He got feted for what he had done, and his--they asked me to speak at the media room thing, and he later died. And his family asked me to sit with the family at the funeral because they said that he was so depressed after his wife had died, but having, being a part of this story helped him and gave him something to live for a little bit. And as a journalist, that's really straddling the line for me, but I do feel it would have been disrespectful. So I did sit with the family at the funeral. And it was quite moving, actually, to be a part of that because he is, I mean to me, his story was basically, you know what, just do your job, just do your job. Speaker 1: And it took a lot of courage for him to just do his job in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, I mean at heart--and he did have threats. And for a while they had police, and his son remembers when he was young. But his son and daughter have been very nice to me. But that's a lesson we can all have. You get the principal who stayed in his office when Dorothy Counts was getting jeered at, he wasn't doing his job. He was doing the easy thing. And his family has since and some of the students have said, you know, he got a raw deal. It was just what was going on, you know, but sometimes history happens. And you're on one side or you're on the other side. Speaker 1: That's right. Story_ID: 57617 Speaker 1: And Ed Sanders was just--and later, they made him the principal of the school, a white school that--and he hired the first black teacher there, B.B. Delaine, I think, who was the son of the Reverend Delaine of the Clarendon County case in South Carolina that was part of the 'Brown v. Board of Education' [1954]. So there's so much Civil Rights history here. But it's, you're right, you know. It, sometimes it takes a lot, but if you just say, "I'm gonna do what I have to do." So he taught me something, but I was--so that was in the '[Charlotte] Observer' too, and then when the South Carolina primaries happened in 2000--started going in 2007, I went to the debate in South Carolina, the first Democratic debate. And I saw on the stage, [President] Barack Obama and [Senator] Hillary Clinton and [Senator] John Edwards and [Governor] Bill Richardson and all these folks, [Senator] Joe Biden, I thought, you know, this is gonna be something. This is gonna be something. So I really hadn't been that involved in politics, but, you know, sometimes you see a story and you gotta grab a hold of it. And you go to that debate and then you go to the Republican debate, and you have to, you need a cheat sheet because they all look the same, you know, well, you know who [Mayor Rudy] Giuliani and [Senator John] McCain and [Governor Mitt] Romney are, but, and you realize how different it's gonna be, and this is gonna be historic. So I just got a hold of that story, tried to make it mine, got the paper's first two interviews with [President] Barack Obama, the only interview with [Senator] Hillary Clinton, followed [Governor] Mike Huckabee around South Carolina, just tried to tell that story, and that--tried to tell that story, tried to tell it. Speaker 2: Now, this is a campaign that North Carolina's favorite son, [Senator] John Edwards, kind of went down and the--he had issues with his marriage and all that got in the press and- Speaker 1: Yeah, although, not at the beginning there. I mean in 2000--the 2008 campaign, remember that famous debate in Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] where [Senator] Hillary Clinton and [President] Barack Obama were going at each other, and their supporters were in front with dueling cards. And [Senator] John Edwards was sort of the peacemaker. Speaker 2: Oh, sure, John Edwards was- Speaker 1: So calm. Speaker 2: --a favorite of a lot of people, you know- Speaker 1: Yeah, and then there were some people who thought, "Well, this isn't gonna be the time for a woman or a minority, that the Democrat--he would be the white guy Democrat that people come back to" because, remember that was the year after [President George W.] Bush where it was such a prime year for a Democrat. So, that's why a lot of people got frustrated when what came out, came out because if he had gotten it, of course, it would have come out, and that would have totally ruined it for it. But, yeah, it was obviously, another great time to be a journalist. Even though North Carolina's primary was late, it actually counted. But I initially covered the--South Carolina is one of the first in the South. So I got to go down there and write columns off of the appearances, see [Presdient] Bill Clinton just hang out and go out around South Carolina with the Republicans and Democrats, watch a Baptist minister bless [Governor] Mike Huckabee and, you know, all of that. It was, I really liked to see the--my piece, my column started to be on the intersection of all of these things, to look at it, and to see the culture piece in the campaigns because what are debates, but political theater? So when you're in a Republican debate and they're talking about torture and all of them are, you know, Romney's, I'm pro-Guantanamo, let's expand it, and, you know, you have [Representative] Tom Tancredo talk about, you know, Jack Ry[an], you know, "Send in the guy from '24'" and [Senator] John McCain says, "You know, we shouldn't torture because it's not about who they are. It's about who we are." And no one applauds, and you realize the only guy against it on the stage is the guy who's been tortured. So that's the story. You know, so it's finding that piece of, looking at it and saying, wow, you know. To watch Oprah [Winfrey] appearing with [President Barack] Obama in South Carolina in a stadium. It was just covering the scene. And I went on to Denver, not for the '[Charlotte] Observer', actually. They didn't send me to the Democratic National Convention. But I got a chance to go and I went and covered for Neiman [Foundation], wouldn't have missed it, went on my own time. That's when the papers were cutting back. I was starting to see the writing on the wall. So, although, you know, it was a great experience. Story_ID: 57618 Speaker 1: Now, [President] Barak Obama won North Carolina in 2008. Speaker 2: Yeah, nobody thought he would. He visited the state like eight times, and nobody--I think the Republicans were caught a little bit napping. And I saw him a lot. The night before the election, he appeared at University of North Carolina at Charlotte, and that was--his grandmother had just died, remember, right before the election. And it had been pouring rain, and then it stopped, but he was talking about what a wonderful woman she was, and how this is the type of person that makes the backbone of America and her going to work every day. And his face was damp, and you wondered, is that the rain, or, no, it's tears. I was, it was a moment. That was the night before the election, he appeared in Charlotte [North Carolina]. And he did win. He won by a whisper, 14,000 votes. He barely won, and in 2012 he barely lost, not--by a little, [Governor Mitt] Romney won by a little more margin, but not--I think North Carolina was one of the five tightest states. It's an interesting state demographically, educationally. So it's a great story. And the good part is, it's a battle ground state, so everybody came here. Everybody comes here to--and I got a chance to interview the First Lady [Michelle Obama] many times, and I have interviewed the President. So it's, the First Lady [Michelle Obama] is a very interesting lady. So she always has women from swing states (laughter). There's always me and the women from Iowa and Ohio. They're very smart politically. I don't think it's because she loves me. I think it's North Carolina that she sees as (unclear). But that's okay. That's the way it goes. And so you can only see what's gonna happen. But, you know, there is life after newspapers too. So, you know, a part of my story is, reinventing yourself, becoming a multi-media journalist and doing the next steps and- Story_ID: 57619 Speaker 1: Now, you made this decision in 2009, right? Speaker 2: I didn't make the decision. I was laid off in 2008. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the, at right around--right before the election. I was, it was the same year as I won four national awards, including the McClatchy President's Award, my piece on the integrated schools was part of the prize of the highest award that McClatchy gives. So I like to say I was, "Someone from McClatchy came to give me the McClatchy President's Award one month, and then the next month I was laid off by McClatchy." I know it was purely financial, you know, that there were--if they could cut a salary, and I understood that. And, but that's okay because, you know, once, I said, "Listen, I just want to be able to write a column and to say good-bye to the folks who have been great." And the next day I was on to the races. It was news when they laid off their only, you know, black, local columnist, and it made the blogs and things. So, which was great because then people knew I was available. So, you know, after that I did a lot of work for 'Essence.org'. I did some stuff for 'Black America' web, did some work. And then by early the next year, one of my former colleagues from the 'New York Times', Melinda Henneberger, was starting 'Politics Daily'. She was the editor of the AOL site, asked me to come on. So I worked for them--I did other things, but I worked for them for two years. I also, locally, some--a news director from the local FOX T.V. affiliate said, come on, you've got a great following. I started doing a local TV spot every week called 'Keeping it Positive', with Mary Curtis, positive news in the community on their morning show, started to, you know, as I said, 'theRoot.com', for the 'Washington Post', NBC's 'theGrio.com'. I do speeches and mainly academic and corporate on what I do, and being your best you, did some commentary on NPR, 'All Things Considered', Michel Martin's Show. And for AOL, that was a couple of years before--well, until 'Politics Daily' folded, but I did a lot of traveling for them in the Southeast, covered the NRA [National Rifle Association] convention when it was here. I covered the first national Tea Party convention in Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Now, this is something that got a lot of attention. Speaker 2: Yes, with [Governor] Sarah Palin and everyone. I seem to cover a lot of conservative groups. I'm thinking that I do, but I covered the NRA [National Rifle Association]. I covered the Tea Party convention in Nashville [Tennessee], which was great. Story_ID: 57620 Speaker 1: Do they recognize you, you know, I mean, you've talked about threats before, but it seems like you have a pretty, you know--I mean a reasonable amount of success discussing, you know, I mean asking questions of people in the Tea Party and- Speaker 2: Well, people are people. I mean when some people said to me, "How can you be with them?" Because they're people. I don't just cover 'em. That's the thing. You know, when you're the journalist in the back of the room with other journalists, that's who you talk with. I don't do that. If I'm at the Tea Party, and they're having breakfast, I'm sitting at the table having breakfast with 'em. They're people, and they have--and if I have a question, I'll ask them. I'll say, "You know, look, you're very much for state's rights. But don't you think that sometimes the federal government has to be involved? Look, if it were state's rights, I couldn't have married my husband. It was a Supreme Court decision that said blacks and white could marry" [Loving v. Virginia, 1967]. Aren't there--and that's taking about from personal freedoms. What do you think about that? They'll go, hum, let me think about that. So they'll also talk about their families, and I have a family. I have, I have invitations to come to stay at these people's homes. I don't take them up on it (laughter) just because I don't stay at people's homes that I cover. But I think it's, you just have to realize everyone's a person, and I think as a journalist, they recognize that in me. I don't do cheap shots or anything like that. I enjoy it. Like I say, I would, I had a drink, you know, I'll go out and have dinner with them and just wanna know what makes 'em tick. "Why did you get in the Tea Party?" What is it you like about 'em, to get to that level, to show the humanity of it. And I think they appreciate it. I mean I've been trashed by some folks on some conservative sites and things who think they--they look at me, and they think they know what I'm about, you know. They don't see a pro-life Catholic which I am or they don't see a gun owner which I am. They don't see these things, but people are much more complicated. I mean I, growing up, taking it back to my childhood, five kids, two parents, boarders and stuff, even at the dinner table, we're not gonna agree with each other, you know. So how do you think if we can't agree with each other in our family, that people in the world walk in lock-step. People are very complicated and nuanced about most every issue. So I think that's why I've had the success. I enjoy covering it. I enjoyed covering it. I mean it's a scene. It's great, you know, someone walking around with a big cardboard picture of Sarah Palin and her son, "Mama Bear and Baby Bear" and telling me how he's followed her all around the country in, and he sounds slightly, you know (laughter). It's grand, it's, and it's taken me, the--since, for the last, over a year, I've been writing for the 'Washington Post' primarily, for their Women's blog sheet of people, working again with Melinda [Henneberg] and they sent me to Mississippi to cover the abortion clinic that was fighting whether it's gonna opened or closed. I like to walk around the neighborhood. "What do you think?" What do you people think that every day, you're trying to sell hamburgers and dresses, and there's people running outside of, you know, with signs, with pictures on 'em, you know? What does that do to a community. I like to try to find these different angles so, if I'm gonna write about a topic in the same way everybody's gonna write about it, then why? So I like to do that. And so that's been interesting. Also, really getting much more involved in different organizations, on boards, doing a lot of mentoring. And one reason I love--I like being a writer, but I love being an editor because I like to mentor. And I still do that. I mean if, "To whom much is given". If I, if I wanna leave this earth, and I don't help anybody, then why was I here, right? So, you know, working with, you know, the Charlotte Area Association of Black Journalists, with the Journalism and Women's Symposium, with Women's Intercultural Exchange, with my church. I'm very active in my church ministries. You know, you--both in journalism and in life, you have to get out there and try to make a difference and, but part of it, like I said is, people are people, you know. I was sick a while back, and one of the--this woman at my church who's so politically conservative, she thinks Rush Limbaugh is god, but she brought me homemade soup every week, you know, that kind of thing. You know, people are complicated. Yeah, and my own family's complicated, but you don't want the personal stuff about my husband and son 'cause that's a whole different six hours (laughter). Story_ID: 57621 Speaker 1: Now, this is a good time I guess to ask this question. And you've kind of explained it on some level, but what is your journalistic philosophy? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I do think that journalism, a free press is the cornerstone of a democracy. And that sounds incredibly corny, and I think it is incredibly true. You need journalist to shed the light there, and even people who say they hate the media, they actually--they like when, you know, when there is an expose that shows our veterans aren't getting the care they need at Walter Reed [Medical Center] or something like that, that--journalist are doing a service, and they like those things. They like watchdog journalism. They like journalism that's helpful, that's gonna teach them how to cook a meal or decorate their home or find the help they need, the psychological help they need or give them information about some medical condition they have. I think it is the cornerstone of a democracy. And I really believe strongly in a democracy, and in America. I do love our country. I'm very critical of some things, but that, to me, is a reason, I think, that a journalist is noble, even though, as I said, it's come in for its fair share of knocks. I have been honored to be a part of it, and a part of shedding light on the diversity that is America in every way. I think that's an important piece of my philosophy. I think we need to be fair, complete, accurate, honest and to do our jobs well. And that's my philosophy. That's my piece of it. I do feel growing up and seeing when I was younger that people like myself, that we were not a part of the story--America's story as told by media. It made a huge impression on me. And I have no bone about that being a big part of my mission, to be a part of telling that story in a complete and accurate way. I want to do something that would make my parents proud, and that would make them feel that their sacrifices were worth it in some way, both in my professional and personal life. I don't really separate them. And I guess that's my philosophy of life and journalism. And I try to do well and do good, and I think that's what I believe in. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here. Story_ID: 57622 Speaker 1: All right, now, we always ask this question too, which is easier to ask 'cause I don't have to think on this one. But what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think that after the Civil Rights battles, particularly, of the '60's [1960s], that so many people thought a lot of things had been won, and it was done. I think after [President] Barack Obama was elected President, a lot of people thought that was the fulfillment of Dr. [Martin Luther] King's dream, although when I heard Congressman John Lewis speak not too long ago here, he says, he tells people- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry, can you take that again from the top, the recorder didn't start. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I'll ask the question again. Are we ready? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think in the 19--after the Civil Rights battles of the 1960s, so many African Americans felt that the battle had been won, a certain battle for rights. I think after 2008 when [President] Barack Obama was elected President, that even more people felt, well, this is the fulfillment of [Martin Luther] King's dream. But as Congressman John Lewis of Georgia said when I saw him just a few weeks ago at a ceremony at Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina] said, you know, "When people ask me about that, I said, it's not the fulfillment, it's a down payment." And he should know since he was on the front lines. I think when you look at some of the voter I.D. legislation that's been up and some of the other push back, my fear is that people have felt that the war or the Civil Rights wars, and the fight for rights is over without seeing that it is a continuing struggle and that there will be pushback. And you will always need to assert your rights and responsibilities in America. So in covering things, I have seen that, that certain frustration, like, well what's next? What do we have to do next? And just to have that fire. What concerns me also is the commitment of young people coming up to take advantage of the things that have been won, the opportunity for education and achievement. And in some ways it's tougher because we live in a country where economic opportunities seems a little tighter. So people will be hunkering in and looking after their own in many ways. And there's been a lot written on that. But just to take advantage of the opportunities that are out there, to not get frustrated even when it's gonna be a little bit more difficult. You will have a more difficult time than others who start off ahead in the race. So that is something that concerns me because we need to have in this global, competitive economy, a great foundation of learning and respect and taking advantage of every opportunity. I do see hope because I do meet so many young people as I mentor and go around to colleges, that are doing so much good work. I am hopeful because I see so many young people, young minority people who are entrepreneurs, who have realized that they're gonna have to make their own opportunity. So besides working for corporations and other places, I know so many people who have their own thing or their own websites, their own companies, their own things that they are doing as young entrepreneurs, and they are helping that next generation to come up. So that, I find very hopeful. And that's something that is a hope as we go ahead. And I just think that as African Americans, we have to know our own history. I think what you're doing is great because we have to know the historical figures that have come before us. And we have to respect them and learn from them and build on what they have done so what they have done is not in vain. So that is both a hope and concern, as we go forward. African Americans have such an important in the building and development of this country, of being--it's moral conscious in some ways. And I think we have to recognize that, not just as African American, but everybody--everybody has to. Everybody in the world, everybody in America has to make sure that we don't forget any of that and we build on it and know that the blood and sweat, tears, the hopes, joys, concerns of African Americans are just intertwined in what America is and what America can and should be. So. Story_ID: 57623 Speaker 1: Okay, one thing I neglected to ask you about, well, what's--it's not neglect so much. But you had a chance to interview, and you did interview Franklin McCain who was part of the original group of students that sat in from North Carolina A[griculture] and T[echinical State University] in 1960, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, who lives in Charlotte [North Carlina]. He's a retired chemist. And he was one of the original. And I interviewed him for 'TheRoot[.com]', and it was, he was one of those people you interview or you're around, like a [Reverend] John Lewis, where they're a--you feel like there's an aura, you know. When you talk to a John Lewis, and he's talking, and you realize despite all he went through, being a teenager and, you know, getting beat up and walking across the bridge [Edmund Pettus Bridge], that he has such a generosity of spirit, even though he has a passion that the fight is not over. And Franklin McCain is that same way when you talk with him, and he talks about just sitting around in his dorm room with the other guys. And they're complaining about this or that or their parents won't do this or that. And then they've had this realization, "Our parents have sacrificed so that we are here as college students, sitting around at North Carolina A and T complaining. What are we going to do?" And just the, sitting there, and first of all, knowing that these folks aren't that old. When people think of history and they say, oh, that long? These guys, that wasn't that long ago that they did these things that helped us all. But just the description of going back day-after-day and sitting there and yes, that people threw things and people dumped things, and, but then talking about the little old white lady who came over to lean over and he says, "What are they gonna say?" And she says, "You all should have done this a long time ago." You're great, you know, just getting that encouragement. And hearing these little stories, and to see what he has made of his life. All these people have accomplished so much, and then living to go back to Greensboro on the site of the museum in the old Woolworths, and knowing how much I owe this person, who is just this approachable man, who did so much, and realizing that it did start with a bunch of college students just talking in the dorm room, and that if--the ordinary people can do extraordinary things, and become extraordinary people. And it was an honor and a pleasure and the, but he's such a part of history and knowing how much we owe someone like that. But I loved hearing the little stories, like I said, about, you know, the day-to-day going back, and you realize, you're eighteen, nineteen. You're kind of scared. You don't know what you're doing. You think it's important, but, oh, gosh, if you get arrested, what are your parents gonna think because they sent you to college. They didn't send you to be arrested, just to, you know, to put it back in that time and seeing it not as, from these years, knowing what good it was, but seeing how scary it was at that time, but how he has really survived and flourished and, and become a part of history. And he's living right here in Charlotte [North Carolina], so I've seen him from time to time, and also his son. Story_ID: 57624 Speaker 1: Okay, now, speaking also in the vein of history, you're a member of the Monroe Trotter Group, which is named for a great black journalist, Monroe Trotter, the 'Boston Guardian'. So what was, what's the purpose of the Trotter Group? Speaker 2: Well, the Trotter Group is a group of African American columnists, and we meet and it's--because, even though we don't walk in lockstep, and there're people of every opinion about everything in the group, just knowing that we are walking in the footsteps of people like Trotter, like Ida B. Wells, people who mix the truth of journalism with the crusade of showing what's going on in this country. And I think it's always good to keep that in mind, also knowing there aren't that many African American columnists still in the country. And we have to, we touch base with each other to make sure that we are getting access to newsmakers, that they realize our concerns are important, and they need to speak to us because we are a voice for so many people, and we have a voice, and we reach a lot of people. So that's good. I mean we, you talk--we have to talk to people. It's a black President, but we talk to people in the administration. Oh, you know, you need to talk with us too. There are concerns and to keep those connections. And it's always better when you have a group. So we, we have met once a year. We, I haven't met, we haven't met in a bit, but it's a great support group of having these columnist from around the country. And I've appreciated being a piece of it. Speaker 1: Okay, and, you know, you put all these groups together, they're all kind of necessary for you to, you know, NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], the Neiman [Foundation] Group, the- Speaker 2: Yes, and the Journalism in Women's Symposium which is women of all, a diverse group of women though, to talk about issues. And that's been great. I'm on the board, gonna be rotating off the board. And that's (unclear) we meet at the Gloria Steinem. That's when I met her again, and we hashed out our differences over wine (laughter), of [President] Barack Obama and [Senator] Hillary Clinton, and Oprah [Winfrey] and all of that. And it is great, you know, the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], and having these groups. But I do, like I said, it's a way to mentor, and I learn things too. It's all not just about mentoring. With all the multimedia and so forth, I have learned so much from young journalists. I could learn a lot. So, but what I have to offer is there too. That's a part of it. I realize I don't, I'm not great at everything, but I'm really good at some things so I can offer that and learn from other people. So I do enjoy being a part of all these groups, though sometimes it can be get overwhelming a bit, but, and I have some of my arts groups in there too. I still love the arts, and I, I still do some arts work. I interview--you talk about being, dance is something I've loved and was a dance writer for a while. And I interviewed choreographers on stage for the 'North Carolina Dance Theater', so I got to meet the Dwight Rhoden's, great African American choreographer, head of Complexions Company [New York] with Desmond Richardson, formerly of [Alvin] Ailey [Dancers]. I got a chance to interview him on the stage of the theater here. I mean what other, what kind of great job is that, right? So I love mixing all of my different interests and- Story_ID: 57625 Speaker 1: Now, have you ever covered the Black Arts Festival in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], the-- Speaker 2: No, I haven't. Speaker 1: --Black Theater festival? Speaker 2: I haven't. I would like to. I know about it. I would like to. But, yeah, I did interview Dr. John Fleming who is one of the curators with Tavis Smiley, "The America I AM" exhibit. I did it for the, a program at the Harvey B. Gantt Center for African American Arts and Culture. I love doing that, I love moderating the conversations. I did one in the city here at Spirit Square for Isabel Wilkerson, my former colleague at the 'New York Times', on her book, '[The] Warmth of Other Suns[: The Epic Story of America's Great Migration]'. I did an introduction and moderated the Q and A. I really like that kind of thing. Story_ID: 57626 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do over again if you could change it? Speaker 2: Probably, but I don't really dwell on it, probably, probably. I don't, yeah--whether it's looking in multimedia earlier or whatever. But I, I'm a kind of person that lives in the present and the future or the present really in trying to look and see what I can do. So I really don't think about it. I look at even things, mistakes I have made as lessons, to try to learn and do better. And that's what I try to do. And I know this is professional, but, you know, I see raising a son who is a person who believes in social justice and community and is a loving person and wants to contribute to society, is probably the greatest accomplishment, no doubt. Speaker 1: Now, looking back again at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Ask me in 10 years, right, 'cause I still have, I still have some important things to do, right, right? (Laughter) I don't think about legacy that much. Maybe that's part of me being the observer, and not thinking that I'm the one at the center of things. But, you know, just being a good person or trying to be a good person that gave back and an honest and open broker of truth, of--as I can find it. I guess that would be a legacy, but--and my son, you know, to see what he does. But I have to say I don't think about legacy a lot. I think other people will decide that if they decide it at all. You'd like to think you leave some mark, but that's usually in the people that you've touched in any way, helped or affected in any way. That's, I suppose, your legacy. Story_ID: 57627 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I know you've talked about your family, but you wanna--now, your son's in school, in graduate school at Yale [University]? Speaker 2: Yeah, he's getting his PhD in History, History of Social Movements. He did his undergraduate thesis, book, on the "Rise and Fall of Progressive and Socialist Politics at the Turn of the Last Century", the 'L[os].A[ngeles]. Times' bombing and the McNamara Brothers and Clarence Darrow, and right now, he's looking at urban housing policy in the second half of the twentieth century with an emphasis on Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]and stuff that was going on there quite a bit wise. He's a historian. He's a thinker, interesting person, good sense of humor, just like my dad (laughter). And I'm sorry they could never meet, great tragedy that my father died before he met him. They would have been great friends. And, we'll see. I told him, that his perfect job when he finishes grad school--he's just a couple of chapters in his dissertation away at Yale [University], but it would be something that combined culture and community activism. And that would be great if he could get it. Although with being a community organizer with one white parent and one black parent, there's no pressure, right (laughter)? Well, no, I think--well, [President] Barack Obama is (unclear) generous, so it's not, no pressure on him. But he, he's a student of history, and I love to talk with him because whenever something comes up, he'll remind me about something historical, that nothing's new. And it's always happened, and the last time I saw him was this past weekend when I was in New York doing something on MSNBC, and I was able to touch base with him. He's helping take care of his grand mom, my husband's mom. And he stopped to take a picture of some union workers unite thing on a side of a building. And he said, you wouldn't see that in Charlotte (laughter). I was like okay, enough. But he's a very, you know, interested in gentrification and issues of unemployment in the African American community. And he did Hurricane Sandy relief. He worked to get, to help get medicine and supplies for the elderly people trapped in apartments without power in lower Manhattan [New York]. So I think that he's on his way. I like to say he'll never make a million dollars, but he'll do just fine. And my husband's great, he's great. We've been married forever, and he's very supportive, sometimes a little frustrated when, like this past two weekends, I wasn't, I was in California for one of them and New York for the other on business both times. But he understands. He goes out with me a little bit, but he's, he likes to work on projects and things. So I guess it works (laughter). Story_ID: 57628 Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you think you'll stay in [North] Carolina? Speaker 2: I don't know. I have no idea. Who knows, who knows what the future will bring? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like I say when they called me about this, I said, does this mean I'm dead 'cause I thought, I'm thinking I have a lot to go. But I think I'll be going until whenever. I like the Carolinas. It's a great news town. We have, what, [Representative] Mark Sanford to the south of us, and a legislature that's doing a lot of stuff to the North of us right now, up in Raleigh [North Carolina]. But you don't know. If a great opportunity came up, and it was half way around the world, would I take it? Who knows? I'd have to think about it. And I love New York also, so we'll see what happens. We'll see what the future brings. There's always news, always something going on, and it'll be interesting to see what this next political cycle will bring, but- Speaker 1: Okay, do you have an ideal position in your mind, what you would want to do if you could do anything you wanted? Speaker 2: Not really, but I like the fact that being able to combine different things. The one thing of being on your own that's bad is that you are doing a lot of things, but the one thing that's good is that you're doing a lot of things. So I like the combination of speaking and one thing leads to another. And my work on local TV, has helped with the speaking, has helped me with appearances on radio and TV. The blogging is interesting for different venues. It gives me a chance to do reporting and commentary. So I do like the combination. So I guess a job that would combine some of all of those things. Or maybe I just wanna act (laughter). I had my acting debut locally here. It's like, oh, that was fun too. I always like a different experience. I think the older you get, or for me, when I was younger, I was so much more conscious of wanting to be perfect, of not wanting to make mistakes, of wanting to present an image of something. And as I've gotten older, I don't mind that as much. I don't mind pushing myself out and maybe sometimes, you know, not doing well or doing something, it's learning from it or trying something totally different. I think that, I was talking about acting, and somebody said, "Oh, that must have taken a lot of nerve or you got"--I said, "Not really." You just do it, and you do it. And it was fun, so I think I've become a lot looser and less rigid about life and about experiences since I've gotten older, oddly enough, because I feel like, what do you have to lose? Story_ID: 57629 Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: You've gotten a lot, I think. I feel like I've been here all day but (laughter), ripped me there. I can't think of it--were you able to peruse the Neiman [Foundation Fellowship] sounding piece 'cause I kind of put my whole life evolved in there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. I've even been on a game show. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Did you see that? Speaker 1: Which one, which one? I did see- Speaker 2: 'Jeopardy'. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Yeah, you took me--yeah, I took the test. I did it. I had been sick, and I was just looking at the show, and to kind of get my brain gear. And they were having a testing, 'cause they only take a couple hundred out of thousands or whatever, in Atlanta [Georgia]. I said, well, I'll take it, and I'll write about how I failed the Jeopardy test. And I passed it with flying colors, did a little thing, and they flew me out there. I came in second place. I knew all the questions, but it was the buzzer. But it was fun. I wrote about it. It was of those, try anything, things. But I guess I've had a lot of those in my life. And I just, sometimes I just think I'm just this girl from West Baltimore [Maryland]. And I can't believe it, you know, that there're some things I want to have done, but I should dwell on what I've done and where I've traveled, and just the experiences I've had and to have a, you know, a long-term marriage and a child and have some professional recognition and success. And I feel, heck, I felt when I got a job at the 'New York Times', I was thinking here, "I'm from West Baltimore [Maryland]", so, you know, that, that's been--but I'm still a, you know, the girl from West Baltimore, from where they filmed 'The Wire' (laughter). So I feel blessed and I feel loved and lucky, but I feel there's still so much to do that, you know, there'll never be enough time, but I guess that's something we all can say. I've had a lot of time so far. Story_ID: 57630 Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Speaker 2: Oh-uh. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: It's not like I knew this wasn't coming, but that is a tough question (laughter). I would like to be remembered as a good and loving friend and neighbor and parent and child and as someone who left the world better than I found it. And I think that's pretty much it, I think, and I contributed to this world in ways, both of accomplishment, but of helping others. I think, I want people to think that I was a positive person, and that I brought positive energy into their lives. And when they remember me, I want them to smile and think of a good story and be able to share that in their heads and feel positive that they knew me, and I think that would be a good thing, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Story_ID: 57631 Speaker 1: (PHOTOS) OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Tell us about this photograph. Speaker 2: This is my mom with the four youngest kids, Evelyn C. Curtis. She's holding me, Mary, and she's outside our church, St. Pius the Fifth in Baltimore [Maryland]. The little, the one from left to right is me in my mom's arms, my mother Evelyn Curtis, my sister, Janice, my sister, Joan, and my brother, Douglas Anthony. Speaker 1: This is when I went to Harvard [University] after my Neiman [Foundation Fellowship], probably, I think it was in 2008, to speak in a forum at the Charles Hamilton Houston Institute for Race and Justice, run by Professor Charles Ogletree of Harvard [University]. I'm with Delores Huerta who was a cofounder of the United Farm Workers with Cesar Chavez. She was getting an award, and that's me. Speaker 2: That's my mother, Evelyn C. Curtis. Speaker 1: That's my niece, is the adult at right, Carrie Curtis Young, and her husband, Wayne D. Young, and their son, Lucien (ph.). She is the oldest daughter--she is daughter of my oldest brother, Thomas. Speaker 2: This is my high school graduation picture from Seton High School in Baltimore, Maryland, 1971. Speaker 1: And that's my mother, Evelyn C. Curtis, and me. It was taken in September, I believe that would have been 1985. It was weeks, it was for my birthday, and it was weeks before she died, about two weeks, three weeks before she died. Speaker 2: That's my college graduation picture from Fordham University, 1975. Speaker 1: That's a picture with Michelle Obama. It was the day after her speech at the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado. I interviewed her. Speaker 2: This is a picture from a newspaper of my parents at their wedding in 1939, Thomas and Evelyn Curtis. Speaker 1: This is my favorite picture of my parents when they were engaged, Thomas and Evelyn Curtis at a picnic. Speaker 2: This is my picture with [Presdient] Barack Obama when he was running for President, first time. Speaker 1: That's a picture with my husband, Martin Olsen in San Francisco, where we went for our 25th wedding anniversary celebration. Speaker 2: This is a picture with my son, Zane, Z-A-N-E, Curtis-Olson, C-U-R-T-I-S hyphen, O-L-S-E-N when we were in a production of 'The Nutcracker'. I was a celebrity guest, so called, at the North Carolina Dance Theater. My husband's name is Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N, Olsen, O-L-S-E-N. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son Zane as a baby with his cousin, Barry, B-A-R-R-Y, Thompson, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N, now deceased in Baltimore [Maryland]. It's the son of my sister, Janice. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me, Mary C. Curtis, as a child on the back porch of our Dolphin Street row house in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: This is a picture with my son, Zane, when he was young, and we visited Paris. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my best friend, Gail Westry, G-A-I-L, W-E-S-T-R-Y, a fellow journalist, who's now deceased, and her son, at the time, my god son, Desmond, D-E-S-M-O-N-D. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my parents, Thomas and Evelyn Curtis, in our kitchen at Dolphin Street [Baltimore, Maryland]. He had just come back from one of his waiting jobs, which is why he's dressed formally. She would wait up for him. These are a picture of my, actually, from left it's Evelyn Curtis who is my aunt. She's married to my Uncle Carroll, C-A-R-R-O-L-L Curtis, is my father's brother. You can see the resemblance. So it's Evelyn Curtis, Carroll Curtis, Thomas Curtis, and my mother, Evelyn Curtis. They both married women named Evelyn, E-V-E-L-Y-N. They looked a little alike (unclear). Speaker 2: This is a picture of my--okay, my brother, from left, this is before I was born, my brother, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, as a child, my mother, Evelyn, her mother and my namesake, Mamie, or Mary Cecelia Thomas, my sister, Joan in my father's arms, my father, Thomas, and my brother, Douglas Anthony. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son, Zane Curtis Olsen, Z-A-N-E, C-U-R-T-I-S hyphen, O-L-S-E-N and President George W. Bush, when he, when my son was a President's scholar. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wedding day with my mother, Evelyn, my husband, Martin Olsen, me and my brother, Tony, I'm sorry, my--Douglas Anthony. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wedding day with my sister, Joan, J-O-A-N, my mother, me, and my sister, J-A-N-I--Janice, J-A-N-I-C-E. Speaker 2: This is a picture on my wedding day of my father walking me down the aisle at St. Pius the Fifth Catholic Church. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when I was about three years old. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my husband, Martin, my son, Zane and I. Speaker 1: This is a wedding picture with Martin and me in 1976. Speaker 2: This is a picture when I was junior model (laughter) at Hutzler's Department Store in Baltimore. I don't know the other girls' names. They're- Speaker 1: Are you the first one, or do you think, or was there someone else before you? Speaker 2: What? Black? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I don't, I'm not sure, but there weren't many. Speaker 1: This is a picture of the graduating class at the Maynard [Institute] Program in 1981. Speaker 2: This is a picture when I was a college intern, a journal--reporting intern at 'New York News Day', or at 'News Day'. It was in Long Island [New York], actually. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of the front page of my high school newspaper, 'The Setonia' when I was named editor. Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: And I will send the others 'cause I have my grandfather and--is that a goodly- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, that's great. Speaker 1: And you can choose which, you know, if some are redundant of the wedding pictures, you know. I like the one of my father walking me down the aisle, just because it's my-..