 Story_ID: 4894 Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton. And I am the interviewer, and Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer. And today's date is Monday, June 14th [2004]. And this interview is taking place at 14009 New Mall Lane in Silver Spring, Maryland. And if you would, please, tell us the date and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born on May 26, 1937 in Weldon, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And could you please tell us your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, currently I am an educator, I'm the Chancellor of the New York College of Health Professions in Syosset, New York. I retire from that position in August, and I'll return to my professorship of social sciences at the New York Institute of Technology in Old Westbury, New York. I am also in the pract--a practicing attorney, with a law practice in North Carolina. Story_ID: 4895 Speaker 1: Could you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: Broccoli. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Well, I like all four seasons because I like the diversity. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I don't vacation very well, so I really don't have a, a favorite vacation. I've traveled all over the world, and I like to travel, but when I vacation, I write. So, so long as it's a place that's quiet and I can spend time inside myself, it's fine. But I don't have a--I'm not bound by any geography of any kind. Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one? Speaker 2: Yes, I have a lot of those. Speaker 1: Could you share with us your favorite? Speaker 2: Well, my favorite one is the one that my father [King Virgil Cheek, Sr.] hung across our door when I was a little boy that came from the book of Ecclesiastes [Eccles. 9:10], "Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might." Story_ID: 4896 Speaker 1: Share with us a little bit about your mother. Could you tell us her name, where she grew up, her background, that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother is Lee Ella Williams Cheek. She was born in North Carolina. That's where she grew up. She was a school teacher, and later became an insurance broker. As a matter of fact, she was the first licensed black, female insurance broker in North Carolina. And she grew up in the eastern part of North Carolina, and moved to the middle part, to Greensboro [North Carolina] in 1940. That's when my family moved from the Weldon area to, to Greensboro. That was in 1940. And it was in that particular period that she became an insurance broker. It was a very satisfying occupation for her. It gave her an opportunity to meet a lot of people. And it also exposed us as well. Speaker 1: And can you--did she ever share any stories with you about her growing up, how she grew up? Speaker 2: Well, we did. We, we have a closely-knit family. And most of the stories that she shared really took place during the [Great] Depression, how the Depression as an oppressive time brought her family together and caused them to understand the meaning of sharing. My mother also grew up in a world--but so did we, that taught us how to be self sufficient. So we learned a lot about that as she shared her childhood. And she even taught us the skills she learned during her childhood, canning, which is an art that has disappeared, and quilting and a lot of those other skills that, that our forbearers used for their own survival. But basically, they were stories of a very closely-knit and caring family that brought them together and nurtured their core values. And there were many of those. Story_ID: 4897 Speaker 1: And what about your father? What can you--can you tell us a little bit about your father, what his name was, where he grew up, that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Sure, sure. I was named after my father. My father was King Virgil Cheek, Sr., born in Halifax, North Carolina, the eastern part of North Carolina, and moved with my family to, to the middle part of North Carolina, to Greensboro in the '40's [1940s]. He was a Baptist minister, but the, the real problem was that he was a very proud person who really wanted to care for his family in ways that being the minister of a small Baptist church would not allow. So that the ministry was a side profession for him even though it represented a commitment. But he chose to earn his living in a way that he could produce money for himself to provide for his family. So he worked with, he worked with and retired from the, the Railway Express Agency where he spent most of his working years. So he was both a minister on one hand and a, and a laborer with the Railway Express Agency, and he retired in the, in the early '60's [1960s]. Speaker 1: Did he ever share any stories with you about his growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, the same kind of stories. We were--as I indicated, we were a very closely-knit family. We knew his family well, and because geog-geographically, we were, we were close together. But the, the same kind of experiences. He, he used stories to really teach us the, the ethics of work. And, and I think it was the work ethic that he delivered to us that was really our greatest gift, a, a gift of, of a destiny of service. And so most of his stories were, were really dedicated around lessons, around teaching us the, the lessons of life and, and why God put us here. And basically, that was to provide service to others. And, and that was his legacy, that, that came from his stories. But there were many. Speaker 1: Now, just going back to your mother for a second. Your mother was also an elementary school teacher? Speaker 2: She was an elementary school teacher when we lived in Weldon, North Carolina. Speaker 1: And then she moved into the insurance industry? Speaker 2: She moved into the insurance industry. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about how you would describe your father? How would you describe him? Speaker 2: Very jovial and comical. Mother was very serious, but my, my father laughed at a lot of the, what I call the ridiculous dimensions of the world. He would not let anything oppress him or depress him. So that laughter was his, was his best medicine. He told jokes, and he was really loved by everybody. He was that kind of personality. And, and he sort of gave a lot of that to us. And he enjoyed life. Story_ID: 4898 Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors? Do you know if they were free or if they were slaves? How far back can you trace your ancestry? Speaker 2: Well, we have a, we have a family reunion history that formally goes back to 1978, even though reunions in our family took place all the time because we--relatives would always get together. And we can trace our ancestry in a formal way back to the, to the 1870s, and, and it was a--on both sides, it was a mixed ancestry. On my mother's [Lee Ella Williams Cheek] side, it was a, you know, it was a byproduct of what we commonly refer to as assassination. On my father's side, the, it goes back to a mixture of black and--black slaves, and Creek Indians. So that I have on my, on my paternal side a Creek Indian ancestry as well as an African American ancestry. I don't know exactly what the other side of my mother's lineage represents, you know, except that it's a mixture. Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents on your mother's side and what can you tell us about them? Speaker 2: I, I only knew my mother's mother, my great, my--I'm sorry, my grandmother, and I knew her well--. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Priscilla Williams, Priscilla Jenkins Williams. And she died in 1965. And, and I grew up with her because after her husband died, after my grandfather died, she spent most of her life moving from child to child. And she, she moved around the country and lived with the, the families of her children. So all of us got to know her very well, and she was a wonderful person. Speaker 1: And what about your grandparents on your father's side? Speaker 2: My grandparents on my father's sti--side died before I had a conscious awareness of their existence. They died young--. Story_ID: 4899 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Do you really want to know that? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Because people don't believe that. Speaker 1: No, we really do. Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up, I trace, which some people doubt, but I don't, back to about age two in Weldon, North Carolina. I have some very vivid memories which I was able to, in a sense orally document when I painted for my sister [Helen Cheek] the, the house we lived in and described it vividly and in much detail, much to her shock and dismay when we went back to it several years ago. And, and the descriptions I gave were, were there and almost 100 percent accurate. But I have, I have some vivid flashes of, of the earlier years of learning to walk and playing, believe it or not. And I'm told that's not possible, but I know it is 'cause I have them. And I have, and then, from that point on, I have very vivid flashes of, of experiences growing up. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about growing up and what family life was like in your house? What was a typical day like in your house? Speaker 2: For me or for the rest of--? Speaker 1: For, just like for the family? Speaker 2: Well, for the, for the family in general, it was a typical day that started with work. It started with chores and ended with chores because we're very suffi--we were a very self-sufficient family. We had a wood-burning stove. So we all had to cut wood and bring wood in. We had a garden so that in the seasons of the year when you could have a garden, we all had to 'til our little plot of ground. And we also had work to do around the house. We read the Bible. On Sunday mornings, for example, it was more than just a ritual. It was a period of family prayer. We, we spent time in the living room around a fireplace listening to my father [King Virgil Cheek, Sr.] and mother [Lee Ella Williams Cheek] talk with us about their life, and it was just a world of a, of a family bonding. As we grew up, we had certain rules about how we had to help each other. And the rule was that the person above one had to reach back and be responsible for the, the one behind him. My youngest brother was the luckiest because he didn't have that responsibility (laughter). He just had to be taken care of. But the rest of us had to take care of somebody, and the person we had to take care of was the sibling who followed us. And, and that was fun. At times I think we considered it a chore. But looking back, it was a very nourishing experience. For me personally, growing up was a little different and a little frustrating because I really was not considered rather normal. I was technically branded retarded. The community and to some extent, I think even my parents questioned whether I had all my faculties because I had, I had a tongue-tied physical deficiency, and I could not speak until I was about six or seven years old. And, and when you can't talk, people simply assume there's something wrong with your head. And I enjoyed being alone, not lonely, but alone. So I retreated into my own world. When I was growing up, I spent a lot of time in rocking chair, just dreaming. And I would rock sometimes from morning until evening, when I wasn't working. That was in my earlier years, and--. Speaker 1: And also you suffered from cataracts as well? Speaker 2: I was born, yes, I have congenital cataracts, which don't really bother me. They're pretty stable and have been. Speaker 1: But contributed to--? Speaker 2: That contributed to what was perceived as an abnormality because I, I didn't have glasses at the time. And, and the, my--and I didn't bother about letting anybody know that I really had difficulty seeing. I just decided it wasn't their business. So I just ignored it, and dealt with it in my way. Speaker 1: And as a child, being perceived as not normal, not like the other children, what was that like for you? Speaker 2: Well, to some extent it had its advantages because, you know, when you're called a dummy and people think you're a dummy, they ignore you. So you can do pretty much what you want to do. And I did that. I, I learned on my own, and I, and I took charge of my own self development, quite frankly. And I was not embarrassed by it because I knew I was not abnormal or retarded. And that was the only thing that was important, was what I knew and not what other people thought. So, so I simply retreated into my own world and started at a very early age developing my own agenda about what I wanted to do with my life, and spent a lot of time, quite frankly, mocking, in my own mind, other people's foolishness as I observed them, and they didn't think that I was absorbing, you know, the, the craziness--what I thought at the time to be the craziness of their own world, but--. Speaker 1: Dr. Cheek, if you would, could you please give your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself? Speaker 2: Yes, my oldest sister is Helen. My oldest brother is James, the next brother is Albert, and then there's me, and then my youngest brother is, was Franklin. Albert and Franklin are deceased. And James and Helen are still alive. Story_ID: 4900 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about the street that you lived on? Can you describe your block or your community as a child growing up? Do you remember the name of the street? Speaker 2: Oh, remember it very well. Yes, I lived at 107 Luther Street in Greensboro [North Carolina], short street, about two blocks in what was, you know, then a black neighborhood. The street is no longer there because urban development took it away. But it was a two-block street, right off the main street in Greensboro, and a closely-knit block in which everybody on the block knew each other. And it was kind of a family block, you know. It was comprised of all of the nosey women who reported me to my mother [Lee Ella Williams Cheek] if they thought I wasn't doing anything, and also were a part of our extended family, as well as fathers. There were a lot of heroes on that block. My favorite hero was an, was an automobile mechanic who lived across the street, and his automobile mechanic shop was part of his home. And I always thought that he was the smartest person in the world because he knew everything about cars, and, and I once remarked that he was smarter than my doctor because cars changed and the human body didn't, and yet he, each year, he became knowledgeable about the changes, and he could do anything. And, and he was a real hero. And he was the person with whom I went fishing when I was a little boy, and who really did not think I was retarded and who also nurtured me. But there were others. It was the place of my early childhood. I lived there until the second grade, 'til I was seven years old when we moved about a mile away. Speaker 1: And, Dr. Cheek, if you will, tell what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, the, the field behind my house where I would retreat. You know, the, the changing of the leaves in autumn, which always fascinated me represent memories which I, which I have growing up. Speaker 1: So are those sights that remind you of growing? Speaker 2: Those, those are sights. And also if you, if you want to, smells, because there was a smell of the outdoors where I spent a lot, a lot of my time. The, the sights that are most indelibly blended into me are really the sights of people. I was a people watcher. And I spent a lot of time on my front porch growing up, watching people and observing people, and not just on my porch, but just about anywhere I went. And, and I'm still a people watcher. I'm a people observer, and, and it's part of what is the source of my, my writing reservoir. Speaker 1: And what sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, that's hard to remember except for the gospel music, which I--if we want to identify a sound, I grew up in the, in the world of the, of the black quartet. And, and one of my favorite experiences really was to, to simply visit musical concerts and enjoy black music, especially the spiritual music. We were churchgoers and, and church was not just a Sunday morning experience for us. It was a, it was part of the fabric of our life. So church music was so--even though I could not sing, music itself was, was very appealing and attractive to me. And I liked, and I liked to listen. Story_ID: 4901 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the elementary school years. Do you remember the name of your elementary school and some of your teachers there? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I remember the school. I remember all my teachers, and I remember just about everything that happened on any given day (laughter). Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: It was Washington Street School [Washington Elementary School] in Greensboro, North Carolina. That was the elementary school. The first through the eighth grade. Speaker 1: And who were some of the teachers who influenced you there? Speaker 2: Well, all of my teachers influenced me, from the first one, Mrs. Simpkins to Mrs. Baker, who was my second grade teacher, all of my teachers influenced me because, you see at that time, teachers were icons. And black teachers were almost spiritual figures, and were not just confined to the classroom. They were a part of your, of your life. They visited your homes, met with your parents. They were concerned about all, all dimensions of your development. So all of them, and I have vivid memories of every teachers I've ever had, right on through high school [James Benson Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about second grade, was a pivotal point for you--. Speaker 2: Yes, it was in many ways. Speaker 1: --because, now all of a sudden the whole world knew, what you knew all along. Tell me a little bit about that, and how it was discovered that you were, in fact, not a dummy, but very, very, very intelligent. Speaker 2: Well, I was really repeating the first grade, and for the first part of that year because I had not exhibited very much of an interest in schooling in the first grade. And I frankly thought it was a waste of time. And so the school was not abusive, I--in terms of its judgment. I think it was more of my own refusal to submit to the schooling process. And in the second grade I had a teacher, Mrs. Baker, who was very suspicious of, of me, and I, and what she thought were my talents. And she convinced the system to give me tests which I didn't want to take. And I only took them because her pretty eyes convinced me to. That's when I discovered I was a sexist at age seven because she looked at me with her pretty eyes, and I couldn't resist. So I took the test. And, and I scored, you know, off the charts, which really surprised them. And they didn't know what to do because it wasn't the kind of system that could measure talent or, or even identify the kinds of problems I had. Speaker 1: What was your parents reaction when they found out about your test scores? Speaker 2: You know, my parents [King Virgil Cheek, Sr. and Lee Ella Williams Cheek] were not surprised because I was an odd child, and you have to remember something, you know, about my parents, or know something. My parents were really strong believers in God, and God's power to take care of his children. And, and they passed that on to us to a very large extent so that somehow in my parents' world, I was gonna be just fine. And that didn't really surprise them because they always suspected that, that I was abnormal. They just didn't know how or in what dimension I was in. And I'm not so sure I was abnormal as much as I was just stubborn. Speaker 1: But what was it like for you? Did you gain a newfound respect among your peers? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I did. It simply reinforced an arrogance I think I already had, and that I'm still, in my adult years, trying to suppress (chuckle). Story_ID: 4902 Speaker 1: So in addition to this intellectual breakthrough in terms of other people knowing about it in second grade, you also fell in love, fell pretty hard. Speaker 2: Well, that was, that was a strange experience. This young girl was also a celebrity. She had her own radio show at 3:15 [P.M.] in the, on a Sunday afternoon. And she was a gospel singer. And so at 3:15 every Sunday afternoon, she was on the radio. So she was kind of a child star, you know, and very cute. And so, and about after I had won some acclaim, she came to me and, and--in class, and asked me if I had a girlfriend. And I told her, "No." And so then she said, "Well, you do now." And that's how our relationship began. And it was very strange, and it's a story most people won't believe, but we--she proposed to me about a week later. And we announced it to the class and to the school and to the community. And, and we--and at that, and I started courting at that age. Every Sunday afternoon, after her concert, I took wildflowers to her home. And her family and I--she was one of seventeen children, and, and her family and I became very close. And we still are today, incidentally. But I, on my own, decided when I was in the ninth grade that, you know, that that kind of fairytale should come to an end. Speaker 1: But did the courtship last throughout the ninth grade? Speaker 2: About midway through the ninth grade, and I, just on an impulse decided that it wasn't good for either one of us, that we were too serious. We were too young to be that serious about each other. Speaker 1: And your teachers even helped to contribute to the courtship? Speaker 2: It's kind of funny cause they really didn't have a choice. It became a kind of a cultural icon that was very weird, but it really did. And some of my teachers thought it was the craziest thing in the world, and, and wanted to rebuff it, but they couldn't. So that was--. Speaker 1: And they would have--and a lot of times, you all would, your classes, you'd have classes together and sit next to one another? Speaker 2: That was required. That was part of the requirement. We had to have seats next to each other. And that was something that the principal mandated, very weird kind of phenomenon, but it was fun. I mean we did things that were, you know, that were fun and cute and healthy, but far beyond what good sense would have dictated for kids our age. We should have been doing things that kids our age do. Speaker 1: Do you regret not, you know, being able--not dating other girls and that kind of thing at that--? Speaker 2: Well, you don't date girls at that age (laughter). So I don't regret--. Speaker 1: Right, right, or meeting other girls? Speaker 2: Oh, I met other girls, but, you know, Gwendolyn was mine, and that was, you know, the way it was. Story_ID: 4903 Speaker 1: Dr. Cheek, when you were in elementary school [at Washington Elementary School, Greensboro, North Carolina], did you have dreams and aspirations at this time in your life? Speaker 2: Yes, I've always had dreams and aspirations. At one point in my life I wanted to be psychiatrist because I wanted to, wanted to study people and analyze them and so forth. And so at an early stage of my life, that's what I wanted to do. But I've always wanted to be a writer. And so then I started keeping a journal. When I was about eight or nine years old, I would simply write impressions of things I saw and felt and, and especially my feelings and observations of events. And at some point, I made a decision that, in the later years of my life, after I had gained enough wisdom, that, that I would--regardless of what I was doing, that I would turn my attention to a writing career. And so that was really an aspiration from a very early stage. But then, there was an evolution. I wanted to become a lawyer. Speaker 1: In elementary school, you were thinking about being a lawyer? Speaker 2: In the latter years of elementary school, about sixth or seventh grade, I decided I wanted to be a lawyer because I enjoyed the art of advocacy. I was a minister at an early age, but that was really not so much an aspiration as much as it was simply an outgrowth of my own spirituality. But I gave it up because I became disenchanted with organized religion and what I perceived it to represent. So I simply walked away from that opportunity, which was before me. I was a young child evangelist, and I could have remained in that career. Speaker 1: How old were you when you became an evangelist? Speaker 2: About twelve, about twelve and a half actually. Speaker 1: And what was that like? What was that experience like--? Speaker 2: It was that December [1949], right after my twelfth birthday. It was spiritually enjoyable because it gave me an opportunity to reflect on the Bible, and its gift, its meaning and gave me an opportunity to, to share that. And so it was fulfilling. Speaker 1: And was it even more so because you were able to, because you had a speech impediment at, at an early age, and you--? Speaker 2: I didn't have it at age twelve. I was through with it. Speaker 1: Right, well, but I'm saying you were able now to share through speaking? Speaker 2: Yeah, the pendulum, the pendulum swung in the opposite direction, (laughter) so that I had good mouth by that. Story_ID: 4904 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about junior high school. What was the name of your junior high school? Speaker 2: It was Lincoln Junior High School [Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at Lincoln? Speaker 2: Well, it--they were fun. I was, I was an adolescent. And for reasons that astound me today, I was a very silly one. I laughed a lot; don't know why, but the only arena of misconduct, I think, was, was my inclination to simply laugh at everything, which mystifies me even today when I look back on those years. But they were years of, of a real development for me because several things happened during that time. For one thing, I, I developed a real obsession with, with hard work. I would stay up all night some time to do an assignment, to take it to a level of, of real perfection; don't know why, except I just go obsessed with, with the, the expression from the Bible that, you know, quoted to you, "whatever thy hand findeth to do, do it with they might." And it was also during that period I think that I developed a lot of self awareness. It was also at that time that I went to work. Speaker 1: You went to work at nine years old? Speaker 2: I went to work at nine years old--. Speaker 1: Tell us why? Speaker 2: --in terms of my own, you know, experiences. Well, my father [King Virgil Cheek, Sr.] would chide--I was really eight. And my father confronted me one evening and told me that I couldn't go to a football game. And the reason I couldn't go was that he had learned that I and the other kids were not using the money to buy tickets. We had what we called a, a spring and fall ticket. We'd spring over the fence and fall on the ground, and we'd keep the money. And the cops would chase us until they got tired, and, and it got back to my parents. And the football game at [North Carolina] A&T [Agricultural and Technical] State University--A&T College in Greensboro, North Carolina was a Saturday event always in Greensboro. And so he was gonna punish me, and we had an argument about the meaning of right and wrong. And my position was that I was doing nothing wrong because nobody was being hurt. And my father proceeded to give me a lesson about doing good for goodness' sake, you know; that right and wrong was something inherent in the act itself. Well, I was too young to understand all that craziness. All I knew was, I wasn't hurting anybody, and since nobody was getting harmed, and since harm was not the end result, it was fine. But my father, who was an authority figure, said to me, so long as you live in this house, you don't pay rent, you eat the food I buy, you're gonna follow the rules I set. So I looked at him, and I said, "Well, suppose I paid you rent and bought my own food and clothes." And he looked at me and laughed because he thought that was crazy. So he said, "Well, you do what you want." And I said, "Shake." He shook my hand and looked at me like I was nuts. And that was the last time I took a dime from them. I went to work. I organized kids in the neighborhood and cleaned yards, and I had my own little corporation. And I earned my own money. And, and since I had already learned how to work, it was very easy to do. But I took a formal job when I was in the seventh grade, working at a theater, and the National Theater in Greensboro, North Carolina. And I went to work every evening after school from 6:00 [P.M.] to 9:30 [P.M.]. And, and to a large extent, it was more than work that, that defined my life because that was my first real incursion into a, into a peer, multicultural environment, and, because I went to work in a theater that was not integrated. Blacks or Negroes as we were called at that time, sat in balconies and whites sat on the first floor. But most of my work brought me in contact with a white world. And, and that's when my interest in, in multiculturalism began. And that's when I--because I already had a knack for studying people, I began to study that particular culture in more detail. And in my own way, when I say, more detail, using my own lesson plans in terms of understanding these, those folk, as I called them. Story_ID: 4905 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about high school. What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: It was, it was [James Benson] Dudley High School [Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: And what were the high school years like? Speaker 2: The high school years were great. They were--this was a very special high school with a very special high school principal and very special teachers. As I've indicated before, teachers in the year of, of my development were, were special people. They were honored people. And school was a very, very serious event. And I deve--I got a lot of heroes. I developed affection for a lot of heroes when I was in high school. And my debating coach, especially, who passed last year, taught me a lot. And that's when my interest--well, my interest in debating really started much earlier, but that's when my interest in debating really heightened in high school. But it was a very, it was a very helpful experience because the first year I was in high school, I went to an English class, and I thought the English class was a waste of my time. And so I went to the principal and asked him if I could skip English. And he thought I was crazy cause was required, and--by the state [of North Carolina]. So I cut a deal with him. I told him I would write an essay a week and turn it in. I would write an essay or a short story. And, and he thought I was nuts, but he talked with the teacher, and they both thought I was nuts, but decided they'd give me a chance to do that. So my first year in high school, I wrote every week. I never went to an English class, and, and I got an English grade at the end of the year. I don't know how they did that 'cause I never went to a class or took tests, but that was one of my more enjoyable experiences. And that was the beginning of, of my real interest and at some point developing a literary career, which is really now just beginning, but that's because I designed it that way. Speaker 1: What other things were you interested in, in high school? Speaker 2: Well, I, I worked after high school every day, okay. And, so except for debating and my work, I didn't have much time to do anything else. I wanted to run track, but I simply didn't have time for it. I even wanted to play football, but didn't have time for it. Speaker 1: What kind of work did you do? Speaker 2: Well, I worked in a theater [National Theater, Greensboro, North Carolina]. I sold tickets and a, at the ticket counter. I worked the concession stand. I also would clean the theater on, on weekends. And, and at one particular point, I gave myself a title, like I decided I was the 'Deputy for the Colored', which was really true. I mean it's a terrible expression, except that it was a true one. And that was pretty much what I was. I was what they called a porter. I was a handy person. I did everything. Speaker 1: So you, you kept this job in the theater from seventh grade all the way through high school? Speaker 2: All the way through high school. Story_ID: 4906 Speaker 1: And so while you were in high school [at James Benson Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina], were you thinking that you were gonna go to college? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, no. College was--not going to college was never an option in my family. So that was not something I ever thought about not doing. So--. Speaker 1: Where were you thinking about attending? Where were you thinking you would attend college? Speaker 2: Well, at the time that I was in high school, my, my first choices were really Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and what was then North Carolina College [now North Carolina Central University] in Durham, North Carolina. And, and I thought about Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] until I learned it was an all-male school. I didn't want to go to an all-male school, but, but those were really my, my first choices. And then things changed. Speaker 1: And how did you make, how did you make the decision about where you would go? Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Benjamin [Elijah] Mays who was president of Morehouse, was one of my idols and heroes and tried to convince me to come to Morehouse. Speaker 1: He recruited you, tried to recruit you there? Speaker 2: Yes. He--I used to attend his speeches when he would come to Bennett College in Greensboro to speak. And I, as a little kid, I got to know David Jones, who also introduced me, as a little boy, to Dr. Mays. And he always thought that Morehouse was natural for me. But then for a variety of reasons, I decided that I didn't want to go. So he told me then that if I didn't want to go to Morehouse, then I had to go to his school. And he was a graduate of Bates [College, Lewiston, Maine]. And he also told me about a very famous debate coach who was actually the most famous debating coach in the United States at the time, who was the debating coach at Bates. So Bates was a natural choice for me given the interest I had in debating. So I got a, I got a scholarship to Bates primarily to study under [Frank] Brooks Quimby who was the debate coach at the time, and was the debating partner of Benjamin Mays when Benjamin Mays was a student at Bates back in, in the 1920s. So that's how I ended up from North Carolina, you know, to western Maine. Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at Bates? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, well, I went to Bates with a, a certain level of what I call ethnic anger and arrogance. You know, I was a product of the South and was very disgusted with, you know, with its environment to some extent, even though I never really felt oppressed because I, you know, I built my own world. But I excelled as a debater at Bates, which was the, the one passion I had. And the strangest thing happened to me though at Bates. I, I had an experience with a counselor who, who advised me not to become too preoccupied with my success as a straight A student coming out of high school, and that I was in a new world and so forth. And I interpreted his remarks to really mean that in order to succeed at Bates I would have to be a 'Super Negro', so to speak. And, and so something sort of snapped, and I said, "No way. I'm simply going to, you know, not do that." And I shifted my whole gears and decided I was gonna milk that environment for everything I could. And so my pattern changed because prior to that, not being a straight A student was something unknown to me. And that ceased to be a priority at Bates. My interest in grades simply disappeared. Now, I was still an honor student, and I graduated as an honor student, but I simply no longer worked for marks in a class or anything. And if I got them, fine, and, you know, most times I did. But what happened to me at Bates was the opportunity to do something I'd been doing all my life, was to develop an understanding of people. And I think my humanity increased because it was really at Bates that, that my perspective about racism, unknown to me, began to shift, and the color of a person's skin disappeared from my radar screen completely. Even though I had an intellectual awareness and understanding of all the issues that racism provoked, where prior to Bates, if I were to pass a white person on the street, the color of that skin, of that person's skin registered with me. But the gift I got from Bates was that I ceased to care, and I was able to see people as people. And a lot of my ethnic anger and baggage that I took to college also disappeared, and I became a lot more balanced in terms of how I looked at and approached life. And it was a real intellectual experience for me. I, I learned a lot, remember a lot, made a lot of friends. And, and the friends really represent, I think, my--the greatest jewel I think that I took away. Story_ID: 4907 Speaker 1: And after earning your degree from Bates [College, Lewiston, Maine], you then went on to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about how you came to that decision? Speaker 2: Well, in part, I was still following the footsteps of Benjamin Mays who left Bates and went to Chicago. But more than that, Chicago was a, was a special kind of institution, and it had the reputation of being a real intellectual place, and I really didn't go to Chicago to pursue a degree. I just wanted to continue to learn and to, and to study. And so, I got a fellowship to the graduate school of economics there, and I started working on a Ph.D. And, and that was a real intellectual hot house for me. I, again, when I was a student there, I, I became disinterested in pursuing a degree of courses, and was more interested in taking teachers, which I did. And that's how I really ended up in a law school. I just wandered across the mall one day and encountered a distinguished law professor as I sat and listened to his lecture, and I got enthralled by, by his discussion of the law as a liberal art. And so my life in Chicago, I really pursued as more of an intellectual experience, rather than one in pursuit of any specific degree or career goal because I was not in any hurry to, to get out of school. I was simply enjoying the experience of ideas. Story_ID: 4908 Speaker 1: In your biographical sketch, you mentioned two things that happened to you while pursuing your graduate studies [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] that involved two different women. Can we talk a little bit about those, first talking about Laray? Speaker 2: Well yes, that was, that was an experience in which--? Speaker 1: And about what year did you meet her? Speaker 2: In the--. Speaker 1: When did you become involved with her? Speaker 2: In the summer of 1960, and I met her. And, and we became friends. I, I really cultivated a relationship with her to keep her from the clutches of a friend of mine who--black, male friend of mine, who, who had a need to wreak his vengeance on white women. And, and oddly enough, I--Laray was one of his targets, and I decided I was gonna prevent that. So I started a relationship with her, primarily to block him. But the relationship became a little serious but more as a friendship for me, but, but romantically, we became involved. And my consciousness saw myself as a, as a black person surfaced as I, as we began to explore the issues of the kind of interracial romance we had. And her parents were worried about whether we were gonna get married, and so were my parents. And, and so was the rest of the world that surrounded us. And, and so that was the beginning of, of a real inquiry into the nature of my ethnic soul. And it was a very profound experience because it was the first time that I went deep inside to understand what it meant to be a black man and, and, and wrestled with my commitment to, to blackness and to my race and, and I listened to the tales and pleas from other black women about losing our black men to the white race, so to speak. But it was a real traumatic experience because, on one hand, I had developed a philosophy that the color of a person's skin was, was not to be pivotal in any decision I would make about any relationship with them. But then I found myself in psychological turmoil in terms of my, my own relationship and, and really came to the point that I simply couldn't do it. And that was the foundation for a real psychological struggle which, which I had. But the, the positive outcome of that was that I developed a very profound understanding of who I was, and, but for that experience, that might have been really delayed. Speaker 1: And while in Chicago, you, you had an interracial relationship and also an interfaith relationship--. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: --that is also another turning point? Speaker 2: The interfaith relationship was, to some extent, more troubling because early in my life, as a matter of fact, all of my life really, I had really been ecumenical. I grew up in a Baptist family. There was a Catholic church about two blocks away, and periodically, we would even go there. We would attend Methodist church, Presbyterian church, whenever we felt like it. Denominationalism was not a, a feature of my spiritual world. And so that if anyone had ever told me that religion, an organized religion would become a factor in a decision to marry, I would have told them they were crazy. But then I met, after the experience, after the interracial experience, the following summer, I met and actually fell in love with a Catholic girl [Jennifer]. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: And this was 1961. And, and we became engaged. And she was very devout, and wanted to be married in the church. Her mother taught in the parochial school system. She had a sister who was a nun, and I think a brother who was a priest. And she was very much inversed in the Catholic world. And, and I had no problems with being married in the church, in the Catholic church, except I was also told that I would have to go through the lessons because eventually I would have to sign a document committing my children to being raised Catholic. But I had problems with that. So I started to explore that particular experience and discovered that not only would I marry her, but I would also marry the church. And that I decided I was not going to do. And, and it was the first time, again, that I went inside my own soul and began to understand the meaning of freedom and who I was and the whole doctrine there, kind of world that organized religion, organized itself around, was not a world that I was going to inhabit. And, and that was a real struggle because I was truly in love, and I had to make a choice between my own personal freedom and the woman I loved, and I chose my freedom. I couldn't--and I could not commit the freedom on children, yet unborn to a, to a set of doctrine that was just alien to my values. And so those two romantic interludes in my life were a part of my personal philosophical and psychological development and were very important turning points. I didn't become anti-Catholic. I, I guess what happened was, that and I discovered that I've always been anti-organized religion. And it was a moment in which I learned the difference between Christianity and Christendom, and I chose Christianity. Story_ID: 4909 Speaker 1: And at this time [while in graduate school at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], you were also becoming involved in civil rights. Tell me a little--. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --bit about that and your interests? Speaker 2: That's right. Well, the Civil Rights Movement, of course, was, was just beginning at that time. And I had to make a choice between marching and, and not marching. And there were a lot of things that were happening. For one thing, one of the three students from [North Carolina] A&T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] who sat in at the Woolworth's store was a person I grew up with, Ezell Blair [Jr., now Jibreel Khazan], and we grew up together in Greensboro. His father [Ezell Blair, Sr.] was one of my heroes. And, and I was very much attracted to the whole sit-in movement, but I discovered something else about myself. I really wasn't nonviolent. And, and the one time I marched in Chicago [Illinois], somebody spat at me, and I got out of line, and I was ready to fight. And I discovered I really wasn't a, an appropriate person. I would have screwed up the Movement. But I also grew up in Chicago. I lived a block and a half from Elijah Muhammad and, and philosophically became very devoted to the philosophical leanings of Malcolm X, and quite frankly, at that time in my life, found more appeal in a lot of what he was saying than I found in the philosophy of passivism that, that Martin Luther King [Jr.] was promoting because for some reason, I found in Malcolm X a philosophy of, of self-development and resistance that I found very important. And what was painful for me was to see the separation between the two of them because I felt that they both shared a stage in human history that was very important, and saw them quite compatible, whereas other people viewed them as opposites. But, but those particular experiences were very important for me because they helped shape, my, my view of bridge building in the, in the whole movement determined where I was gonna go also with my career. Speaker 1: But yet and still, you went to the March on Washington [D.C., 1963]? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Why did you make that decision, and what was that experience like for you? Speaker 2: Well, I, I made that decision because at the time, it was the appropriate decision to make. It was a, it was a statement which we all had to make, I thought, and because we had to express to America our outrage and our, and our feelings about the meaning and impact of racism. What I was most profoundly touched by, as well as profoundly upset by, I was touched by the diversity, the diversity of people of all races, young and old and all economic groups and so forth. I was ticked off by the absolute absence of the prominence of women. That offended me, and to this day, I have difficulties in looking back on that experience and not seeing Rosa Parks who was the mother of the whole movement, given some prominence and not looking at a stage full of black men without women. But see, you have to understand that I grew up in a world in which black women were prominent in shaping our culture and shaping our values. They were the pillow of the transference of values and so forth. And, and even though that was a very, very profound moment for me in a positive way, it was also a profoundly disturbing moment because of that particular observation, which to this day, I have--. Story_ID: 4910 Speaker 1: Dr. Cheek, were you satif--well, you talked a little bit about your dissatisfaction with the March on Washington [D.C., 1963], and what are your thoughts about the Civil Rights Movement in general? Speaker 2: Well, my first thought is that I don't call it that. It's the first thing we need to understand. I have re-titled it the Psycho-Cultural Movement in America because it was a period that embraced more than a fight for, for civil rights as much as it was a fight for social justice that involved a development of appreciation of differences in cultures and values and so forth of other people. And I think that whole period was about more than, than getting the right to eat at a restaurant or to go to a hotel or it was even more, you know, than just about the desegregation of, of our school systems. I think there were a lot of pluses and minuses. For one thing, when the Brown vs. Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas, 1954] decision was first published, and I read it in high school, my first reaction to it was that it was a racist decision. Even though I recognized the importance of the decision and I recognized the necessity of the decision, I felt that Earl Warren and the rest of the justices were also a product of their times, in which they saw white people as superior creatures. And I was very much offended by Justice Warren's, the chief justice's failure to acknowledge that black children were the only ones who were deprived in that kind of system because in my view, white children were also disadvantaged--. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: --as a result of that system. They were disadvantaged in the sense that they were deprived of the opportunity to get to know me. They were deprived of the opportunity experience a quality of humanity found in profound ways in the black experience. They were deprived of the opportunity to experience human diversity. And in that sense, their own education and their own human experience was affected. I went to a high school [James Benson Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina] that I felt was as good, and in many ways, superior to that of the white high school in our town. I did not see at the time that integration was going to take place on any kind of equal level, that desegregation would proceed in a way in which the power structure would simply get rearranged, and we would physically simply be moved around. The black principals in some cases, were more qualified than white principals, became assistant principals in charge of buses. In balance, integration was good and necessary. We need to look back on it, and we need to understand that there were certain things that we lost. And, and perhaps we had to lose it in order to gain others. Perhaps if there was anything that was also very disturbing to me about that period was that--and that was a period, incidentally, that also defined my own career in the sense that it was during that time that I made a decision to become a bridge builder, and it was upon that basis that my own career got launched as an educator, and, and in other ways. And that was that as we sought to fight racism expressed in a, in a white oppressive culture, I found in our own culture, elements of racism, and, and our failure to rise to a level of humanity that I thought was necessary for us to be the kind of people we really wanted to be. So that on a personal level, I suffered during that early period, especially in the, in the mid-'60s [1960s] and, and early '70s [1970s], some real psychological problems with our--and I say "our," I'm talking now about my peer group because I was within that age group, pushing out the participation of many of my white friends who wanted to be very much a part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], very much a part of the, of the militance of that particular period and movement. But, nevertheless, I look back on that period and I view it in a much broader way as a, as a period in which America was seeking a real moment for itself, a real quest for social justice as opposed to just racial justice; that it was about humanity, and it was also a time in which the fight against sexism also entered the scene. Speaker 1: So you thought that you could do more as an educator than as an attorney. Why did you think that? Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't that I thought I could do more as an educator. It just happened that I entered the world of education--. Speaker 1: But you turned down an opportunity. Speaker 2: --and I was a--I turned down an opportunity but, because I decided that the color of my passion was black and not green. And I turned that opportunity to practice law in law firm in Chicago [Illinois] because I felt I had an obligation of service to, to my community. And it was an outgrowth of, of my own development. So I had to go south. It just was not a choice. I had to go south even though it was less money and perhaps less prestige at the time. And it was just important to me philosophically. Story_ID: 4911 Speaker 1: 1969, you became the president of Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] at a very early age, thirty-two years old. What was that like for you as such a young man, having such a tremendous responsibility? Speaker 2: Well, the first thing my mama [Lee Ella Williams Cheek] told was that, well, she said, "Son, I'm not gonna give you much advice, okay". She said, "But there's one thing I want you to remember, somebody appointed you to this position because they thought you were exciting and smart, and they were probably right". She said, "I don't want you to make the mistake that you're wise. You haven't lived long enough" (laughter). And that's the first thing I had to learn, was that I really wasn't wise, you know. I was exciting, I had a lot of ideas, and, and it was a real growth, you know, experience for me. I was a revolutionary at the time, and I, my career in higher education got launched really back in 1965 when I delivered a speech before the [American] Orthopsychiatric Association in New York, entitled 'Damn the System' in which I delivered an address that sought to explain why this was the country of the young, and why we were, why we had decided to promote a, a different set of value norms, and why we were engaged, not just in a political revolution, but a real value revolution so that the, the first address I gave as president of Shaw University, my convocation address was entitled 'Toward the Definition, the Redefinition of the University' because I felt very strongly that the nature of the university that, we were using to advance our cause, which was a university and an educational system patterned primarily after the needs, primarily of a white world. We needed to look at and examine whether or not the black college phenomenon was really serving the needs of the black community, so that I began to champion a philosophy of the role of our college and developed a very, very strong commitment to the predominantly black college at the time, even though some people will question the nature of that commitment when you look at my career and the fact that I moved on, but that can explained for other reasons. Story_ID: 4912 Speaker 1: You left Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] in 1971 after two years and went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]--. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --where you became president there. What were some of the differences at Shaw and Morgan? Speaker 2: Well, the major difference was that my motivation for being a college president was to spark reform, was to, was to be a leader, and, and to give my creative instincts and opportunity to do work. As president of a small private institution, I was primarily occupied with fiscal solvency requirements, which consumed about 90 percent of my time and my psychological energy. And that really wasn't where my head was. That really wasn't where my talent was. My talent was not in the management of an educational enterprise to keep it fiscally solvent, and it was a misuse of my talents. So that my motivation for going to a public college was to remove that agenda from my plate, not completely because you still have to convince legislators, but I felt it would be a great opportunity for me to, to utilize my skills and to, to commit myself in a stronger way to, to developing educational systems that I thought could better serve black Americans. Speaker 1: And were there any differences in the students? Speaker 2: No, not really. Both communities were somewhat diverse, same commitment of students. The institution was just larger. That's all; larger and in an urban environment. There was a difference in the challenge because Morgan was an urban college located in, you know, in a larger city, and the community challenges were much greater. Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: They were greater in the, in the sense that Morgan had a more prominent role in the community as a, as a public college. Shaw was somewhat, a little more parochial even though it had prestige, historically and otherwise in that community. But Morgan had a more powerful presence, and it gave me a stronger, more visible platform as a leader. And that was the primary basis for that. Story_ID: 4913 Speaker 1: And, and after you left Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], tell me a little bit about your next job with Union for Experimenting [Colleges and Universities, UECU]--? Speaker 2: College and Universities. Well, earlier when I was at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina], I was part of a founding movement that originated and created what was known as the University Without Walls movement, the creation of a consortium of about forty-some college--forty-two colleges to be exact in the early '60s [1960s]. And I became a, a part of, of that group. And when I went to Morgan, of course, I, I took that relationship also with me. And the, the Union for Experimenting Colleges had also organized an indepen--had also organized and incorporated a university, the Union Graduate School [Cincinnati, Ohio], and the University Without Walls program at the baccalaureate level. The Union Graduate School was a Ph.D. program, non-traditional, principally oriented around attracting adult professionals who could continue their graduate education without having to interrupt their work careers, but who would use their experience or backgrounds as the foundation for the advancement of their own learning. And it was also a revolution in values. It was, in the sense that it did not conform to the traditional requirements of schooling. These were people who had more responsibility for their own learning, and it was a self-directed learning kind of environment. So I made a decision at the time when I was President of Morgan, and members of the board of trustees and the president then, who was a close friend of mine, really convinced me of the necessity for an increased black presence in that movement. There were a lot of black people who could do what I was doing at Morgan, but we needed to have a leadership presence and other dimensions of higher education. And, and at that particular time, I was one of the few who were involved in that, and I decided to make that shift and take on a leadership role in that area, and so I did it. But the other reason was that after a particular point, my presidency at Morgan--and that's a long story. I really left Morgan because I decided that the governor of the state [of Maryland] and I were on two opposite ends of the pole with regard to our value system. And, and I was asked to live a lie which I refused to do. And, so--. Speaker 1: How so? What were you asked to do? Speaker 2: I was asked to--the governor [Marvin Mandel] wanted to do something which they knew that I would oppose, and they simply cut a deal with me. And the deal was that they would do something for Morgan if I kept my big mouth shut. And so, what they wanted--. Speaker 1: What did the governor want? Can you share that with us? Speaker 2: Sure, sure. They were going to--I had a proposal into the state to convert Morgan to a university. And, and it was in the process. And so one day the executive director of the state board of education, higher education, invited me to lunch and explained to me that they, the governor had planned to make the, make the University of Baltimore [Maryland], which was then a private college, a public college. And so I asked him why did they have a need for another public college? And, you know, had they done a study, and they already were saying that no money was available to even give us what we needed, and I was advised, of course, that this was really a political decision and that he was really meeting with me because of all of the presidents, you know, in Baltimore, that I was the one most likely to open my big mouth and oppose it. So they wanted me to know that if I kept quiet, that the agenda that I had before the state of making Morgan a university would sail through, but the only thing I had to do was keep quiet. And, and one day, you know, I woke up to the insanity of all that, and again, I had to make a choice between my own value system. But in this particular case, I simply decided that--because I knew that if I didn't do what they wanted, that Morgan would not become a university, and it was in Morgan's interest to become a university. So I decided to say goodbye to them, and I left town. Speaker 1: Do you ever regret that decision? Speaker 2: No, I don't regret that decision because I had to make a choice between my own integrity and the politics of a situation, and I chose my integrity because I learned as a kid that if you ever give up your integrity, that's a part of your soul you can never regain. And I had to make that choice. Story_ID: 4914 Speaker 1: After Morgan you then went on to New York Institute of Technology [Old Westbury, New York]? Speaker 2: I went--no, after the Union for Experimenting Colleges [and Universities consortium, UECU]--. Speaker 1: Right, after--I'm sorry, after the Union, but tell me a little bit--. Speaker 2: That, that was--yes, go ahead. Speaker 1: --about being at a school that was so focused on technology and that kind of thing. What were some of the differences there that you hadn't encountered? Speaker 2: Yeah, let me, let me correct something. It wasn't that the school was so focused on technology. I need to give you a piece of that history. Had there not been a New York Institute of Technology, there would not have been a career of King Cheek in higher education. So I need to explain that. My relationship with New York Institute of Technology began in 1965, okay. I was on the board [of trustees]. I went on the board of the New York Institute of Technology in 1968. The New York Institute of Technology, even though it has the name tech--as part of its name, technology, was a very innovative institution that was championing, when I first came onto the scene in higher education, was championing humanistic learning and was seeking to explore new ways to teach and learn and using technology, looking at technology as a vehicle for actually humanizing the learning process. So I became very attached to the, to the president of that institution. He became a mentor, and so that it was, it was during my formative years in higher education that I learned a lot about the real value of individualized and self-directed learning, which I developed in my association with the New York Institute of Technology, so that when I left the, the Union, I left the Union for a very unique opportunity. I was, I was given the opportunity to develop a think tank in Washington, D.C. This is how I ended up Washington. I was, the--New York Institute of Technology offered me a position and told me that I could write my own job description, and do whatever I wanted to do and live anywhere I wanted to. And, and I chose to come to Washington, and they funded the creation, they endowed and funded the creation of the Washington Center, which became the Center for Leadership and Career Development. And the reason that that center was created was that I had developed a very, very strong bias about what was happening in, in corporate America and in the world of work, that, that job opportunities were primarily limited, as far as black people and women were concerned, were primarily limited to occupational entry. When we talked about affirmative action, we primarily focused on occupational entry, moving racism and sexism away from the door. But the only thing we did was simply replant it at the bottom of the stairway. And career escalation and advancement was something that was really not on the agenda. We still were not making our way into the board rooms. The stairways were still blocked. So I developed an interest in the forces and factors that affected the career advancement of women and minorities. So I started a think tank in Washington in 1978 that the New York Institute of Technology funded to study that phenomenon. And that's how my formal work relationship with the New York Institute of Technology began. I was already on the board of trustees when that opportunity was given to me. So between the period of 1978 and 1985, I directed that think tank. Story_ID: 4915 Speaker 1: More than twenty years later, after creating that think tank [Washington Center, later the Center for Leadership and Career Development, New York Institute of Technology, Old Westbury, New York], how much progress do you think has been made in terms of women and minorities and advancement once they get through the door? Speaker 2: A lot of progress has been made if we, if we want to look at numbers. If we want to look at numbers, we have to say a lot of progress has been made, but I still think that there's still a lot of racism, still a lot of sexism in corporate America. It's just more subtle, and we have to fight harder to overcome it. There is a greater sensitivity to it, but the battle has not yet been won. And, and there's a certain amount of tokenism, you know. There's still what I call the 'Deputy for the Coloreds' syndrome, you know. We have one of those and we give fancy titles to him, you know, like 'Vice President for Urban Affairs' and, you know, and the 'Saturday Night Marshals', is what I call them, you know, keep the peace, so to speak for us. But maybe less cynical and indicate that, you know, we can look at examples of where we have made it to the top and, and the numbers are growing. The progress is there. The only danger we face is that we fall back and think we've made it and that the war is over, and it's not. Story_ID: 4916 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the way that you--how you feel about the way that you've lived your life and what's important to you? Speaker 2: Well, what's important to me is personal fulfillment as I define it, rather than success as other people see it. I'm an enigma for most people because power and prestige and honor and all that stuff is not something that has ever had appeal to me. People couldn't understand why I could give up a college presidency, for example, and, you know, and do something that in their minds was less prestigious and so forth. And they don't realize that, that having status, etc. was not something that was attractive or appealing to me or that drove me. It is more important for me to feel inside that I'm making an impact on something, that I'm giving back. All of my life, I've had to recognize that what has happened to me has also happened because other people have been involved in making it happen. This is not a road that I've traveled alone, and I owe a lot. And so that I have to express that gratitude in the ways in which I define my life of service. And at this particular moment, I have few passions. I, in spite of what you may see in this house, I do not have an attraction to the accumulation of things. I couldn't care, you know, anything. I drive a 1989, you know, Jeep Cherokee. Those cars out there in the yard, you know, are not the cars I drive. I don't care about driving a fancy car, okay. People laugh at me because I still got this old, reliable car. I don't accumulate a lot of stuff, okay. My passion at the moment is making sure that my four children [King Virgil III, Kahlil, Antoinette and Antoine Cheek] have the opportunity to have a fulfilling life and that there's cohesiveness and love in my family, and that I continue a life of inspiring other people. And my final passion is to complete my four novels. And that's how I spend my waking hours. And that, those novels are the legacy that I really want to leave behind because they represent an expression of my own soul. That's why I call it the 'Quadrasoul Project'. It's a, an exploration of the four dimensions of the human spirit and there are messages that are found in the vehicles of the stories I used, and, and so that's how I view my life. That's how I view where I am now, and where I want to go and what it is I want to do. Speaker 1: Dr. Cheek, is there anything that you haven't done yet that you'd still like to do? Speaker 2: Not--the book, I haven't finished my novels. Speaker 1: Right, not, not--. Speaker 2: Not that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: No, I have no desire for fame. You know, that will satisfy, if it existed at all. Early in life, I've been there, done that, got my t-shirt and my mug, okay. So I don't have any desire for fame or for honor as people traditionally define it. I simply have a need to continue to be fulfilled by making other people happy to the extent that I can contribute to that. And that's, that's what moves me. I get more joy out of that. Speaker 1: And your next contribution will be sharing your writings? Speaker 2: Will be sharing my writings, that's correct. And completing the other major project that I'm now involved in, and that is launching a new medical school. Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about that? Speaker 2: I'm the, one of the founders and president of the, what is known as the Global Learning Network. It's a, it was a--well--. Story_ID: 4917 Speaker 1: [Tell] me a little bit about this new medical school you all are planning to launch? What makes it different from traditional medical schools? Speaker 2: Well, I'm involved currently in the complementary and alternative medicine movement which I entered in a very accidental way after I became a management consultant to the board of trustees of this non-traditional health profession school [New York College of Health Professions, Syosset, New York]. And I have always had an interest in alternative medical modalities, and this is really an extension of that. And what I have discovered in holistic medicine, I've discovered a whole new approach to, to treating the body, and to responding to the health needs of our, of our system. Speaker 1: So will it be a combination of--. Speaker 2: It's gonna be a combination of, of Western practices and Eastern practices, traditional Chinese medicine, Tibetan medicine, medicine from other cultures. It is gonna be a more holistic approach to looking at the way in which the body heals itself. And it's primarily oriented now, not to license professions. It's not gonna offer degrees that provide licenses to practice. The clientele will all be licensed healthcare givers. The students will all be physicians, nurses chiropractors and all kinds of, acupuncturist, medical massage therapists--. Speaker 1: And where will it be located? Speaker 2: At the moment, our projection is to locate it in the United Kingdom and Switzerland initially, later in South Africa and also in partnership with the university in Beijing [China]. So that it is intended to be an international university, and we may start a campus here in America. But that decision hasn't been made. Story_ID: 4918 Speaker 1: One of the things we didn't talk about is your brother [James Cheek] who is also a university president [formerly president of Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina, and Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Do you all ever share advice and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Sure, we've talked all our lives, and we continue to. We've, we've had, and we've had an intellectual partnership. He was a big brother, and in my family, little brothers always looked up to big brothers, except there comes a point in time when you consider yourself a peer, you know, and, and that. But, but Jim is, is still a person with whom, you know, I spend a lot of time. We have differences. He's a Republican and I'm a Democrat, whatever that may mean, except he's more Republican than I am a Democrat because I don't have fidelity really to, much to a party. But philosophically, we are pretty much on the, on the same wavelength. He was an inspirational force to me in my early period in higher education. Working with him was a phenomenal experience. It was a phenomenal growth experience because you see, I began my career in higher education as his vice president [at Shaw University] and I learned something and developed something which became a part of my force, a part of my life force. And I was able to be a vice president for a person and separate my relationship with him as a brother from my role as an employee and as a vice president, subordinate to him. And learning how to do that, both philosophically and emotionally was a very powerful experience and one that, that has never deserted me since the moment that learning experience began. Story_ID: 4919 Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered, Dr. Cheek? Speaker 2: I would simply like to be remembered truthfully as a person who cared more about giving than taking, pure and simple...