 Story_ID: 5930 Speaker 1: Name, your date of birth, today's date, and your profession. Speaker 2: Stanley Crouch, born December 14, 1945, Los Angeles, California in the morning. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is May 21st, 2001. Speaker 1: And we're at the-- Speaker 2: Waldorf-Astoria [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Waldorf-Astoria. Speaker 2: Waldorf-Hysteria--hysteria, (laughs). Speaker 1: And your profession. Speaker 2: I'm a writer. Story_ID: 5931 Speaker 1: What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color. Speaker 1: (laughs) I knew this was going to happen. Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Definitely have none. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Winter. Speaker 1: And from L.A. originally. That's amazing, too. Speaker 2: Well, I think the reason I like winter more is because in California, as my mother used to say, they don't have seasons so I became very appreciative of the New York winter. In fact, I'm irritated that we don't have more blizzards. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: "I'm doing the best I can." Speaker 1: I thought it was going to be "victory is assured." Speaker 2: No, well, that's a publicity thing. (laughs) Story_ID: 5932 Speaker 1: I'd like you to start out by talking about your mother and what you know about her side of the family, what you know about mother, and if you would give her name. Speaker 2: Well, my mother's name as a maiden was Emma B. Ford. She was from Jefferson, Texas, which is about 16 miles from Marshall, Bill Moyers' home, in East Texas, but you can't get there by plane. You have to fly into Shreveport and then drive from Shreveport to Marshall. Her grandfather was from Madagascar, and he arrived in America in 1863 on, I think, a Portuguese sailing ship, and he jumped ship and married a Choctaw Indian, and he said to his kids that the first thing he encountered in America were these big guns going off so that was Grant shelling Vicksburg so then after he moved - then he moved from Mississippi to Arkansas and eventually from Arkansas to Texas so that's my mother's side. My father's side is part Anglo-Irish from the Crouch plantation in Atlanta, Georgia. In fact, I was there during the child killings in Atlanta and went to the historical museum, I think it was, and I told this guy I was interested in looking for my family. Oh, yes, the Crouch family, a very, very famous family in Atlanta. Come back next time, he said. I'll open up the drawers and take you to the grave sites so I haven't had the chance to get back so that side eventually ended up in Texas, too, and that's--my mother and my father met there. Speaker 1: That was interesting. Give me your father's name also. Speaker 2: My father's name is James Crouch. Speaker 1: And he's still alive, right? Speaker 2: He might be. I haven't seen him in 35 years maybe. Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met in Texas? Speaker 2: Well, actually now I'm not exactly sure whether they met in Texas or they met in Los Angeles. They may well have met in Los Angeles because my mother's family moved out to Los Angeles in the middle '30s [1930s], I think somewhere around 1936, because there was a lot of work and stuff in Los Angeles, and a lot of people were moving to California from the South and other places during the Depression. Story_ID: 5933 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Emma Ford Crouch] ever talk about growing up, anything that she shared with you about her growing up that you? Speaker 2: Well, she had a couple of stories about her father and about her mother who was the same as her father was. That is that my mother once took my grandfather's lunch to the construction site he was working on, and so this white guy came up to her, and he said, "what are you doing here?" So she said, "I came here"--she said, "I came to bring lunch." She said, "My father left his lunch at home." "Well, who's your father?" She said, "My father's Mr. Ford," and he says well, "We got a nigger here named Ford, but we don't have any Mr. Ford," at which point he shouts out,"Ford, there's a little nigger girl here looking for you," at which point--it's seemingly out of nowhere--her father appeared and smashed this cracker by the neck. He looked at him, and he said. "First thing, if you refer to me, you put a handle on my name. You refer to me as Mr. Ford." He said secondarily, "I don't have any niggers in my family, and if you fail to understand this, I will get in your ass up to my waist." So she was--my mother always gleefully told that story. She loved to tell that one. Now, there's one about her mother who was like her father in that she and her sister, Mary, were these two tomboy types, that they'd call them at that time, rough girls, and that they played hard and everything. They were out in a buggy at the turn of the 20th century, and so this white judge who had the first automobile in East Texas came down the road that Matilda, my mother's mother, my grandmother, and her sister, Mary, were in. You know, they were like teenage girls. They were out there in their little buggy and ran over the horse's foot, not intentionally but accidentally, so the horse was making all kind of noise, and the judge says out of the car, "You little nigger girls are going to have to keep these buggies off the road because from now on these roads are going to be for automobiles," at which point Matilda and Mary jumped out of the buggy, and Matilda had a buggy whip, and so they went around to the driver's side and said, "Get out," and so he looked at them, and they said, "Get out," and so then the judge was trying to figure out what was going on. So then his wife says to the judge, "They just--oh, dear, they're just girls. Don't get out of this--don't get--don't--oh, dear, they're just girls." At which point my grandmother was said to have said, "Little girls? Hell, you let that redhead son of a bitch out of this thing, and we'll beat the shit out of him," and so my grandmother was always--see, I knew that was true because I saw her deal with things when I was growing up to straighten me out. I mean, you know, she had pistols under the pillows in her bed. She carried a .45 under her apron in this little restaurant she owned outside--in Bakersfield where these Negroes would pick cotton all week and drink wine and cut each other with pocket knives all weekend, but when they came in her place, though, they would calm down. You'd hear them outside. As soon as they came in, they took their hats off, and it was Mrs. Ford, blah, blah, blah, and they sat down. There was no stuff in there because they knew she would shoot one of them. There was no doubt about that so those were basically the things that I heard. I also heard that my great-aunt Mary, my mother's aunt, was the fastest cab driver during World War II in East Texas. They said if you got in her cab, you might feel that you would be dead before you got there, but you'd definitely get there faster than if anybody else was driving you, you know. Story_ID: 5934 Speaker 1: And on my father's side, they're mostly religious types. That's when I grew up in Los Angeles, I used to always see the crowds jumping and all of that so Andre Crouch and Sandra and all of them, they're my cousins. They all come from that side of the family, from my father's side. See, my father was a criminal, though, so he was kind of the bad guy of the string of kids that went on into being pastors, etc., so he was the one who didn't go the right way. Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you about your father. Your father, you had contact with him during the early part of your life? Speaker 1: Yeah, during my adolescence, yeah. Right. Speaker 2: I want to know about your--you have a sister and brother? Speaker 1: My brother's dead. Speaker 2: Your brother's dead. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But you have a sister? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Can you tell me where you fit? Speaker 1: I'm the oldest. Speaker 2: You're the oldest, okay, so it's you, and then who was next? Speaker 1: My sister, Victoria, then my brother, Rudy. Speaker 2: And there were three of you? Speaker 1: Three. Speaker 2: Were you--you were born in Los Angeles? Speaker 1: All three of us were. Story_ID: 5935 Speaker 1: Do you know why your family--why they ended up moving to Los Angeles from Texas? Speaker 2: Because it was supposed to be this land of opportunity during the Depression. There was a large migration of people from Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma into southern California, Los Angeles primarily, during those years in the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Now what were some of your earliest memories growing up? Speaker 2: Of what? Speaker 1: Period. Just do you have any early memories? Speaker 2: I remember being in a crib, and I remember the radiator being on, and I remember the heat. The things I recall now mostly from that period, I think, are your senses are beginning to learn the vocabulary of experience, that is whether it's cold or too cold or hot or too hot, etcetera, that all those things seem to come at you at a greater intensity, kind of like spices. When you first encounter them, they seem--they're more intense to you. Once you become accustomed to them, they go another way so I remember that, and I remembered how--I've always remembered how people's voices--how large they seemed when I was very small and the size of people. I remember constantly looking up at these people who were--it was kind of--I felt like I was--I wouldn't have called it the Land of the Giants because I didn't have anything to compare it to, but I just knew that people seemed to be very big, and their voices were very large, and I remember my mother nursing my brother once--I think it was my brother--in the kitchen. She was sitting in this chair, and I was trying to run up there and get something and was told to go away, you know. That I recall, yeah. Let me see. I spent a lot of time in the house when I was small because I developed asthma so for awhile they only thought there were two kids in the neighborhood because people so rarely saw me, but eventually as I got older, I had more--better and better control over it. Speaker 1: What about describing some of your family life? You know, what was it like? Was it church-centered? You know, was it playing with kids in the neighborhood? You know, what--I'm just trying to understand, you know. Speaker 2: Well, growing up at the time that I grew up, it was much like growing up in the South and the Southwest combined because the neighborhood was full of these people from Oklahoma, from Texas, from Louisiana, and when you went over to these people's houses, there were those different kinds of food that they cooked, and sometimes there were games that were a little bit different that the kids knew from other places, and more often than not, the kids from the South might actually be better educated than we were, even though the civil rights movement, a little later, was seen on television and all that. Sometimes the teachers would have been more attentive, and the curriculum was stronger, etc. Story_ID: 5936 Speaker 1: You went where to elementary school? You went to-- Speaker 2: I went to 28th Street School. Speaker 1: Right, and that was an integrated elementary school. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, my mother wanted us to go to that school because she was convinced that we should start mingling, as they called it in those days, and so we got our lunch bags and our lunch pails and thermoses and marched west to 28th Street School on 28th and San Pedro, and there were Asian kids, there were Koreans, Japanese, Chinese. There were some Irish kids. There were Mexicans. There were black people from that big mix of the Southwest and South so it was very--so the first six years of school were very influential on me in the long run because I came to later remember how these different ethnic groups were when you had to compete with them in classes. Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about competing with them in classes? I mean, that's the whole--you grew up--that your formative years were in a multicultural environment is basically what you're saying. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was your neighborhood that way? Speaker 2: No. No. My neighborhood wasn't that way, but one of the kids we played with a lot was a Mexican kid, but--see, I played a lot with these kids who were at 28th Street School so Henry Ramirez and this kid named Lam who was Chinese, L-A-M, and Elizabeth Wu and a number of these people. There was some Irish girl named Laura, a bunch of these different people I came to know them at that time because we were on--you know, we went on these field trips, and we had gypsies there who, to underline the stereotype, did, in fact, steal everything that they could. Invariably if someone's ring, watch, jacket, whatever it was, was stolen, eventually it turned out that one of the gypsy kids had stolen it, but they had this other thing, too, which was, these gypsies, they didn't dress like the rest of the kids. They dressed like these Eastern European types and a girl--I remember one of them was a girl who had this beautiful skin tone and this long, black hair, black as a horse's, you know, and these big earrings, and she could really play volleyball. She was a terror as a volleyball player, and she had these little shoes that laced up around her ankles, and the way they spoke, they spoke with kind of this guttural purr so it would be kind of like a--that would be a part of the way they would talk, and they were around for about a year, and then they left. I don't know where they went, but I don't know too many people who went to school with gypsies, but I can say I did. Speaker 1: Now were there others--I mean while you're dealing in stereotypes, were there other things that struck you, you know, about the other different people there, whether they were Asian or Mexican? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that you learn, if you went to school, the school that I went to, was the first thing, all of the people inside the groups were different. I'm sure if they'd been more--the thing is, you see, the gypsy kids were themselves individuals. I'm not talking about that they all seemed the same. I'm just saying that they did steal everything that they could steal. Now from what I've come to understand, that's more of a cultural proposition than anything else because a friend of mine saw this movie about this monstrous gypsy child who was stealing all this stuff, and he saw it in a movie house somewhere here in Midtown, and gypsies came to see the movie every night, right. It would be packed with gypsies, and every time he would steal something, the gypsy audience would cheer him on and say good, way to go, kid, right, so I didn't understand that when I was a boy. All I just knew is every time they would go, they would search the kid's stuff, and boom, there it would be, right, and they would be standing in front of the class with their hands behind their back, and they'd say--everybody would be, but of course, it was obvious, as it is today in professional sports, by them being good athletes, too, so everybody forgave them at recess, you know, because at recess and lunch we could play these different games or during the physical education period because they were so good at what they were doing, you know. They played good baseball, good volleyball, etcetera, so they were like these guys in the NBA or something, you know. You can be a jackass on one side, but if you made a lot of points on the other, people kind of say okay so they were like that, but I don't really remember anything outstanding about the Mexicans or the Chinese and the Japanese and the Koreans except that they all hated each other. That was very clear, and they were showing these terrible, perhaps even racist, propaganda movies on the weekend because television was still growing, and they didn't have a backlog of material so they used a lot of old movies, and they would make these movies like Gung Ho and this one and that one, and so this Japanese kid, Alan Funo, he often had a hell of a time come Monday because after people had ingested all those dirty Jap movies over the weekend, they came to school, and they were like. There was poor Alan Funo, you know, getting slapped upside the head or whatever, not all the time, but he could have a problem because of that. Speaker 1: Now where did black kids fit in the most at that school? Speaker 2: I think they were the majority. I think it might have been half black, anywhere from 40 to half, but finally the thing that struck you most about different people was just that if you visited somebody else's house, their food was different, but you couldn't really think of Henry Ramirez as a Mexican because you didn't have a frame for a Mexican, but you could say that at Henry Ramirez's house they served these things called tamales and this and that, and we don't know how to make them, and we don't eat them, but they taste good, though. Or if you went to Linwood Lam's house, then there was a whole other thing going on with what they cooked, and so that was essentially it because when you go--at that age, you just look at people as this one's a bully. That one's a kiss-ass. This one's a nerd. That one's a so and so. You don't really particularly think of them as this person represents that group. The person is actually a part of a group to you, the kid. Later on, if you come under the wrong influences, you might think of them as something else, but I don't think that anybody thought of that that way at the time. Story_ID: 5937 Speaker 1: What was the young Stanley Crouch like? What were you like? Were you--you know, were you shy? Were you introspective? Were you a bully? Speaker 2: I was passive-aggressive so I was introverted, and I was also aggressive and violent if I could bring it off. If I couldn't bring it off, I'd become introspective, but if I actually could --if I actually had a shot like at winning a fight or something, oh, yeah, I would definitely do that. Speaker 1: So were you--did you fight? Speaker 2: Oh, many times. I still have fights right now except the fights that I have now are with myself. They're not with other people, but I would say that all the time. I was a fighter, yeah, and at one time I got to the point where I didn't really care whether I won or lost, as long as I didn't back down, because I would--rather than submit to certain things, I would just take the beating. I just couldn't do it. There's a certain point in my personality I just would say no. Speaker 1: What age do you think--what age are we talking about? Speaker 2: Fifteen, maybe, 15, around that time. Speaker 1: You're a young adult. Speaker 2: Around that time, yeah, but I never--I always resisted that anyway. One time I remember this guy who came from Texas named Ray--not from Texas, he was from Oklahoma City. He thought he was a bully, and he was beating this guy that was much smaller than him up one day, this guy named Bud, and he was beating Bud for stealing some of his pigeons because a number of kids collected pigeons at that time and had tumblers of these various pigeons with these different kinds of patterns and so on. Anyway, I mean, he was having a good time. I mean he was like--he would beat Bud down, and Bud would get up, and he would just beat him down some more, and then he would get up, and he would just beat him down some more. I was standing there, and I had this rubber gun that I had made out of a lawn chair or a deck chair, and I was holding it, and he was beating this guy, and the next thing I knew, I saw this big piece of my rubber gun fly off because I had swung it and hit him in the back of the head with it, at which point I took off, but he didn't catch me, but then later on I had to stay in the house because every time he said you come out of this house because I'm gonna, you know. At one point I just said I'm not staying in the house anymore so I went out there, and he came and got me, but I didn't back down, though. Speaker 1: Your father [James Crouch], do you think he had any influence over you during your early years? Speaker 2: No. He wasn't around. Speaker 1: He wasn't around at all, not even up to age 15? Speaker 2: No. He came along around that time. Now he came by and he--at one point, and then at another time he and my mother tried to get back together, but it didn't work so I was around him on a day-to-day basis then, but he was still in that criminal thing so he ended up going back to the penitentiary because most of the time he was in San Quentin or Folsom or some such place because he just had a criminal mind. See, a criminal mind is not a complex thing. A criminal mind is actually a very simple thing except that my father was a very brilliant guy, but he had this criminal mind. See, the criminal mind is very--it's based on this. I want a car. I don't have one. You have a car. I'll take your car. I want some money. I don't have any money. You have money. I'll take your money. I want. That's all it's about. It's not about--I don't think it has much to do with how you're reared or not reared because we keep finding these people who are well-reared who are criminals, and they're not criminal--it's not a--when I say the criminal mind, I'm not talking about somebody who's in rebellion who's trying to be noticed by doing bad things, like if I talk to Dad, the only way that I ever get your attention, Dad, is if I end up calling from the jail and to have to bail me out for drunk and disorderly or whatever, it's a cry of help. I'm not talking about that kind. I'm talking about the guy who just could easily do this other thing, but that takes too much time so that person just tries to get yours. Story_ID: 5938 Speaker 1: Were you raised by your mother [Emma Ford Crouch]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my mother was, yeah. I was raised in what they today call a single-parent household on the one hand, but on the other hand my mother was--she married this guy, Sylvester Newkirk, sometime in the early '50s [1950s], and then they broke up, and then later on they broke up in a few years. Then after that she married this guy, Lee Andrew Vaughan Jr., who was from Texas--no, I'm sorry, who was from Oklahoma and who was related to Sarah Vaughan, but these Negroes were so barbaric in certain ways that they were always trying to figure out why Sarah Vaughan never embraced them, but they were just kind of--like for instance, this guy, he would put syrup on a steak. That's where they were from, you know, but he was all right. He was okay. I think my mother got with him because he was easier to control. See, she couldn't really control my father. This guy, Sylvester Newkirk, he was brain-damaged from World War II. I mean, this--because he was a very small guy but very violent. I mean he was a guy who must have been like maybe 5'8", maybe 5'8", maybe 140, maybe, but this guy would jump on George Foreman. I mean I'm talking about when George Foreman was champion. That's the way he was. The whole thing about just getting, you know, getting your ass whipped or killed or all that, that didn't cross his head. He took nothing from anyone. In fact, I don't know if I've ever met anybody like him since. I mean this guy--the way Dennis Rodman played basketball was the way this guy lived in the sense that Dennis Rodman had absolutely no fear of anyone. If you wanted him to guard Shaquille O'Neal who's seven feet tall and weighs 300 pounds, Rodman would say when and would never back down, even if he had no place to. So this guy was like that, but see, he also had that kind of--he had a hot temper, and he could--he was a very explosive person, and he was the same way even when he became an old man, you know, and couldn't have really dealt. He was still like that because he had some stuff out in his car for you, you know what I mean? If you messed around and got into something with him and let him get to his car now, you're gonna deal with Sylvester Newkirk. You better deal with him then. Don't let him get to his car because when he hits that button on the glove compartment, something's going to be in there that you're not gonna want to deal with, you know, and since he'd been in the military, he knew how to use that so he was that kind of person. Speaker 1: Did they participate in your parenting--in parenting, you know? Speaker 2: These guys? Yeah. Story_ID: 5939 Speaker 1: You grew up in an aggressive environment then. Sort of, really. Speaker 2: Some, somewhat, but it was aggressive, but I mean--but, you see you had two things, though. See, that was one side of what was happening. Now on the other side, you had--like [Sylvester] Newkirk was also a very humorous guy, and he was a guy who was a very good cook, was very generous to people. Like I said, he had a quick temper, and he could be--let me see. Like when he got angry, it could be--the experience could be--I think it could be like being forced to drink a couple of razor blades. I mean it was something, you know. You were not going to forget it after it happened, but again--but see, he wouldn't--see, my grandmother was just like him, though, except, you see--and the thing about the two of them was you would never know it unless you crossed the line, and I do have to give him this. He could be sadistic, but it was always connected to something you had done. He wasn't one of those guys who came in the house looking to spank some kids or something. That wasn't his thing. He wasn't like that, you know, but if you actually--see, the thing that enraged him would be if you did something and then tried to lie your way out of it. See, his thing was like look, boy, if you do something wrong that you wanted to do, just admit that, see, because lying. You think you're gonna get whipped anyway so you might as well admit that you wanted to do it and stop trying to put it on somebody else, and you didn't--because that was the way--that was his thing. You should take it whatever it is, and he worked. He was a hard worker. He was--that's the way he was, and my grandmother was exactly like that, and one time I was with her in a car, and this guy--some woman was crossing the street, and we were in a mint green Pontiac, and this guy started honking the horn and honking it so she got mad so she put the car in park then and turned it off so he really got hot because he couldn't really get around so then he commenced calling her out of her name, at which point she reached over to her glove compartment and pushed a button, and in that was a .45 which she took out and pulled the handle back on and put it in her lap and adjusted the mirror so she could watch him through the rearview mirror. Then she rolled the window down on the driver's side, but she knew he was going to eventually come up to her so when he came up, he said, "You bitch. You dumb blah, blah." He was over in there by the time he got to the door, and then she just turned to him and lifted this .45 up with the handle back, and she said "You know, if you say one more word to me, I'm gonna blow your brains out," and then that was the most compressed etiquette school I ever witnessed because at that moment he suddenly--it was almost as though he was "Just well, excuse me. I'm sorry that I came here and disturbed you in this manner. I know I was a bit out of myself, and I'd like you to accept my apologies," turned around and left so he essentially--that was what that was so I saw that a lot, and also, you know, just growing up as a boy, the stuff you had to deal with, but then at the other side--but there was also in the neighborhood I grew up in, there was this big, collective, extended family type situation, a lot of going in and out of different people's houses, the kids, and the Christmas. This guy named Mr. Wyatt used to take these brown paper bags and put candy and stuff in them, and he would write the name of each kid in each house on both sides of the block, and he would go to each door with this wheelbarrow full of this--full all of these bags of stuff, right, and he would come to the door, and he would say is Mr. Stanley, is Mr. Rudy, is Miss Vicky, are they all here, and we'd come running to the door and say yes, and he'd say this is for you. This is for you. This is for you, you know, and he would sit up on his porch, you know, and smoke his cigar and have his drink. He was an older guy. He was retired, but so you had that sort of thing all the time, too. I mean, in other words, you had to go through the thing. You had to go through a boy's life, you know, brutal stuff on the one hand, great adventures, long bike rides we'd take, eight or ten of us, miles and miles across L.A., learning how to carve things. There was one period we went through about swords where we'd make our own swords and fence all--everywhere, all over the top of the houses and everything because that's what we saw in the movies, and so it was--you know, I wouldn't--I don't think I would trade that with anything I know of because I read of a lot of white, other type, you know, white Americans and European childhoods and all that, and I don't think I would trade mine, no. Not for the people I knew and the things I got to learn, no. Story_ID: 5940 Speaker 1: Where does the introspection come from with you? I mean do you think that the young--is this something that developed later in life with you because you're very introspective, and I'm just wondering was that there at those, you know, those early days? Speaker 2: Yeah, because I was always curious. I always wondered how things worked. I was always--I mean, for instance, I remember once how fascinated I became by gloves, just the fact that you could put a glove--you could cover your hand up, and then you couldn't see it, but it would work, and then you took it off, and it was the same thing so that was--so I think that was the beginning of my interest in masks and how they function, and I think a lot of people--I think that clothing, gloves, things like that --I think that when you're a child you actually do realize more what they are, which is that they're masks. You know, you actually --that's why kids get in and out of adults' clothes and all that because they realize that that's what that is, and there's something about covering something and making something look different so I was always fascinated by that. I was fascinated by the animal world and the horticulture and insects and all of those different things, and then the--I'll never forget when I saw on one of these TV shows where a guy took a drop of water, put it under the microscope, and there were all of these--this teeming world of life was in this little drop of water. I was like whoa so all of those kinds of things were always fascinating me and the, to the people I was around, they had so much intensity in any direction. I'm talking about from--I don't just mean going wild. I mean in terms of the deep, compassionate response to other people, you know, because somebody would be telling a story about something that happened to somebody else, and they'd start crying, you know, because they felt the humanity of somebody else that deeply, and I'm, you know, whoa, that's heavy. You know what I mean? So all of this--of course, I was a child. I'm sure I didn't say anything that dumb, like whoa, that's heavy, but I think that I was always struck by that. When we were kids, I remember my mother told me. I don't remember doing it, but I keep trying to pretend to myself that I did, but she told me the first time I went to church and one of these people got the Holy Ghost that I jumped up and ran out of the church because it frightened me. I didn't know what was happening. So there was also that because of my father's side of the family being religious and this extraordinary eloquence that these ministers could have so all of these kinds of things were always going around in my mind. I was always taken by them, and when I was small and was sickly, I stayed home and read a lot, too, and my mother was very supportive of reading and education because she would say the great thing about books is that you can sit in one room and go all over the world. You can pick up a book and could go to China. You can go to France. You can go to blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and she was the one that made me aware of the fact that Jules Verne who wrote these stories set in all these different places never left Paris. I think Paris or Marseilles or wherever he lived. He never went anywhere. He just would read about them and then he would put them in his books, and so she was just--so she was like that. Story_ID: 5941 Speaker 1: Then, too, see, at that time there was something that has--that I think has gone into decay, and it needs to be resurrected, and that was this Afro-American--this deep Afro-American understanding of the inner life. That is to say people would say to you well, the world might not be fair, boy, but if you learn something, that's yours. If you get something in your head, that's yours. Nobody can steal that from you. Now I don't think there's any--I don't there's any more succinct understanding of what the inner life is about is that these--that your mind, your sensibility, the things that you learn and what they make of you inside, you possess that. Nobody can take that from you, right, and so I thought about that a lot, and then you'd have these--you had all of this community support of reading and thinking about things because if you were sitting on a bus stop, some of these women who were in one of these tributaries of Father Divine's operation who was then dead, but these things were still around, and they'd be walking down the street with these usually pink leaflets, little small leaflets, announcing something, and you know, if I and a couple of other kids were sitting on a bus stop with our books, school books, these women would walk up because they used to have these white--they usually were dressed almost like nurses with these white dresses and white stockings and white shoes, some kind of white hat on, right, and they would say God is truly wonderful. I'm gonna tell you kids something. I'm gonna tell you youngsters something today. Go to school. Read those books. Study. Learn something. Knowledge comes from God. The Lord doesn't want you to be dumb, and they'd be gone, right. Then some wino would stumble up, right, perhaps, not usually the same day, of course. That's in a movie, but on another day you might be there or somewhere else, and some wino is like really like a street--a guy who's out in the street and said yeah. You all want to study them books. You don't want to get out here like me. You don't want to be like me, you know. Learn so then the people in barbershops would give you--at the end of the year they might give you 50 cents for an A and a quarter for a B. They didn't give you any money for Cs and Ds, you know, so you show your report card or if churches and stuff at that time--if a kid did exemplary work in school, that might get announced at church. So and so got all A's this year, and they'd go oh. Stand up, boy, you know, that sort of thing. I didn't go to church a lot after a certain point because my mother, who I don't really think liked all that whooping and hollering, she went Christian Scientist which was like shooting heroin, you know, but now she could whoop and holler in terms of her having a good time with her whist parties and guys come over and play the piano, which was the san and see, then, see, because at that house at 1239 East 28th Street, which no longer exists, Fats Waller and Meade Lux Lewis' album was--Pete Johnson, all those people used to come through the house and play because in those days the piano players would have the addresses of people who had pianos in these different times so you could be sitting at home after school, and the door would knock, and there would be Fats Waller at the door saying, "I heard you have a piano. My name is Thomas Fats Waller. I play the piano. Do you mind if I play your piano?," you know, and people say yes or they say no, and they usually say yes, and then the next thing, you know, these guys are in there playing that piano so we had one of those pianos that had been, you know, that had been--the fingers of masters had gone across those keys. It was one of those blonde pianos, the blonde leather pianos with the big studs on the side. It was one of those so I grew up with that, and the teachers in that era, too, had almost a missionary zeal. They came there. Their intention was to make sure that you were as well prepared to handle your fate as you possibly could be. That was what their thing was, black or white. Every now and then you had a white teacher or a black teacher who had total contempt for kids, but they were really in the minority. The bulk of teachers, they were there to impart knowledge and discipline that they could, and so I feel that a lot of kids today are far more deprived than I was growing up in the blue-collar background, but then, see, in that era, I don't know if you had an underclass. I never--there were some people who were poor and extremely ignorant in the neighborhood, and the thing they had to fight through was their parents. Speaker 2: You were talking--that was interesting about the piano thing. That was very interesting so all these forces are really shaping you. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: As a young person. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: All of this, but it's an environment where education is really--even among people who are not typically educated. Speaker 1: A lot of them weren't educated. Well, see, the thing was when I was growing up, a lot of the people weren't educated at all necessarily, but they had very great reverence for education, for reading, for knowing, and I think that that's something, when we look at the work of a guy like Frederick Douglass and the fact that slavery was so big in the direction of keeping the slaves ignorant, that at least on one level the great reverence for reading and knowledge and stuff may be the example of what Albert Murray calls antagonistic cooperation, that the negative impact of something can bring about a positive reaction, you know, rather than a negative extension. That too can happen, but however it came about, these people were very, very clear on that. They were very clear on that. Story_ID: 5942 Speaker 1: What were the other things forming you as a young person? I mean what are the things? Did you dream about being anything at that point in time, you know, in young adulthood? Were you--would you sort of--I know you said you were fascinated with gloves and, you know, making things, but were there--did you want to be something? Speaker 2: Well, at first I thought I was going to be a painter because I had a very good hand-eye coordination, which is something that you have to stay on or it will go away if you don't stay on it, but I didn't like the messiness of all of that, and then when I discovered the Big Chief notebook with that old mill-colored paper, blue lines, and a number two pencil could solve the problem, that's when I said okay, but the thing that I came later to understand was that the great appeal of writing was that it allowed you to maintain the presence of an experience from the past. That is to say often the way that I'll explain it is that if you go to the swimming pool on Monday at 2:00, and you jump in the water at the same place, whatever it is, and then you leave at 5:00 and say wow, that was a great time. If you go there Tuesday at 2:00 and jump into the same place, it's not necessarily going to feel the same way, but if you can write something down and get the feeling of the way it was on Monday, then that'll stick around, and that was a lot of the appeal to me was that you could keep--that the disappearing facts of experience that are basic to human life could be thwarted through the writing process. Speaker 1: When did your writing start? Speaker 2: I started writing when I was eight, nine, 10, around in there, little stories, mostly imitations of stuff I saw on television, but I was going. By the time I was in high school, I was actually trying to write something, yeah. Speaker 1: And was this encouraged by your mother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. In fact, my moods and stuff were often explained by her to my brother and sister as the fact that I was an artistic type. Right. Speaker 1: How did she know? I know I read that, but I thought that was so cute. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: My mother would just say she's looney. What's wrong with you? Speaker 2: Right. No, well, you know, my mother was very--she was very intellectually aggressive in certain ways, and she read a lot of things about painters and, you know, artists of one sort or another, and she looked at a lot of those things on television documentaries, and she came to understand things like that. Somebody like Boris Pasternak became famous for writing Dr. Zhivago, and they were interviewing him in the newspaper so then she would read those things and stuff so she had a certain kind of sophistication. But, you see, the most important thing about my mother and about all of those people is that they prove out something that Ralph Ellison used to say all the time which is you never know automatically to whom you're talking, you know, or to whom you're listening. You never automatically know so if you say Emma B. Crouch, maid, born 1917, Jefferson, Texas, and if, say, in 1957 that's what you're thinking about, you could miss who you're talking about, you know, so a lot of these people that I was around, they were--some of them were educated. Some of them weren't, but the mental engagement with life was not lacking. Story_ID: 5943 Speaker 1: I've often said that, see, I don't think that there was any community any more civilized than the one that I grew up in, and I'm not talking about the boys who would bash each other in the head if they could, you know, but that just goes with being men, but the--like I was saying earlier, the support for education, the compassion people had, the sense of grace, the ways these guys looked on Saturday. See, Sunday's one thing, but Saturday, now that's the one. That's the real one, see, because that's when the guys are not going to church. That's when they're just strolling up and down the street or whatever it is, sharp, usually casual but clean, though, you know, like the whole thing of these--I remember those short-sleeved sweater shirts these guys would wear and the way they would have them and, you know, how their pants would be, shoes, going to the shoeshine parlor, and they had that one ring that was or something, and they had watches. It's the way they were. Now these guys were truck drivers. They were guys. They were mechanics. They worked on assembly lines and built airplanes. They did a lot of--you know, they were blue-collar guys, but they had a real sense of elegance, though, these men did, and the women. See, there's another--there's a thing I think that feminism kind of screwed up which was the--an understanding that it screwed up, which was that authority and actual power doesn't always come from the declaration of it so--I have a friend who might as well have been born literally in the church, right, who's a millionaire, who works in high tech, and we were talking about that one day. He said look, man. He said the women have always run the church. He said I saw that. I noticed that since I was a boy, and it hasn't changed 40 years later. They run the church, he said, but they don't say they run it, he said, because power is having command. It's not saying I have power. He said that's a lot. He said that's where the feminists screwed up women who have power but aren't walking around with a general's stuff on the shoulders of their clothes, right, so you start thinking you don't have control of something or don't have an enormous influence because nobody's walking around saying you have it, and that's something to me that--see, I don't think anybody's ever really, really dealt with that, but, see, everybody from my generation knows exactly what I'm talking about is that those women who taught school, those women who organized those things in the churches, who set up those field trips, they weren't flunkies because they were directing where things would go and created, you know, the feeling of the community. The deacon's board and all that, they did what they did. Nobody's saying they didn't do what they did, but there was definitely another kind of a force that they had, and another thing I'll tell you, too. See, when I was growing, I had a very--I had some very unusual experiences because there was this guy named Mr. Wilson in my elementary school. He was one of these extremely dark guys who was like Plastic Man. He was like one of those kind of black guys who had extremely--he had long arms and enormous hands, and he seemed like a contortionist because of his physical ease and the way that he could get his body in certain things. I can remember when he would teach us how to play baseball or something like that, but anyway Mr. Wilson's attitude was everybody plays everything so there was no sexual differentiation at all. The girls played football with the boys, but see, we were all at the same--we were still at that eight, ten. You could only do that to about maybe twelve, maybe twelve, but the point is that a girl might be a hitter. She's gonna be a pitcher. She's gonna play first base. She's gonna be quarterback. She's gonna be on the line. She's gonna be blocking. She's gonna be trying to do this and that. Story_ID: 5944 Speaker 1: The other thing was about your fascination with the opposite sex. You were sort of kidding--joking about that. Speaker 2: Oh, right yeah. Well, that was the period of discovering the other, which was these girls, and I remember there was this big deal once when the first time I put my pre-adolescent hand on the buttocks of one of those hinderonies, as we used to call them, and discovered that it actually had a soft quality to it. You know what I mean because being a guy, everything about you is hard, right, and the last thing you're gonna do is put your hand on your mother's booty so you don't have any idea what that's like. And so actually I remember that experience of the shock of it, but then, you know, you went through the regular stuff, coming to discover what they were like, that they were all the same, and they were all exactly the same and all exactly not the same. Which is what I think makes a group in an odd way is that women are, in fact, women so there's something that connects all of them, but their individual humanity makes all of them unlike everybody else in that group, but there's something in them that makes them like everybody else in the group, too. So that was one of my first times of coming to learn that that was the way things--most things are, and I think around then that's when I discovered that I really wasn't attracted to women who were not smart. I might be erotically attracted to them, but I wasn't really attracted to them because I found that intelligence always intensified what I thought was attractive in a female. Now I was as much of a bumbler as anybody else, I think, because usually, in that area, anyway, there are only a couple of guys who really know anything. Everybody else is bumbling around and making up his own romantic movie in which he's the lead, right, in this long line of women as in some production number or falling before his charms, which is usually not necessarily very true--in fact, was not, but there were a group of guys who did know things, but some of the things that they knew, you found out later were really strange in a certain way because I know I used to run with this guy who was explaining to me what the best erotic experience was with a woman, right, and he said well, you know, when you get it in, he said," There's a little thing in there, you know," and he said, "now if you put the front of your johnson against that," he said, "then she'll like it, and you will, too. Right, and so it was a long time before I'd realized how far in he got. Do you know what I mean? So I thought he actually knew something. Well, let's put it like this. In the clitoral sensitive depths of our time, he would definitely be a hero of some sort, but in that era he was actually kind of an oddball when it came down to it, and so years after that, when he and I would run into each other, I'd bring that up, and we would laugh because it was so nutty, right. But yeah, he knew a little something, as the saying goes. Story_ID: 5945 Speaker 1: Basically, I came to see women differently, I think, in the long run than most guys do, primarily because I had seen such powerful personalities, my grandmother, particularly, that kind of woman, so I didn't--there were a lot of things that I didn't associate with being female qualities, like I didn't associate weakness as being male or female. That was just what somebody was or wasn't and a lot of characteristics, you know, running businesses because my grandmother ran a businesses, and I knew different black women who ran businesses. I didn't think of them like that. Being powerhouse disciplinarians because there were a lot of these black teachers who were like that so my sense of the female coming up was a lot like the supposed ambition in terms of how one is perceived that women began to talk about much later, maybe in the '70s [1970s], because they didn't talk about that then, but in that era when I was growing up, too, girls thought of themselves very, very differently. If you asked a class of girls when I was in elementary school what they would be when they grew up, most of them say it would be basically three areas. It would be a mother, a schoolteacher, or a nurse. Those were the three basic ones. Now by 1980 when my daughter was--'80, '81--when she was about four, I asked her what she wanted to be when she grew up. She said, "Oh, I might be an astronaut. I might be a Supreme Court Justice. I might be a police officer. I might be a firefighter. I might be a lawyer." I mean she had a long, long list, but that was because by then, as a child, looking at television, she saw women who were judges. She saw women who were in the military. You know what I mean? She saw women cops so there was no--she wasn't making, taking a political stance. She was just talking about how broad the range of choices had become in terms of the mind of a girl even, at that--you know, that that was over, but so when I was coming up, that was how that was, but I was--I think I also became very fascinated, too, with, if you will, the female mind, which today I don't particularly know that much more about than I did when I was twelve. In fact, no one that I know knows, including other women because if some woman comes up and does something extremely strange, and if you get her--the argument goes to a certain point, then she'll say well, you're just a man. That's why you don't understand, and you say okay. Well, that's fine, and then you describe whatever this behavior was to a number of women friends that you have, and they can't explain it to you either. See, that's why I say I'm not sure that anyone can explain the so-called female mind, right. It's a mysterious element of consciousness in the world, if that's what it is. If, as they say in that bioterm, it's gender-specific, then, as I said, no one truly knows what it is. Story_ID: 5946 Speaker 1: I think that--see, a lot of things have to do with how a guy perceives the relationship with a woman. If he perceives the relationship with a woman having a lot of shadow areas that he moves in and out of that she doesn't really know about or cannot really imagine and she has a certain level of intelligence, then she could be a pain in his ass because she'll figure out what he's doing, right, if that's how he thinks it's supposed to go. If he doesn't think it's supposed to go like that, then her ability to figure things out, to think things through, etcetera, that'll be a big asset. If a guy thinks that the woman takes on her protective role in the relationship by virtue of being strong enough to not be overwhelmed by him when she knows he's wrong, right, then that's to his advantage to be with somebody like that who's smart enough to foresee that this is not a good way to do it. She says you can holler all that you want to, but when all is said and done, that's not correct, and, see, then the woman has that other advantage, which is why they usually win out, which is the ability--is the harassment factor. See, it's the post 11:00 harassment that leads either to domestic violence or to a truce or to a victory. That's why in Africa these--when these corrupt guys have really played up to the wife over and over again for a couple of extra cuts of meat, some more gas, better service, etc., then when it comes time for a government contract to come up, and this guy is number 87 on the list, that's how he gets to be number one because even if the president says I am not going to do that, then see, her harassing him on a nightly basis, eventually he'll just submit and corruption will begin or, at least on that level, it will come in that way so I think that all of those qualities, though, put together, with a certain intelligence driving them are far more beneficial than something else, and when I was coming up, none of the teachers that I had either made it seem as though a woman not being smart was something virtuous. That really wasn't the impression at all, and I never got the impression in any of the classes that I was coming up in that men were automatically supposed to be smarter than women. That just didn't play, and you did see, though--actually you did see one thing which was that anti-intellectual strain that has nothing to do with race, but it's just a fundamental thing about America because of the way that our democracy evolved and how the ability for the common people to get into it, the freedom that the common people had to get into the dialogue which often led to a disdain for refinement because they were too far removed from that played itself out, too, so that a girl who was very smart often tried to figure out another way to compensate, if you will, for that to keep from being alienated into one of the one of them categories so she would do other things to become more socially connected to other people. Now if she was good-looking, she didn't have to do as much as somebody else might have to do, but since people who get tired of someone else's hand always going up in class and them invariably being right if they're called upon and the teacher saying now, "Bernetha, she's an example of what we need in here, if you all would be like her." See, nobody wants to hear that, so people would start getting mad at her, and then she's out there, right, so you have that other side, and I don't think I've ever read anything written by anybody really describing the psychological complexity of the development of a black female of a certain kind of intelligence. In my novel I was after that with the black women in there. I was trying to get to that, that is those kinds of women who--in my novel I was trying to get to those kinds of women who are downhome-ish, if you want to call it that, and would probably most accurately call it that but also are not provincial in any way or intellectually developed, and I just always found that a lot more thrilling because, see, when you had a woman of a certain kind of intelligence, you also had a woman who could imagine things on another scale so you could be with a girl and then go into that imaginary world of what it might be like later or what something might mean and those kinds of discussions, whereas another different level girl, you couldn't do that. You had to keep trying to figure out how to talk about her to get her out of her underwear. That was what the story was, really, and actually not all of her underwear either, in that era. I don't care what was happening. Some things did not come off. That's how that was. That is if you were lucky enough to find that out, you still found out that you had to wait to find something else out. Story_ID: 5947 Speaker 1: You said that you went to George Washington Carver Junior High [Los Angeles, California], and that that school then was becoming more black. Speaker 2: No. That was a black school. Speaker 1: It was a black school. Okay. Speaker 2: Right. That was a black school. See, the junior high school and the high school I went to were essentially black schools. There may have been a couple of Mexicans in there. There were no white kids. There might have been one or two Asians maybe but not many. Speaker 1: The teachers, were they black or white? Speaker 2: They were both. Yeah. Right. Oh, yeah, definitely. Story_ID: 5948 Speaker 1: Who was this person becoming at this point in time? Are you--you know, you had said, you know, I was reading more. You know, I was more studious, but, you know, I also knew the streets. You knew both. Speaker 2: Well, I came to know them because the guys I grew up around were knuckleheads so you know, it just--see, there's a--see, in men, in men--I don't think this is true in women, but I think this is innate to men. See, men have a specific position in the natural order of the world which has nothing to do with intelligence. See, the difference between us and other mammals is we have both the natural position that goes with just being a mammal, and then we have the human element which comes out of having a larger brain which leads to, as we know, many, many other kinds of responses to stimulation. Now the natural order of the male in the world falls only in two categories, really. That is insemination and heavy artillery. That's it. The females can do everything else. They can hunt, right. They can have babies. They can do--you know, whatever else there is to do, they can do that. Now they cannot inseminate each other, and they cannot deal on a physical level with certain things beyond a certain point so that's why if you study, for instance, lions, the male lion essentially is a bum who doesn't do anything until it gets to a certain point. Now the female lion gets to maybe 200 pounds, maybe 250, but around 200. The male can be 300, 400, you know. It can be 450, I mean. Now when it comes time--when it's time for 400 pounds to step into the discussion, then that's when he comes in. That's when he comes in, but if that's not called for, he doesn't do anything. Now it's the same thing with the male elephants. The male elephants are so male, they don't even hang out with each other. They just come around during mating season, battle for the females, inseminate the females, hang around for a little while, and then go wandering off by themselves, which is their favorite thing is to just wander around, you know, eating leaves or whatever it is they eat and being themselves until mating season so when you see all of those elephants together, those are female elephants and baby elephants. Those males aren't--you know they're peripheral to that. Now what happens with men growing up is that they have to deal with that fundamental reality about themselves, and so civilization actually is based upon bringing together the male inclination to physical domination and refinement so that's what you're trying to do because, see, for instance, in a--I was thinking about that because I was at this conference, and there was this little guy who ran things. Now he only ran things because civilization is set up like that because he was talking to these guys. Now he was playing around, but you could tell he was the boss. In the real--in the natural world he would never be the one running things because he was too small. One of these bigger guys would just say no, not you. This is me, right, now all that we have evolved to at this point in human civilization is based upon removing that element as much as possible from society because all of the brilliant woman who are small or the brilliant guys who are small would never get in positions of power in a world that was based purely on physical force, right, so no matter how brilliant they were, they would just be overwhelmed so we have moved forward on the basis of being able to repress that or try to focus it, say, against our enemies, whomever they may happen to be, so when I was coming up, the guys were caught in that particular part of their relationship to the natural order of the world. Now the natural order of the world is about the fact that the world has only one concern which is very different from our concern. See, the only concern that the world has is the perpetuation of itself. In that respect, the world is exactly like a bureaucracy. As people have discovered both the Russian and the American bureaucracy had one thing in common, that each bureaucracy was obsessed with sustaining its own existence. Now what kind of work it was doing, what kind of papers were coming through there, what kind of orders were going out, they don't care about that. Somebody wanted to be able to say where do you work? I work at such and such a place, right. That was number one. Now the world itself is equally impersonal. It doesn't care. All it--the only --for instance, the reason why, from my perspective, the female orgasm might be 10 to 15 to 20 to 25 to 30 times more intense with the male is because since that's the act that she gets inseminated by, right, she has to like it. She has to like it far more than the guy likes it because if the guy gets the most joy from it, if the thrill were reversed, then we probably wouldn't have five billion people on the face of Earth or we might not because that's nature's way of saying you will reproduce. Now nature doesn't care whether you reproduce good people or bad people--masochists, sadists, child molesters, mass murderers. Nature doesn't care about that. All nature cares about is reproduction, that you put more of the species back out there. See, nature fights very hard to keep any species from disappearing so when we come to understand those underlying things, I think we understand better what the real glory of civilization is wherever it arrives in the world because it could easily be the way it is in a number of different species, you know? What is it? The grasshopper, I think it is, the grasshopper or the praying mantis, while she's having sex with the male, she's literally eating his head off so that's the most expensive intercourse, perhaps, of all. When they said he lost his head, ha, ha, ha, ha. When you're talking about the praying mantis, boy, it's whew. They said look forward to this, son. When you finally get a chance to find out what it is, you're not going to know for long, you know. Story_ID: 5949 Speaker 1: You're saying that the guys you were hanging out with were operating on the most primal? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know so it was the biggest, the baddest, whatever. Speaker 2: Yeah, just destructive stuff, basically, and clever, you know--theft, which has a certain kind of cleverness to it. I saw a guy do something one time that was truly remarkable. I mean he must--now I realize later what he actually did, but at the time it seemed magical. See, he came in this liquor store. Now this guy was a real thief so he tells them he was going to steal something, and they laughed at him, right, and he hovered over this stuff and oh and made this noise, and it was like a joke, right, and then they said ah, you guys get out of here, and then we left so everybody had their eyes on him, right, and when we got out, everybody was like well, see, obviously, you didn't get anything there, and he reached inside his coat and started juggling these things that he had stolen. Now what I think he did was that I think as soon as we went in there, he stole immediately and then said now I'm going to steal something, hovered all over it, and everybody's eyes were on him. He said not this time or whatever it was, but when we got out there he said oh, really? He started flipping these things up. Wow, this is impressive, you know, so it was that kind of thing, and you know, we had a lot of fights with people, but we never graduated to that next level of real thuggery. We were like--we were low-level thugs, really. We weren't like real thugs. We never--I mean we carried knives and stuff like that, but we never stabbed nobody or we never attacked anybody. We never rat-packed, either rat or wolf-packed anybody, but we never did stuff like that. We walked around acting as though we would do that, but we never really did anything like that, but we had to deal with people who were like that, and you never forget that. Story_ID: 5950 Speaker 1: There's a bestial quality in certain people, and they carry it in their eyes in a certain way, and you know when you see them how far they're ready to go. When you step into something with them, you better be ready to go where they're ready to go because if you aren't, you're not going to come out of it on the upside. You won't necessarily--I mean, I'm not talking about you getting killed or anything. That's more today. At that time you just might take a beating, but a certain kind of person you could look at them, you'd say okay, I know what this is about. I'm sure. See, that person, you strike that person first. You don't let them decide because if they decide first, and they're faster than you are, then you're going to have a difficult problem coming back, but you step right up on them and just bust them in the mouth or whatever, wherever it is you think you gotta--wherever you think you could bring something off, that's it. You start it because you do not let them, no, no, no, because that's their thing. It's like if you were a--it's almost if you were in a situation and you saw a lion pacing back and forth, if you had to fight the lion, you're gonna move on the lion before the lion decides to move on you. You're going to make the lion have to come at you defensively because if the lion gets a chance to focus all of that weight and come at you, you're gonna have a different kind of a problem. Now, of course, one learns these things by getting one's ass whipped, too, now. See, these are not things that you just--you know, these aren't things that magically float down into your consciousness when you have a problem, but at a certain point then you come to know what certain things are. I remember once I had a--this guy kept harassing me because he was bigger than me, and I was in junior high school, and he kept slapping me on the back of the head, and I just knew where this was gonna go so he said, "Oh, you want to fight, right," so we got ready to go so he made that--see, and that was the first time I really got this right because he actually went to take his jacket off. And so when he got his jacket down to his forearms, right, where his arms were down in here, I busted him hard. I busted him hard, but I waited. I could see that that was exactly the time, and when he got to there, I was like boom, and I moved in on him. You know, I lit him up, see, but that was exactly the right moment, see, because by the time--he didn't get his--he never got his jacket back on, see, but now--and then later on, many years later, I had one of these TV-type experiences. I had gone to the bank, and I had gotten a large amount of money out of the bank in cash. I'm trying to remember why. I don't remember, but anyway I was wearing this field jacket, and I put it in there, and I buttoned the field jacket holes, right, so I'm coming down the street to go to this chiropractor, and just as I get to the gate, these three Mexicans came up on me, right, and I went--and then one of them reached for my pocket where it was so that meant that somebody in the bank was in there had told them so one guy reached, and then I stepped back, and the guy that was behind me, and he grabbed me from behind. Then the guy, the other guy who had tried to reach in my pocket, he was standing in front of me so then I just did one of those TV things. I kicked him down and threw the other guy over my back, right, and there was a third one, and he kind of went, and I said you know, and then they all just jumped up and ran off, but it wasn't something I thought about. I think I had seen that done on television so many times, right, that I wasn't even--you know, it wasn't something I had practiced in some martial arts class or something, right. It was just--oh, now I'm in the movie, and now's my time, you know. Action. That was it. Story_ID: 5951 Speaker 1: It was during that period, too, that I became more of an outsider type. I could get along with a lot of people, but at a certain point I ceased wanting to getting along with everybody. Speaker 2: What age is this? Speaker 1: I'm in my mid-teens. Speaker 2: You did? Okay. Speaker 1: My mid-teens. Part of it had to do with the fact that, see, my mother [Emma Ford Crouch] and my grandmother had a lot of contempt for people who were bullshitting. See, my grandmother was really like what? You know, the idea of doing something because everybody else was doing it, don't ever mention about that around her. I mean, if you wanted to be looked upon as though you were like a big pile of elephant dung in front of the refrigerator, you would be seen as that when you said something to her like why'd you do that, boy? Everybody else was doing it. Oh, no, you've gotta have a better reason than that because anybody with sense would know that's stupid. You're not going to tell me that because everybody else is too stupid to understand that, because these people are dumber than Ned in the first reader, you're going to go along with them? Out of my sight, but, of course, if you made her mad, too, see, she would give you a whipping anyway. She was that type. You didn't have to wait. See, my mother, she would never do that in public so by the time you got home, if you'd done something dumb, she might have cooled off and just tell you to go in your room or something, but, see, my grandmother believed in instant justice so if you acted up in Sears, you got lit up in Sears. If you acted up going up the escalator, you started getting smacked before you got off the escalator. If you acted crazy in the elevator, you started get an ass whipping in the elevator. If you--that was her thing. walking down the street, then you got lit up in the street. Conversely, if you got ill, she'd stay up all night, cook the best breakfast in the world, selfless in terms of her affection or something so you never got the impression--see, that's the thing that a lot of people don't understand today. When they get (unclear) to the whole problem of you mean you were beaten when you were growing up or whatever that is, see, they get into--see, that is horrific if that's all you get, see, because if somebody treats you with an almost overabundance of affection and concern, then when you get that ass whipping, it's in perspective because that's not what you normally get. See, my grandmother, see, the thing with her was she would always--she actually would be startled, you know, see, because the way she lived--see, she was a very interesting person because she was also part Indian, and everything about her was let's get to the groove. Is the groove 50 miles that way? Well, let's start walking. That was her thing. It was like let's have a good time, and when you would do something that was going away from that conception, she would really be startled that anybody would waste time trying to do something dumb that would be--you know what I mean? She could never--that was something she could never get to, and that's probably why she was so confounding to those white people when she was in Texas because that was just her attitude towards everybody, just like my grandfather as I said earlier. They just treated everybody the same way. They didn't buy any, and they didn't have--another thing about those people, too, that was interesting to me that caused me to move away from kind of common clichd stuff was that they had a very, very deep belief in the individual, and they really didn't--they really weren't prejudiced. You know, like, for instance, now they had a lot of problems with Jews, specific individual Jews for whom they worked or with whom they worked. Jews as a group, they didn't mean anything to them so, in other words, my grandmother was working for this--(laughs) My grandmother was working for this Jewish woman, right, in the '30s [1930s], she told me, and, no, she didn't tell me. My mother told me because my grandmother would never have told me this story because her wild side, she never told anybody about that. You would see--you either saw it or you didn't see it so she's coming. Sometime in the '30s [1930s] she's working for this Jewish woman who would always turn the clock back on her, right, and so she would be--she's supposed to leave. She's supposed to work from, say, maybe nine to five or eight to four or whatever it was, and the woman would always turn the clock back so then my grandmother started bringing her own watch, right, so when the woman would turn it back, she'd say no, no, no, no, Matilda. You still have one more hour to work, and she'd say no, I don't. She said here's mine. She said you better check your stuff so now this woman had this--I think she had these trees that had apricots and peaches, I think, and maybe cherries. Anyway, they just were in the backyard, and things would become ripe, and then they would just fall on the ground and rot so my grandmother one day took--I had a big bag, and she put a bunch of stuff in because she was going to bring it home to my mother so the woman stopped her, right, like she was a cop and said, "Where are you going with those? What are you going to do with that?" My grandmother turned to her and said, "I'm going to take every piece of this and ram it up your ass if you don't take your hands off me," at which point the woman said oh, have it. You know, take home. Have a good time, right, but she was that kind of person. Now like I said, my mother told me that, but see, she would never tell me anything like that. In fact, she didn't even like people talking about her like that around her. She didn't like that because it wasn't something--it wasn't bravado stuff. That was just always what she thought you were supposed to do at a certain time so as different kinds of pressures to be a certain way came in on me, I would, you know, at a certain point just take that kind of position that I had seen around me which was this much, no more of that, and I think I guess I've pretty much been like that since then. Story_ID: 5952 Speaker 1: So your individualism really was encouraged by your family, is what you're saying. Speaker 2: But there was also another thing, but there was a very high regard for the individual in the Afro-American world that I grew up in. I don't mean that people didn't have conventions. Everybody's got some kind of convention. Like a person says I'm a pure individual. Well, that guy doesn't walk down the lobby here in the Waldorf Astoria and pull out his johnson and start taking a leak because he doesn't feel like asking anybody where the bathroom is. He, too, Mr. Unconvention, goes and asks where is the lavatory, right, you know so everybody--there are conventions everybody adheres to elsewise, of course, you would have absolute chaos, but they had a big, big thing about you being you and about you and I letting outside people define you, and they also had an enormous understanding of what undergirds a golden age of civilization, which is that everyone does the tip-top best that he or she can do at whatever it is that he or she does so that, you know. Because I mean there's that thing, and so many black people used to hear me say well, look, girl, I'll tell you even if you're going to be out there as a prostitute, be the best prostitute you can be. Don't be second-rate, whatever it is. If you're gonna shine shoes, shine shoes as well as you can. Okay, now what does that result in? That's how you get a city like Florence during the Renaissance. That's where you get those remarkable doors from. That's where you get those astonishing floors that those masons laid. All of that comes from everybody deciding that what I do, I'm gonna do that as well as I can possibly do it. Now that's why a lot of people today don't understand Afro-American life before, say, 1970. See, they don't know what it was like to go in a restaurant where everybody in the restaurant wants to make every other restaurant wish that their restaurant was as good as this restaurant. They don't know what it's like to go into a barbershop, and every barber in there wants to be the best barber in the world or to go into a beauty parlor, and every woman who does hair in there wants to be the best person in the world who does hair and on down the line. See, people don't--they don't know what kind of feeling that gives you as an individual when you know the moment you go in someplace that everybody in there is trying to hit a home run so that you have another--it gives you another feeling. See, that's a feeling that doesn't have anything to do with money, see, because the same thing, the exact same feeling that you get in a place like this, the Waldorf Astoria, that's exactly what you could get in some rib joint, in Pappy's in Watts. When you went in Pappy's, Pappy had that wood-burning barbeque. Hey, when Pappy pulled his stuff out and that long carving knife had commenced to slice that meat off, you knew that meat was happening. When you went certain places to get whatever it was, people--they weren't playing around, and I was so far removed from understanding that when I was a kid because one time my mother, who was a maid, was sitting up bragging to these other black women about how highly regarded she was in the world of maids, not of-- in the world of people who employed maids, right, so I'm sitting up, you know, like a prototypical imbecilic American teenager thinking boy, these black women are in trouble. They're sitting up here bragging about how much these white women respect them for cleaning their houses, poor, dark women. Later on I come to realize that they weren't talking about that. What they were saying is that the excellence symbolizes who I am, not that I'm a maid, not that I'm a redcap, not that I shine shoes, not that I'm a barber, not that I'm a house painter, none of that. It's the excellence itself is symbolic of me. That tells you who I am, that I'm somebody, when you look to me to do this job, I have the capacity to be excellent, and so excellence is what you think of when you think of me, and, again, that's the same thing that undergirds a golden age of civilization. It's like that thing--you know, it's like the story that they tell. The guys, the Renaissance story--these guys are masons and one brick, mortar, brick, mortar, brick, mortar, brick, mortar so the guy says--they ask the first guy what are you doing? He says I'm doing what the foreman told me to do. Then they ask the second guy what are you doing? He says I take one brick, and I put some mortar on top of it. I put another brick on top of that. I put some mortar on top of that. They go to the third guy, and they say what are you doing? He says I'm building a great cathedral. See, what I submit is that those Negroes that I grew up under, they would have answered like the third guy, and somebody else would have just said yeah, but you Negroes aren't doing anything but putting--all you're doing is putting a brick on top of some mortar on top of another brick, right? That's true, too, but the great cathedral is equally true, and so that's what I think has decayed among black people who are not well off economically. You used to be able to perceive that in almost any class, but welfare, too much teenage pregnancy, dope, and a lot of other things destroyed a lot of that. It can always return, though. It can always return because all you have to do is remind people sometimes of who they were at their best, and they'll do their best to try to replicate that. See, if black America discovers a way to reinvent itself as it was, as it was--not segregation and all of that, I'm not talking about that--to reinvent that obsession with internal life, hype education, being excellent, dealing with being an individual, not being afraid to address the individuality of other people, at the same time not being so sentimental that you pretend that everybody's okay, you know. See, all that kind of I'm okay, you're okay? The Negroes were never that nave, you know, so that kind of thing, I don't mean that. I mean an adult, a serious adult vision of life that's based in understanding the extremes of human tragedy but not being overwhelmed by them to the point that you lose the optimism that's necessary for somebody to be excellent at anything. See, I always look at it this way. You have to look at life, if you can, the way that a doctor does. That is to say no amount of great skill is going to keep any of your patients from eventually dying. They're all going to die, and so are you so once you discover that you're not in the immortality business but you decide to fight pain, death, disease as hard as you can fight it, then you're taking the high road, it seems to me, because you're not pretending that there's a different outcome, but you're just saying well, as much as I can do to battle the inevitable, I'm going to do that, and, see, I think that that was the driving force of Afro-American culture coast to coast until it was overwhelmed by, you know, black nationalism and a whole bunch of other garbage like that. Story_ID: 5953 Speaker 1: What are you doing at 18? Speaker 2: I was 18 years old? Speaker 1: Because I thought you didn't enter junior college until '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: No, no--no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: My dates. Speaker 2: No, when I graduated from high school, I started going to East Los Angeles Junior College, and I was there for a year or so, and then I think I started working for one of the poverty programs in East Los Angeles. Was that then or afterwards? Yeah, I think that was then. Then after that I was working for another poverty program in L.A. See, this one was in East Los Angeles. That's when I was around Mexicans a lot, had to deal with their program and their thing, which was another thing, and because I had to deal with these people like the Sandoval brothers. These were like real knuckleheads, you know, and you know, these guys liked to get up in classes. You know, there's always room for blood in the alley. You know, they were those kind of guys, and I had to deal with that, but I dealt with it okay. Speaker 1: So you were teaching at the same time you were going to school? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was teaching a reading class because this was--see, this was one of these things that is really fascinating about something like literacy so here I was. I'm 18 years old, and these guys, you know, some of them very aggressive guys, you know, guys that lifted weights all the time, you know, some of them very good-looking guys, and the girls are around them, and you know, the Mexicans, they're just like the Puerto Ricans because they like to bite each other on the neck and stuff and come, you know, around so you get these big red marks on so, you know, so you said okay, here we go. That was their thing. Now the Negroes called them monkey bites, and the Mexicans called them hickeys, I think, and the other people called them hickeys, but anyway I always found that repulsive, personally, because I always felt like it happened as an advertisement. It wasn't something that just went down, as they say in the heat of. This was like for tomorrow. Now tomorrow somebody will know this about him or will know this about her, right, and so you know it was in that environment, and these guys, they were dressed then the way these blackheads and others dress now because so much of the contemporary 2001 black style comes from these Mexicans, right, that these guys, these black guys in Compton picked up from dealing with them. See, when we were coming up, the very last thing you would have done was dress like a Mexican. That was like ick, right, but, by now it became something else so--but also, see, there was also another thing, which was that you didn't dress like a hoodlum unless you wanted to be treated like a hoodlum. See, in those days you hadn't had the--hoodlumism, if you will, had not been celebrated in anything like rap videos, and there was nothing like gangster rap, and there were no Ice T's, Ice Cubes, Snoop Doggs, Tupac Shakurs, all of that, who became sex symbols and therefore influenced the other--the way that the other--the way younger guys carried themselves so it's like--in other words, see, we didn't have any version when we were coming up as black kids and the Mexican kids either. See, none of us had any version of the Marlon Brando phenomenon or the James Dean phenomenon. There was no black or Latin version of that so the heroes to the black guys and stuff were basically the guys in rhythm and blues and stuff, and they weren't about that at all. Their whole thing was--you know, Smokey Robinson and all those people, they were dealing with something else altogether, and those extraordinary singers and players of Latin music, they definitely weren't dealing with anything like that, and see, in that period a serious battle, a true battle, would be either--well, there were two kinds. You could either have a fight and tear up a movie theater with the Mexican gangs or you might show up at one of their things where the mambo was big then, and that was where the--see, that was the most serious battle to me was out there, that mambo. See, that was--see, you have to--you know what I mean? That was where you had to really come with something then, see, because that was--see, that's something that's never been depicted which was like a group of black guys who knew--black guys and women who knew those Latin dancers and a group of Mexicans who knew those and a band at one of those dances that could really play where somebody was a good--you know, they had good records, and to watch these couples go up against each other, that kind of battle? Oh, that was something. That was something. See, I've never seen anything like that. The only thing I've seen on the level of that is people tangoing, but I'm talking about way upstairs in the tango, though. I'm talking about--see, what I mean, and this was like teenagers, but I mean it was something, the intensity of it and the elegance of it. All of those things I knew about before I came into contact with these guys when I was teaching school, but they were--but, see, these guys were like real--were teaching in the poverty program. These guys were real thugs, and you had to be ready for them. You had to be ready for them, and you had to sometimes just deal with the world the way they dealt with it, and there was also that tragedy of seeing the ones who were not like their brothers. You know, like there was one guy who was really--had a poetic sensibility and the way that he was affected by his no-good brothers and how they essentially eventually pulled him into the spiritual quicksand, the pit that they lived in, was really unfortunate, but you saw a lot of that. You saw a lot of that, and then after that I went on to work in L.A. writing speeches and doing research for this woman who ran this program, and that was when the Watts Riot took place. Story_ID: 5954 Speaker 1: I actually went out there to kind of try to investigate what was happening on Friday the 13th in August 1965 when it really blew up because the first couple of nights had been confrontations with the police and stuff in Watts and Compton, you know, but I was there when it went off and seeing that was something. I'll never forget that one. Speaker 2: And why was that something? Speaker 1: Well, I had never seen a riot. Well, actually I had seen a riot the year before because there had been a riot. Speaker 2: Do this right here. Speaker 1: See, I'd seen a riot the year before the Watts riot exploded. It was in front of my high school so I was in the middle of that. I saw that happen once where the police came. There was a track meet. It was the second most memorable thing I saw at a track meet at my high school. One was that this Asian guy was accosted by four or five knuckleheads who actually got a Bruce Lee treatment, which was--this was like 1964 so that was really shocking because they jumped him, and he did--I'm sure they all went to the hospital, and that was really--that was a legendary moment. That was what--but, of course, it goes in the folklore, and everybody then becomes paranoid about all Asians, you know, because they didn't know enough so they said you gotta watch them. You've gotta watch them. Even if you jump on them in a group, they might whip everybody, one of them might, so I'm sure he had a good time, too, because I know there's probably no greater feeling than to be attacked by four or five people, and they don't know that they're starting off outgunned. There must be a special feeling to that. I've never had any kind of ability like that, but I know there must be something when these guys look at you with that confidence, and they say aha, lunch, and then they discover that they're in the box, right. You know what I mean so this--at this next one, the one I was at where the riot was, this guy was drunk, and the police were trying to get him into this car because he was drunk and disorderly, and his sister got mad and started pummeling one of the cops from the back as he was walking towards the car where they were trying to put--that they were trying to put her brother in. At that point the cop eventually just turns around and pushes her off. Now this was during the period when there was all this rhetoric going on. Malcolm X was everywhere and all this stuff about the cowardice of the black people and the black men in the South, you know. There was all this stuff that was coming out. You will go to war for the white man, but you'll come home, and you'll let a white man slap a black woman and do nothing so all that was in the atmosphere, right, so when he did that, all these guys were so at that point when they did that, the cops who were trying to put the guy in the car, her brother, were distracted, and when they were distracted, her brother, the door that they'd almost closed, he kicked the door open so even though they had handcuffed him, they were trying to--he was sitting there, and he was trying to kick them, and so they took their billy clubs out, and they were trying to essentially beat him into the car, make him back up so that they could close the door and get out of there so while this is going on, as this is happening, suddenly I saw this cop gets hit in the face with a brick and goes down just like a toy, right, boom, and then another brick hits another cop, pow, and they go down. Then both of them get up, and their faces are covered with blood, and then the other--then one of--there's bottles and stuff flying, and then the cops eventually draw their guns, and it ended then, but I had never seen that kind of frenzy before. Story_ID: 5955 Speaker 1: Never, no--no degrees at all. I got an honorary doctorate, but I don't have any. Speaker 2: That's impressive. Speaker 1: But I don't have any. I never even got an AA [associates degree], you know, which is the, you know, the two-year kind. I never got no degree. Speaker 2: So you were writing and teaching? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So what were you teaching at Claremont [McKenna College, Claremont, California] then? Speaker 1: See, this is how this goes. See, after--in 1965 when I saw the [Watts] riots, and I saw that whole thing blow up, at that time I was working for the Neighborhood Adult Participation Project, which to this day I don't understand, but I don't know that all those programs were supposed to be understood. I think they were just supposed to employ people, and when I think back, I'm still trying to figure out what we were doing. Now we were accumulating some kind of information so I guess we were doing some kind of survey work to potentially lead to something being done about black people in lower-income communities, but I can't actually tell you what we were doing. In fact, I might have to say it was--well, basically since all I did really was write speeches and sometimes go out and interview people, I can't really say what it was, but I'll tell you this. At this point in time it's very difficult for me to explain to you what it was as opposed to when I was working in East L.A., it was a very specific thing. I was trying to teach these kids, this was a program, the fundamental purpose of which in my wing of it was the teaching of kids who had either dropped out of school or been sent to the penitentiary and were now--who were illiterate. We were trying to bring them back in, see, and that was also where you start seeing the real weakness of illiteracy, to see something you forget because if you're around people who can read, it's a very--it's an astonishing experience initially, anyway, to see this guy who has an enormous amount of power in his little clique of criminals and the Mexican girls with too much makeup and big hair, as they say. And all of that are drooling over him and all that and see this guy sweating cannonballs as he tries to get through the clarity of a sentence on a page and the embarrassment of, you know--and the impotence that you started seeing him feel and the frustration and the need for help and then the anger and resentment and attempt to pretend that this doesn't mean anything so you watch him go through all of that, and in a very short period of time I don't care about this, you know, you know. When is this class going to be over? But you watch him actually try to read. He woke up at 8:00 in the morning, brushed his teeth, washed his face, put on his clothes, and went to school. What it would take one of those guys to get through that was something very painful to watch, and the distance from the things that actually control elements in the world become obvious or becomes obvious to them whenever they're doing it. And then they realize, again, when I was in court, that's the difference between me and my lawyers and the judge and a lot of the people in court. I'm the one in there that can't read. I couldn't even read my own case. If somebody said okay, here's all the papers on your case, if they gave it to me, it would mean nothing. It would just be paper with stuff on it so you see what that is, you know. And you see then that there's the fact that so much of civilization is also about being able to take something that's inside you and put it outside, which is what you're doing even if you write a letter so you have these people who can only put things outside by virtue of talking or by doing something. So my worries and books of law and all these other things are like mirages to them. They can never get their hands on them, and whenever they're exposed to that, they become very childlike for a little while, a very short period of time. Story_ID: 5956 Speaker 1: You had come out of a black community that was poor going to a--teaching in a Mexican community. What are the differences because some people say that, you know, there's this whole thing about there really being more cultural differences, but were there differences that you saw in the two communities coming up? Speaker 2: Basically, no, although--well, Mexicans didn't like too much if you started messing around with those Mexican girls. They didn't like that too thick, and they were Mexicans, and since--you know, they ate Mexican food. They listened to Latin music. They carried themselves a certain way. They had a certain kind of physicality, but all those things, all those things turned out to be--finally was just their version of what everybody else does. See, finally all culture is about really is the style with which people approach the fundamentals of existence. I mean every society wants to have sex, so there's a courtship ritual, and there's stuff that goes with that so what makes one group different is not--see, there's no one who argues--there's no society that argues that the male inserts his penis in the female by backing into her. See, there's no society that says that that I know of because if they do, there's another kind of equipment that no one knows about in that society, but no one ever argues that point, right, so the arguments are something else. No one argues that you shouldn't eat food, but they may argue that you shouldn't eat this or you shouldn't eat that. And so all of these different things come--are very much alike, and then, see, I used to go to this joint that I took my wife to that actually is still there because I used to go with this woman, this Mexican. Wow, she was something. She was an adult, too. See, I was like 19, and she was like about 35, and she was fine, too, and I used to go to this joint with her, but it was much--but it's that thing that memory does, right. When I remembered it, it was--I remembered it as being a big place because we used to go in there, and they had those bands that would wander around the tables and play with the big bass guitars, and the guys would sing in four-part harmony and all of that dressed, you know, in the traditional Mexican stuff with the conchos on their pants and all of that, and we used to go in there and drink margaritas and eat tortillas and all that. She was one of those women who liked to twist her hair up. She was a twister long before twisting got big, and boy, oh, boy. Anyway, that feeling in there when everybody would be into it, that's the feeling everybody's looking for, and that was just their version of it. I'd been in it before, but I hadn't been in it with that food. I hadn't been in it hearing people speaking Spanish, and I hadn't been it with people who were like that, but that particular feeling, I felt that in my house. I felt that in other houses. It was the same thing, but it was their way of getting to it, and I've found that to be true anywhere you go that somewhere, see, there's a groove palace of a sort, whether it's in somebody's living room or in a restaurant or a dance hall or whatever it is. There's a groove palace, and everybody knows that that's where you go to get there. Now some people carry the groove palace in themselves so people just follow them wherever they go that they're the groove palace because when they get there it'll be that thing, right, and that helped me see something. And see, there's also something about Mexicans and Mexico and that strange combination of elegance, fatalism, sadism that comes from the Spanish, you know, because Spanish culture is this weird intermixing of very complex refinement and horrific sadistic elements that are played out in the cockfights, and the bullfight is another thing. See, the bullfight is about a bigger, more complex proposition, but to see that in them, not so--and I don't mean it--I don't think that everybody absorbs the worst elements of it. They just know about it because their thing is--I was asking this Mexican once because he was joking with me. I said, "Why do Mexicans like to have siestas?" He said "Oh, you're resting up so you'll be able to party." I said every day?" He said. "Why not?" (laughing) You know, I mean, you know, and so that was an incredible experience for me with the guys dealing with illiteracy, coming to meet this woman, also meeting these other white people who had come there to be a part of this program, one of whom had been in the civil rights movement. He was going through depression, you know, because, see, there's a whole--there was a number of depressive, not depressives. There were a number of people who were very depressed by that dramatic experience that they had in the South of knowing of people being murdered, terrified, fire-bombed, all of that. That left a lot of that--that messed up a lot of people so I met--there were some of those people there, too, so by the time I got to work in the program during--where the Watts riot took place, during the period of the Watts riot, I had already seen a lot of very, very different things, and when I went to that, I saw a whole other group of people, too, and I also--see, there was another thing, too. See, there was a cartoon Negro quality to the bullshit side of that, that if you act--see, the thing was some of it was so fraudulent that if you actually had filmed it, black people would never have ever gotten another dime spent on them for any kind of community program that was not overseen by white folks because there was some stuff that would be done sometimes, when I think back and look at it, I'd be like [facial expression]. Because it was so out. I mean it was like--because it was like exactly what a guy like in the white aryan resistance, what he would imagine almost, short of an orgy or something like that. Yeah, every now and then you'd see something like that, and you'd be like [facial expression]. Story_ID: 5957 Speaker 1: Were you becoming a black radical yourself ever? Speaker 2: Oh, I became one, but I couldn't handle it. Speaker 1: Okay, so let's talk about that. Speaker 2: I became one after the [Watts] riot [1965]. Speaker 1: You became one after the riot, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because, see, the riot put something on everybody, see, because you saw things in that riot. See, I saw a lot of things there. You saw things you'll never forget. You know, I mean, I saw two things that I'll never--that on my death bed I might be thinking about them, if I get to a death bed. You never know how that goes. One was I saw the police pull this black woman out of a window that had been broken when she was trying-when these people were trying to loot something, and I saw they would snatch her through this window. The window was broken, but they reached in and snatched her, and she got cut coming through, and by the time she got to the car, she was covered with blood from head to foot, and another one was I saw this woman, while when the riot like swelled up and started moving, moving down from Watts which is in the South so it started moving North. I saw this black woman go into one of these windows and started taking these domestic workers' uniforms off. She was stealing them, you know, as if to say after this is over, I'll have some new uniforms to go clean these white folks' houses in, you know, so that had a certain kind of quality to it, too. It was a little eerie because people had--there's a certain kind of--there's a frivolity. See, riots are strange because they have this bizarre combination of frivolity and real violence, and it goes back and forth, and you know, and I also saw this guy, this white guy had wandered in. He didn't know where he was. He didn't know what was going on because it hadn't gotten--it had burst out of Watts, but now it was starting to build, and so he drove into this neighborhood, you know, and these guys came to him and started--you know, they start pummeling him in the car and stuff, and they turned the car over. And there was this guy on the outside of the group who was trying to get into the front so he could stab this guy, right, because they were just pounding him, and they would throw bottles at him and all that because they had just chased off the truck from the television station with the black guy in it because, you know, that was when the black reporters got some jobs, right, because whenever there's a race riot, all the black reporters can be sure it will be live from, you know, boom, boom, boom so they got out there, and they said, you know, we're out here. We're gonna get rid of all the Toms. They said, "You're not a Tom, are you?" They said no, no, no, no because, see, they had all broken into the liquor store, and by then these guys were drunk because you know. Now the thing was, of course, that that was where you came to find out--that was the precursor of the brand-name wrapper and stuff because, you know, they got the--they snatched out the (unclear). They snatched out the Johnny Walker, I mean, you know, white pouring lemon juice and all that kind of stuff. They wouldn't think about that. They knew what all the best stuff was, and they were out there on the lawn, 51st and Avalon, drinking that. They were drunk with the good stuff. No hangover the next day, and when they turned his car over, this guy was edging in, and he was trying to get to the front to stab this guy because he would have killed him. Then this black preacher came across the street, right. He said don't kill him. Don't kill him. Please don't kill him, and they turned around to him, and they looked at him like they were going to attack him, right, and then he said, "If you want to kill somebody, kill me!" And those Negroes looked at him, and they turned around, and they turned that car upright, and this white guy looked over there. Blood was dripping off of him. He was covered with blood, and he looked at them, and he turned the key and drove off. I've never seen anything like that before. I'll never forget that as long as I live. It was another kind of thing because he was serious. He would have let them kill him. It just did something. Nobody--and the thing was no one said anything. When he did that, they just turned around, turned the car upside up because it was on its side, you know, and at that point people were trying to--they were over there beating the guy. They lifted the car up. The guy looked around for a moment and drove off. See, whoever this guy is, see, he'll never see--but it was so chaotic, I don't even know if he knew what happened. I don't know if he heard that. Probably the only thing he knew was that for some reason these people that were trying to kill him just turned the car up and stepped back, and he drove off, but, see, that's the kind of a thing. See, I associate that with like the deep moral integrity that exists always in the black community. Even in a moment that chaotic with that much violence going on, that there's some people who are just not going to be pulled over there. Speaker 1: Now--so you became a black national, right? Speaker 2: Excuse me? Speaker 1: So you became a black radical, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 5958 Speaker 1: Why did I turn towards black nationalism? Speaker 2: Well, I understand why you turned towards black nationalism. Speaker 1: Now, don't forget. I had been involved--oh, actually, don't forget--I never told you. See, about the age of fourteen or fifteen, I became involved with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] in L.A., and while I was in junior high school, I was on picket lines picketing Safeway and this and that because they didn't have any black managers and stuff like that so I eventually became part of Friends of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], which worked to help raise money for SNCC, and so when Bob Moses came to raise money for SNCC in 1964, I traveled around with him and this guy named Jimmy Garrett who had gone South. He and I had been going to high school together, and I went to San Francisco with them and watched Moses with him at these different things, and that was what they called the Valley then where there were like no Negroes out there except as guests. They're there now, but they were not there then, and it was really a fascinating thing watching Moses and all of them, and his explanations for why there was no--why non-violence was used and all of that and his very anti-racist, anti-segregationist position because I remember one time we were in the car, and we were riding with one of the inevitable wealthy white women that you encounter in any kind of radical movement. Eventually they get there, and she turned at one point in the car, and she said to Bob, she says, "Bob, after we free the Negroes, how soon are we going to move to free the women?", and he said, "Why wait?" He said, "Let's just free everybody at the same time. Come on. Now, you know, because that was the way he was, you know, but he never spoke as loud as I'm speaking. He always was a soft-spoken guy, you know, and so all that stuff, Malcolm X and all that, to me at that side of time was just some noise. It was just noise because I had heard of them, and I remember one time when I was in high school this guy named Oliver Crawford said yeah, man, all these guys out here, have you seen them? They wear bow ties all the time, and when they say hello to each other, they say aselem malakum, (laughs) and so we were walking down the street, and they were walking down there with some papers and stuff. He said there goes one of those ali sali akem people, and so you know, we'd look over there, you know, and so we heard all that stuff about the white man was invented 6,000 years ago by a mad scientist and all of that, we just--not that, but after the riot there was this upsurge of a certain kind of antipathy towards white America and white people, and then politics became skin tone so there was a line that was us, and then there was them, and in '66 [1966], of course, that was when Stokely Carmichael announced Black Power, and this whole idea about black manhood and nonviolence was--and telling your enemy that you love your enemy and all that was just some Uncle Tom type stuff so I got tied up in it for a moment because, for me, it was an extension of teen rebellion in retrospect. That's why I referred often to that period as nothing more than political rock and roll, that is that it was something that allowed one to rebel against, you know, the black American conventions. I'm talking about from where we were, and in place of the motorcycle, the white t-shirt, and the black leather jacket, right, was the Afro hairdo, the dashiki, and obsession with Africa and calling yourself black. Because there had been that period when calling somebody black was fighting words when somebody would actually so that was a reversal of that, and so I got tied up in that, but the only problem I had was that I never felt natural in it. I mean it felt good to be full of rage because it's an easy emotion to have because it doesn't have any nuance to it. You know, you could just walk around and be mad all the time and you know, and plus, you know, when there's three or four of you, young men and all of that, and you get around some white people, and you look mad all the time, and they're kind of like can we help you? Are you all right? Did anyone treat you badly? You can do that, right, and then there's always some white girl who's running around and ready to take her panties off to make you--to calm you down, right, to make you feel less oppressed, and so that was a good period, in a certain sense, for a young guy, irresponsible as it may have been, but the most interesting thing that happened during that Black Nationalist period was that the white girls, most of whom were Jews, were run out of the movement, and they were replaced by middle-class black girls who were treated like dog shit, too. See, so the thing that was interesting was that the white girls, the Jews, came, and they paid penance for plantation slavery which Jews weren't even involved in, which is the hilarious part about it, right, so you got these white girls from Long Island and Lake Shore Drive and all of that, all over America, right, and they're paying for Scarlett O'Hara, you know, and their parents didn't get to America 'til 1901 or 19-- I mean their ancestors in America, right, but they're so assimilated on a certain level, they're gonna--you know, they're gonna claim plantation slavery, too, right, so then when they get run out, then when the Angela Davises, the Kathleen Cleavers, when what some people call the Nellows--instead of calling them Yellows, they used to call them--instead of calling them Yellows, they used to call them Nellows or Nellaws, right, when they came in, right, and the long hair of the white girl was replace by the big Afro, and so that was when the guys would talk about the girl that they'd run into was fine, they said yeah, man, she's light, and she's got a big Afro, right, so now that whole thing was going on. All that was in there too, but, finally I started thinking it was something of a charade because it was so based in racial antipathy that it was really at odds with my own background, see, because when I was coming up, the worst thing you could be was a racist to black people I always grew up around. See, they had no nave feelings about racism, but they thought that for you to sink down into judging somebody you didn't know was truly a great sin because you, better than anyone, should know, you know, how fraudulent that was and how little you could ever really assume that you knew about someone whom you really didn't know, and one time there was another saying that these older black people had about that was they said that, you know, if you want to keep a man down in a muddy hole, you have to climb down in there and get muddy yourself to keep him down there because he's not gonna stay down there just because you put him there. And so their whole thing was if you get in there, you can become that, and my mother and those people, they could never make heads nor tails of it, you know. They didn't care. They weren't pro- or anti-African. They were just like, "And?" That was their thing, and so the dashikis and all that, they just kind of looked at that as either good or bad taste or exotic. Anything about some substantial connection to Africa or your true identity, that there was some pure, deep bullshit. Story_ID: 5959 Speaker 1: Well, you have a couple of very--I mean, you have many different kinds of black nationalism, but see, I'm talking about the pop version of black nationalism which is what begat Kwanzaa. See, that's all pop black nationalism. I'm not talking about people who do a lot of study and get involved in some obsession with Africa and our relationship as people in the Western Hemisphere who all arrived here fundamentally as chattel slaves, etc., and were taught to hate their hair, their lips, their noses, their skin tone, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. Now I'm not talking about those people, but I am saying also this, that black people themselves have no greater problems with their looks than anybody else. Like, for instance, there's a--in Philip Roth's book 'The Ghostwriter', there's a guy who talks or somebody talks about the slaughter of Jews, the genocide of Jews, and he says well, there's a genocide of Jews that takes place every day right here in New Jersey in a doctor's office. It doesn't take place ith a gas chamber. It doesn't take place behind barbed wire and gas. It takes place on a table with a little hammer, you know? He says dozens upon dozens upon dozens of Jews have their noses broken every day here, right here in New Jersey, right, and now, okay, start with them. Go to--go back to Jean Harlow. She popularizes the platinum blondee look. If the Negro only had a concession on the amount of peroxide and blonde hair dye that has been sold over the last seventy years, we'd be doing okay. Okay, move then to all of the cosmetic surgery, the liposuction, all of this stuff. They didn't put this together for the Negro. All of these--Max Factor, all of these people who became multi-multi-millionaires, if not billionaires, in the cosmetic industry, they weren't thinking about the Negro. The dissatisfaction with what one looks like is not something that black people should feel they alone suffer, if in fact they suffer from that. It's just--see, I think it's also part of democracy. See, I think--in other words, I think the idea that you can reinvent yourself, as people love to talk about today, that also has its presence just in the world of the individual look. I mean like now everywhere you look is someone. You, too, can have a body like this, right? You, too, can have washboard abs. You too, can, you know. Okay, now they've been saying in that America forever, that whatever you started with, don't worry about it. We can change it for you. Now the Negro does have to deal with all of those things that were Niagara-like showered down upon him or upon her, but those things, I think, need to be seen within the context of the country at large. In that period black people have become so nationalistic or--in that period the black people of my generation, who were the baby-boom people, didn't particularly see the experience within the context of the country at large, and so at a certain point I began to see that as a monumental loss of faith in the democratic proposition and the idea that your freedom would come from someplace else, and so this idea of Africa being some kind of paradise that you had lost at some point took on currency, but of course, as more and more people went to Africa, they came back going whew, I never thought I'd thank God for slavery, but when I went to Africa, I came back here, and I said boy, I must--I know slavery wasn't fun, but goddamn am I glad I didn't stay in Africa, you know. See, now that's been said so many times. Now, you'll hear that off camera. You'll hear that over the--coming out of a telephone many times, but if those very same people were interviewed by Ted Koppel or somebody, and he said well, "Mr. Rudy Lee Taylor, what do you think about your African identity?" "Well, you know, I can't tell you, Mr. Koppel, how important that is to me. I used to not know where I was. I used to not have any idea that black people were pharaohs in Egypt, and there were all kind of things about Africa that made me more of a person. In fact, before I came in contact with that, you could say I'd been brainwashed," right. Now that very same guy, if you met him in a bar on the south side of Chicago the next night, and you said "Rudy, you don't really believe that, do you?" "Hell, no, but I mean if I told the truth, the white folks would know we're more fucked up than they already think we are so obviously you've got that kind of thing," right. And the basic thing is it's never gone deeper than the cosmetic. That's the thing I find fascinating about it. Story_ID: 5960 Speaker 1: Do you know LeRoi Jones or Amiri Baraka personally? Speaker 2: Do I know him personally? Speaker 1: Um hmm. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, because I read where you had read his poem over and over again, and that was important to you, but you don't even call him--you refer to him as LeRoi Jones. You don't refer to him as Amiri Baraka. Speaker 2: Yeah, not only do I not refer to LeRoi Jones as Amiri Baraka, but he answers when I call him Roy. How about that? Well, see, I think he's a tragic figure. I think he's one of the most tragic figures in the second half of the 20th century in America because this was a man who had an extraordinary talent. I mean truly, truly exceptional, but he was so overwhelmed by his guilt for having married a Jewish woman and for having had with her two children and for living downtown and for being sexually confused at a certain point in his earlier life and all of that, that he maniacally went into a certain kind of black nationalism and rejected everything. You know, he became a homophobe. He became anti-Semitic. He became agitprop and rejected the kind of complex artistic styles and stuff that he was in the process of mastering before he was overwhelmed, and so it was--he was truly a great loss because after about 1967 or so he just wrote a bunch of agitprop garbage over and over and over, I mean, so he essentially incinerated his talent in order to make himself more understandable to the kind of simpletons that he should have rejected all along, but, you see, I know his work extremely well, and periodically he writes these nasty things about me. He calls me this and that, but, you see, whenever we see each other, we don't--that doesn't matter because, see, he looks at life like a lawyer. See, I was going to throttle him one night in a club because we got into a minor argument, but then I thought later on--fortunately some people stepped in, fortunately for him because he's a small guy--but later on I realized that he actually is a guy who doesn't take any of that beyond the fact of--he's like a guy who talks terribly about the opposing lawyer in court, and then they meet for a drink or dinner or go play golf together the next Saturday so that's the way he is with me. Now he may be that with a lot of people, but, you know, he's--it's a sad case, but that book "Home" was really very important to me when I was coming up, but, see, I've gone far beyond what he was capable of writing at that time. Now had he continued developing what he had, he would probably be part of the constellation of--you know, he'd be a member of that constellation of superior talents that would have a certain kind of invincible authority in the aesthetic world. Story_ID: 5961 Speaker 1: Is he influencing you at the same time that Ralph Ellison's 'The Invisible Man' came out? When did you meet and then how did--I know Larry Neal introduced you to Albert Murray, but when did that--oh, you met him in 1970 because it's a little later. Speaker 2: Right. Well, yeah. Well, I was influenced by Jones first, but then Jayne Cortez, under whom I worked from 1965 to 1967 in the--what was first called Studio Watts and then later--the Watts Repertory Theater Company. We did [Jean] Genet's 'The Blacks'. We did 'Moon on a Rainbow Shawl'. We did a lot of original plays that we wrote collectively. She introduced me to [Ralph] Ellison, both 'Shadow and Act' and 'Invisible Man' which she read every year. Once a year she read it, and she told me that I had to read that book, that this book--that there was nothing like this at all, and so when I read that, I was astonished, and I began--I thought a lot about that, and his essays were really different because they were coming from a level or learning that was far above what LeRoi Jones was dealing with, although LeRoi Jones, though, at his best he had--see, the thing about LeRoi Jones was that he had--see, he had some new rhythms. He had some new rhythms. I mean he had another way that he could get from place to place that nobody else had ever written like him. He was an original. I mean he could really do some startling things, and there was--see, see there was another kind of a negroid element that was more street in him, even though he was a middle-class Negro, and Ellison actually was far more street than him. Ellison wrote--Ellison didn't write like that, but Ellison definitely was more of a street Negro than LeRoi Jones by any means and had lived things and had done things that LeRoi Jones didn't even imagine doing, you know, hopping trains and all that kind of stuff, you know, but you have to say, though, finally, that--see that loss is very complicated and important because of two things. When LeRoi Jones sold out to black nationalism just because of the charisma of his personality and his performance style that he honed during that period, see, he misled a lot of people a certain kind of a way. Then when he discovered Marxism, he became even more boring, you know, and now he's just another super-left-wing bore who writes the same thing over and over again, but the thing that turned me around completely, I think, was after I met Murray, Albert Murray, although I was moving away from that because I couldn't--it wasn't big enough, and furthermore, see, the Negroes that we'd be turning out at these black power conferences and all that, I mean they were so mediocre. They were walking around. You know, it's kind of like, as a woman, I know you must have experienced this, particularly when you're a kid. When you're around these guys who are just like some dumb athletes, and they're carrying themselves like they're nuclear physicists or something who have just figured out something, a real cure for--that'll work for breast cancer, prostate cancer, brain tumors, I mean they're carrying themselves like they're in the crme de la crme of physicists who understand that. Their stuff is so heavy that they're going to be able to transfer into medicine and completely revolutionize it, right, and then you just find out they're just some dumb athletes. Now if you get through--if somebody turns a big fan on and then that fraudulent smoke of self-importance is blown away, and you actually see who they are, you go gee whiz, what jerks, right, and so the thing with me is that I'd be at these black power conferences, and I'd get into conversations with these Negroes, and I'd be like gee whiz. This guy is not much smarter than a donkey, you know, and then he--and see, that was the other thing. The other thing that went along with black nationalism in that era were two things, pretension and pomposity. You know, the people who were like they got some--you know, they were just well. I remember once I was at this college where this guy was the head of the Black Studies department. No, he was head of the black student union, and the way he opened up this meeting, I wish I could remembere his exact words, but it was kind of like hey, hey, hey. Yeah, brother. Yeah, sister. Here we are, descendants coming all the way up from the slave ship, all the way, long way from Mama Africa, but today now we're gonna talk about some stuff. We got to think about right up in here now connected to Africanity, and so you had to go through that--you know, you have to go through that in one version or another, place after place. Then you had all of these fake black academics who were sitting there pretending to take this stuff seriously because those students on the campuses had so brow-beaten the white faculty and administrators that you actually had carte blanche of a sort, right, and so much so that one buffoon, Marvin X, I think it was--I think it was at San Diego State--had a communications class in which he assigned this black woman who took this communications class to learn how to make a bean pie because the best way for a black woman to communicate to a black man was through his stomach. Now, if you don't know that a communications class is not about male-female relations, it's actually about communications. It's not about communication, right, and you're actually come to class weekly, that's unbelievable. That's unbelievable so when I started looking at all of that, I was like really appalled, and finally I just had to just say look, later for all of that, later for it all, and that's what my first book of essays, 'Notes of a Hanging Judge', after I came to New York, after I escaped from what I call the Academic Foreign Legion and got--came to New York in 1975. Then I started writing for the 'Village Voice', and I've worked for them for about 15 years. Story_ID: 5962 Speaker 1: Do you think that the exposure plus New York and putting you--do you think that caused you to think differently of the people you were coming into contact with at that time, the mixture of, you know, and what brought you--what made you come to New York in the first place? Speaker 2: Well, the thing that made me come to New York was I didn't want to get tenure. See, when I was teaching at the Claremont Colleges, I was running the risk of becoming a tenured professor. Speaker 1: So what was so bad about that? Speaker 2: Well, the reason I didn't want to become a tenured professor was because I saw what tenure had done to a number of people, and I became sort of paranoid because I felt like it could actually get in your way. You could become less industrious, less ambitious, and you could just be like a lot of those people were. They might have been experts in their field, but they were just kind of--they were sort of like--they were like veal that had been--that was suspended but didn't know it, and so I just kind of felt like I didn't really want to be there, and so as soon as I got a chance to escape, I did, and I also was playing drums at the time. I had a band, you know. I was coming to New York to do all of that, and so when I came to New York for the first four or five years, I also played the drums, but I was in avant-garde jazz so you really didn't have to play well because avant-garde is always a big smoke screen for a lack of real skill. And so people asked me why did you stop playing the drums, and I said because I actually started hearing what I sounded like so that was a good tonic for me playing, and I stopped playing and started focusing. I just focused in on writing, and out of that came my first book of essays which, to some extent, I think it's the essays of 1979 to 1989. I think they pretty much sum up what happened during that period. I think I caught that period pretty well because it talks about a lot of different kinds of things, and when I left there in 1990, after a very, very miniature version of a brawl with Harry Allen over the subject of rap music. See, we got in a discussion in which I was saying that rap music was no good, and he was saying that it was good, and I was saying that one of the reasons that rap music was no good was because it celebrated thuggery and scumbags and violence and this and that, and he very adamantly disagreed with me, and so of course, I assaulted him, you know. In the interest of talking against the promotion of thuggish behavior, I smacked him, right, and so fortunately I was fired because I've always said the two best things that ever happened to me were being--in terms of the 'Village Voice', was one, being hired by the 'Village Voice', and two, being fired by the 'Village Voice' but not necessarily in that order so then after I left the 'Village Voice', that's when my career really took off, and things started coming, and I wrote these other books, and I think Wynton Marsalis and I became--no, that started in the early '80s [1980s]. we came to know each other. Then we went on to found Jazz at Lincoln Center along with Gordon Davidson and other people and--Gordon Davis, I'm sorry, not Davidson. See, that's what happens when you're here in New York, you'll say Davis when you should have said Davidson or something, and most recently I've written my novel, which I think is my best work so far. Story_ID: 5963 Speaker 1: You continue to be a commentator really. Would you consider it a print commentator, a writer? Speaker 2: Well, I would describe--go ahead. Speaker 1: Go on. Speaker 2: No, what were you going to say? Speaker 1: Well, I mean I think you said a lot of things. Actually, I've enjoyed this interview a lot because I was wondering about that black nationalism, but I agree with you. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because I think the way it's positioned out here, it's positioned that you're attacking all that's sort of what they call race, the people who are race people, but that's not what you're doing. Speaker 2: No, well, the thing--see, one of the problems that you have is if you don't toe a particular party line is that someone will say something about you. People won't read your material, and they'll begin to discuss you on the basis of something they heard about you. Many is the time I've been someplace and people--I'll come someplace and be on a panel or something, and after the panel all of these black people come up to me and say, "Man, I didn't--you're nothing like the way people say you are." I say, "What do you mean?" "Hey, man, they got you wrong, man. People always describe you like some right-wing black conservative or something. See, you're not that at all." I said, "I know, but you know, you have to actually either hear me or actually read my books. If you read my books, you'll be disavowed of that misinterpretation, too." And so whenever I get--see, I don't--once I get there, I don't have a problem, and by the way, it doesn't make any difference what the age the black people are because I could talk to black kids in elementary school or junior high school or high school. It doesn't make any difference. Story_ID: 5964 Speaker 1: You call yourself a writer, but I think you've been also more a commentator on the American experience, in some respects. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but see, it's not unusual for a writer, if a writer is around long enough, to end up writing about things other than--to end up writing in a number of areas. Now you have people like Faulkner who only wrote fiction, period, and that was what he wrote. There was no major Faulkner criticism or anything, of anything or about anything. That wasn't what he was about. He was about trying to write as much as he could between those bouts he had with the bottle so that was the only thing that was on his mind. Now if you go to somebody like [Ralph] Ellison, [Saul] Bellow, [Phillip] Roth, [Norman] Mailer, Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, Henry James, you had people who wrote stuff that was very respected in one arena but also wrote criticism, wrote certain kinds of essays, might write as Mailer did about boxing, [Ernest] Hemingway about the bullfight, many, many different kinds of things, and Ellison has written about many different kinds of things. Speaker 1: But, see, Ellison, that's the thing--has--because his second--you know 'The Invisible Man', but he did--his second book that never really got published is one. Speaker 2: Oh, the one that came out as 'Juneteenth'? Yeah. Speaker 1: People--I mean, they panned that. I never saw it, but it got panned, you know, as sort of--but the belief was that he had a hard time, you know, doing anything after "Invisible Man". Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Ellison's failure to produce was a major tragedy for American literature, but it's a hard act to follow and the pressure--see, the biggest problem was this, that, see, if Ellison had forced himself, which he obviously could not do because he didn't do it. Whe--whenever people say so and so could have done X, that's not true. All people ever do is what they can do. You know, somebody can say she could leave him if she would just get herself together. No, she can't. If she could, she'd be gone. That's not how people are. Everything people do, that's what they can do. You know, see, when you go into the theoretical thing about the life of a person, you're missing something, that every day somebody is doing the best he or she can do. They might think about doing something else. They might know they should be doing something else, but the only thing that they can do on that day is what they do. That's true of everybody, and anytime anybody actually starts thinking about themselves back over the years they say you know, I wasted a whole year. I could have--no, you would have done something if you could have, but it's something in the nature of you was not going to allow that, and with Ellison, the further he got away from 'Invisible Man', the bigger the next book becomes. See, that's the problem. Had he been--'Invisible Man' came out in 1952. Had he been able to produce another novel before 1960, then his whole career probably would have been different. He might have written two more novels between '60 [1960s] and '70 [1970s]. I mean he might by his death have written seven or eight novels. But see, by not being able to get--he went that whole decade without another book. Then he went another decade so then 'Invisible Man' gets big, you know, so 'Invisible Man' begins as this exquisitely designed townhouse, right, but within about 30 years, it becomes the World Trade Center, you know. Then you're supposed to have to build something taller than the World Trade Center. You might not get out--you might not be able to do that then so there's a lot to be learned from him about the fact that when you're in it, get in it, and take the punches that you have to take, and produce as much as you can produce because there's always room for good because one thing is for sure, bad takes up as much area as it can get every day. Story_ID: 5965 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson as interviewer and Scott Sterns is the videographer and Larry Crowe is observer and we have Stanley Crouch. I would like for you to state your name and spell it for us, and give us today's date, and your profession and the location. Speaker 2: Alright, my name is Stanley Crouch. Today's date is March 5th--no, today's date is March 4th, 2002. Speaker 1: Third, March 3rd. Speaker 2: Isn't today--tomorrow March 4th? What is today? Speaker 1: Today is March 3rd. Speaker 2: What is today? Speaker 1: Today is March 3rd. Speaker 2: Okay, today is March 3rd. Alright, I'm--As they used to say, "I'm getting ahead of myself." Okay. My name is Stanley Crouch. Today March 3rd, 2002. This is New York City, 234 West 42nd Street in a narrow Hilton Hotel. Story_ID: 5966 Speaker 1: I want to start with your poem that was published in Harper's magazine and how that actually came about, and I'd like to--no. Speaker 2: How it came about that the poem was published? I just mailed to them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean it wasn't--I just submitted it. I didn't know anybody there, and that was before I came to know anybody in New York. Malcolm X, Medgar Evers, and Martin Luther King [Jr.] had all been assassinated so I wrote this poem, and it was a reference. The title referred to this king in India who had reversed the normal way of dealing with things, this king named Asoka, A-S-O-K-A, who had been in a war, and he had been so horrified by the slaughter that he actually went in the opposite direction for the rest of his life and tried to do, as they say, good works and things that were at the opposite end from war and slaughter and pillaging and all of that. And so he was the only person at that time that I knew who had been reversed in his ideas about how one does things through the horror of war. Usually when people go into war, it kind of doesn't affect them the same way it did him so I thought that the way things were at that time, because it was such a violent period, that the future would have to be handled by people like that, people who have that kind of mentality. Now interestingly, I had never thought about that in reference to the conclusion of my novel, but at the end 'Don't the Moon Look Lonesome', Nelson Mandela is brought in, and he's compared to Odysseus and the 'Odyssey' from when he comes, finally gets home after 20 years, his solution for handling all of these people who were the soldiers who had torn everything up, is to kill everybody and that Mandela who actually had exceeded the mythical Odysseus by seven years in being away from home, imprisoned anyway, for 27 years. He comes back, and he turns away from that manner of handling problems and starts to talk about a more humane society, about democracy, etcetera, when in fact he could have, had he wanted to, unleash the hostilities that had been built up in his country toward the whites due to all the terrible things that the black population had experienced under apartheid, but he chose not to do that so I thought that that was an example of a guy who was superior in certain ways to even this mythological hero who stayed with us for over 2000 years so I think that it's fascinating to me in a way how 30 plus years later you can still be saying the same thing. Speaker 1: I want to go back to the poem. What was the name of the poem? Speaker 2: It was called 'A Song for Asoka'. Speaker 1: Do you remember the poem? Speaker 2: No, I just remember the last line. Speaker 1: What was the last line? Speaker 2: The last line was "and men speak light". That's all I remember. Speaker 1: And what did that mean? Speaker 2: Well, it's just that the idea that we exist in darkness in certain ways and that xenophobia, racial hostility, those are all forms of darkness and that when people say certain things, it's as though they're are speaking light, things that carry us through the darkness. Story_ID: 5967 Speaker 1: I want to also ask you about the plays that you were writing around that period. Were they the LeRoi Jones type of plays or Amiri Baraka type of plays? Speaker 2: Well, I think some of them were, but you see, the thing that has to be addressed in all of this is that LeRoi Jones and those people are all derivative of [Jean] Genet's 'The Blacks'. See, if you read 'The Blacks' and then you read LeRoi Jones and the so-called Black Arts stuff, that was coming out of that period, it all comes out of Genet, and in fact, 'The Blacks' had been performed in New York City so I'm sure that LeRoi Jones and all those people saw it, and it was kind of a prototypical French absurd play, as they called them at that time, and it had that contempt for order and hierarchy, etcetera, that tends to come through French material that leads all the way back to Rousseau on the one hand and Baudelaire and others on the other, and this is a kind of hatred of the people at the top and the middle class, the bourgeoisie, etc., except that in Genet's world it was cast in racial terms, but it was that same thing. Now the big difference between Genet and the various Europeans and some white Americans is that they're talking about something that's symbolic. They don't mean these things literally. The difference in the Black Arts movement, even though probably it was more symbolic, too, because these Negroes really were not going to do anything--they were just talking about slaughtering white people and tearing down this and that. I think they were probably all shocked when they actually saw anybody actually get up and burn up a large section of a city or something like that, but that was a lot of mouth. Nobody was really--anybody who can count would never have thought that black 10 percent of the population was going to overthrow 90 percent. That would have just been--nobody could actually believe that if they have thought about it so that was why there was all kind of rhetorical stuff about if you look at the world at large, the minorities, the white people, there are so many Chinese, there's so many Africans, there's so many this and so, as though there was going to be this international uprising of all of these people against Europeans and white Americans. I mean, the way things are going now, even 35 years later, that's highly doubtful. Story_ID: 5968 Speaker 1: I'm wondering where your head was at, like really, between the years of 1967 and 1975. That's what I'm trying to understand. What was influencing you at that time? Speaker 2: Well, I was. Speaker 1: Were the riots? Speaker 2: I was influenced. See, I was a great admirer at that time of LeRoi Jones for whom I've come to develop an exceeding degree of contempt, by the way, primarily because I think now he just sold out to agitprop and hysteria and essentially incinerated what was a considerable literary talent in the interest of trying to be some kind of leader that he's never been capable of being, but at that time there was so much hysteria in the air, and there was such resentment that had developed due to what people saw in media, particularly in what was happening with the civil rights movement, what was happening, and see, I say something else, too. I think that the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in 1963 within, I think, three to four weeks of the March on Washington had an enormous impact on the country in terms of just the degree of rancor that was felt, that, okay, so even with all of this nonviolent stuff, even with accepting the jailing, the hoses and the this, the that, these redneck lowdown crackers will still put dynamite in a church and blow up these four little girls, that that's who we're dealing with, right, so I knew that something was afoot in 1964 because I remember when the reports started coming out of the Congo about the murders of these nuns, and whenever I would be around these black guys in my age or something, when they would--the reports on the radio and TV would come out about that these nuns were being murdered in the Congo or murdered and raped or whatever was going on these people were saying good, good, and so a year later when the riot took off, I wasn't quite as surprised as some people might have been, besides which I had seen a riot take place in the summer of 1964. A small one, after a track meet at Jefferson High School, and just the sheer intensity of it was not exceeded by what happened a year later when things blew up in the so-called Watts riot. And it was the same thing because one of the things that is most fascinating about riots, black people and riots, is that a number of them are connected to a supposed moment at which some white cop did something to some black woman. That was--I think the New York riot of 1943 was about that, and that's was what the riot was in '64 [1964] outside of Thomas Jefferson High School. What happened, we were all sitting in the stands, and this guy had come out there who was drunk, etc., so the cops took him and put him in one car, and he's going so now when the cops were trying to get him out of there, there were all these kids there, and this girl who was the sister of this knucklehead whom they had arrested, right, was behind this big white cop who was walking back toward the car, and she was pummeling him on his back, right, calling him names, I assume. I don't really remember. I just remember seeing this little black girl kind of--I don't mean little girl like a child but just like a teenage going bing, bing, bing, bing, hitting this guy on the back, and so he's walking and bing, bing, bing, so finally he turns around, and he just pushes her away, right, and when he pushed her, that was when things exploded. Look at him hit that black woman, blah, blah, blah, blah. One thing led to another, and then suddenly I had never seen this before. All of these bricks and bottles started flying, right, and these cops started going over like tenpins, right, because these guys were getting hit in the face with these bricks and then hit in the face with these bottles, and they were going down, right. Then the the guy whom they were trying to arrest was in the car, but he had kicked the car door open, and so he was handcuffed, but he was in there, and he was kicking the cops so the cops were trying to get him in the car. He was kicking them, and so they took the billy club, and they were trying to be his legs back in. Then over at the fence, I'll never forget this. There was this guy who had been a black football star named Brice Taylor who had been--I think he'd been an All-American at [U]SC [University of Southern California], and he was at the fence, right, and he was in a fury, right. He was like 65, 66, something like that, and he was saying hit him. Hit him, kill him, kill him, hit him. He didn't mean the cop, though. He meant that the cops--he didn't say kill him. He said hit him, get him, right, so when the cops were going at him so you had this one isolated guy who was saying get him. What everybody else was exploding about the fact that they were trying to get this guy in, and so at one point--finally these cops were going down. Finally they got up, and they went to their stuff and whap, right, and when those came out, it was like oooooh. It all dispersed, and people started moving on. No guns got fired, but once they pulled them out, it's to say okay, we're not going to stand here and let you stone us to death. The best thing for you to do is back off so when they did that, the crowd started backing up so then when they backed up and started moving off, then the cops got in the car, and they zipped off, and about that time this helicopter came over. See, I later found out that the whole thing was the fault of the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department]. They didn't do what they were supposed to do, see, because William Parker, who was the police chief at that time, who was an effective redneck cracker who advertised for cops, advertised openings in LAPD in places like Mississippi because civil rights workers used to see these posters like join the LAPD. And so you know, that's all you need is some rednecks from redneck land with some guns and some badges in the black community anywhere in America. Not good, but what they were supposed to do, according to the way Parker wanted things to go, was they should have arrested this guy, got him in the car, closed the door, and gotten out of there. The fact that they allowed themselves to be distracted by this girl, that's why they got caught because, see, Parker understood that. If you're in the middle of something, you just go and arrest the person, you get them in the car, and you drive off. There's no talk. If people want to talk, you talk at the station because the longer you stay there, the better the chances are that something else can be ignited, right, but even so, even though I had seen the LAPD which had a very bad reputation do a number of things before, I had never seen anything like that. But I think that that's because all of that tension that was building up due to the civil rights movement had infected a lot of these guys, and then of course, you know there was the influence of the Malcolm X rhetoric of you're not men. You don't defend yourselves. You let these white men beat black women, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, right, so all of that was--there was this mushroom cloud of resentment that was coming out of the Nation of Islam with that kind of blowhard stuff that was coming from Malcolm X, which influenced all of us, I think, during that period--maybe not all of us but most young guys at that period were really affected by that, and so that was what--so there was a very strong link between that and the next phase which was when, for me, was after the Watts riot which I saw in 3-D so what that was which was something to see. And then I joined the what was called Studio Watts, and I worked under Jayne Cortez ,and we wrote a member of plays there, but they weren't all Genet-influenced, too, now. You see, we did 'The Blacks' first, and then we did the neo-blacks, if you will, so a lot of that stuff was still coming from what he was dealing with except that it was more--it was American in style, but a lot of the perspective came out of Genet, yeah. Story_ID: 5969 Speaker 1: Was James Cortez--was he like? Speaker 2: Jayne. Speaker 1: Jayne, Jayne, okay. Speaker 2: Jayne Cortez. Speaker 1: Jayne Cortez. Was she? Speaker 2: She's a--yeah, she's a writer. Speaker 1: Was she part of the black? Speaker 2: Was she what? Speaker 1: The Black Arts Movement? No. Speaker 2: No, that was happening--see, the Black Arts movement kicked off on the east coast around LeRoi Jones and all that, but you know, there were these magazines like the 'Liberator', 'Negro Digest', which later became 'Black World', all of those things, I mean, and Jones was traveling around the country. He was speaking everywhere, and so a lot of people were being influenced by this stuff even though they weren't in New York and they weren't involved in the specific things. In fact, at one point sometime in the late '60s, I think, '68, '69, maybe '70 [1968,1969,1970], but probably around '69 [1969], Jones--when Larry Neal put together these two big readings, one I think at the Apollo in Harlem and the other I think maybe at the Brooklyn Academy of Arts where they brought all of these people from across the country who were reading primarily, you know, Black Nationalist poorly written drivel. Now you know there was--and I had one of those great experiences doing that, which was that this guy named--I think his name was originally Amos Moore. But his name was Amos Moore so I had one of those experiences because I was standing next to him when we read from one to the next across the stage at the Apollo, and this guy was amazing. He was the one that night, and there's nothing better for you than to have that experience of, you know, somebody starts coming your way, and you go yeah, yeah, yeah. I got that, and someone comes to the next thing, and you say yeah, yeah, yeah. I got him, too, and somebody comes, and yeah, yeah, yeah, I got that, and then maybe you--I think I read before him so my thing was like yeah, yeah, these people, ha, but when he read, though, that was an astonishing feeling that he had, and he was a big guy, you know, like maybe six two or something, you know, and the way he read that poem, I'd never heard anything like that before, and there was one point in there where he said--he was talking about a saxaphone player, and he said "so soon was he into the Academy of Lester, the president [saxaphone ad lib], and he said who are we? Where are we? Where are we going?, and so everybody when--blah. He smoked everybody that night. That was like a great moment, just to stand next to somebody like that, you know, and I think at that time I came to understand or begin to understand what my real ambition in life was, which was actually to be in situations like that with people like him. That is to say, one can hope to become the champion, but I don't know if that's as great a feeling really as the feeling of being among, to be one of a group of people who were getting something done that's up on another scale because the thing is, no matter who you are, there is something that somebody can do better than you. I don't care who you are. I don't care how great you are. It's just like James Joyce. As great as he was, I mean, you can take him down a number of ways. As great as James Joyce was, all you have to do with him is write a three-dimensional brilliant female character, and you're taking him down. He never did that. He did a lot of things, but he didn't do that. Story_ID: 5970 Speaker 1: So, Stanley, about that era then, were you saying you were in process basically? When you look back, I'm trying--You're saying that this was where I was. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. See, I think that that was a period in which people were trying to find something out, but the thing that we were trying to do was based on nave vision of what was going on. It was politically nave in terms of both--the supermilitant aspect of it was exceedingly nave, and then the rejection of our American identity in favor of a fantasy about being Africans or something like that, that was really like beyond nave because anybody who ever is actually around Africans, any black American who's ever among Africans, when it's mostly them, who comes out of that situation thinking he or she is an African is insane. That doesn't mean that you don't see some little things that are similar, but they really are another kind of people. In other words when I say another kind of people, it's just like if somebody--same analogy is it's like if some Irish guy from Boston actually thinks he's Irish, is that they are in Ireland are at a very great remove from him, then he's an imbecile. That's neither an up nor a down thing, but you see, I think that where I eventually began to go to was that I came to realize that all of this stuff, all of that Black Nationalism and everything, was at great odds with my own upbringing in terms of the black people I was reared by, my mother and all of these people, because see, racism was something that they really abhorred. That was like really repulsive to them, and they really believed in the individual, and by the way, they had no real belief fundamentally that they were inferior to white people because they were always telling somebody if we were what the white folks say we are, why do they go to such extremes to make sure we don't have a chance to compete. If we're so inferior, they should let us come out there and fail so we'd know, too, and then we'd just settle for being what they say we are. But every time a Negro tries to do something, they put every kind of obstacle they can in front of this person, and then if the person fails, they say see? I told you he was inferior so they weren't really about that, and they had their pantheon of people that they would point at that they celebrated, whether it was Joe Louis or Duke Ellington or Jackie Robinson or Thurgood Marshall or whomever it was. They had there own pantheon. They were--they had a very healthy attitude, I think, towards who they were and understanding what was happening and understanding that there was a difference between policies and people. A lot of what Black Nationalism became, particularly under willful loons like LeRoi Jones, was that all of the worst of American racism and bigotry and so on was a pure expression of the innate identity of the white people themselves, that that wasn't just policy. That was them. That's what they are, right, okay, so you know, they just knew too many--you know, these older black people, they knew too much about life. They had seen too much, and they would always say something like, "These people want to talk about they want to move, and four or five states would be all Negroes. Do they think that's going to make them happy because they knew that happiness isn't something you're going to get, you know what I mean, by not being around white people." You know what I mean? I mean in other words, the sorrows that come when a woman loses a child or a loved one dies or something, a girl gets her heart broken by her teenage sweetheart, all that's not going to go away because the white people go away. There's no paradise out here for you, and they always understood that so when I started getting myself together, I think I started going back into the kind of stuff that I actually been taught when I was a kid when they were talking against all of that, yeah. Story_ID: 5971 Speaker 1: You didn't come to this realization until you were in New York. Speaker 2: No, no, no--no, no, that's not true. I started turning away from that around 1970, '71, '72 [1971, 1972]. Yeah. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: Well, the basic thing is this, is that, see, I look at that whole period as a period of a loss of faith. In other words, that when people lost faith in the possibility of what the civil rights movement was about, which was making the country live up to the greatest ideas in the social contract, when people essentially concluded, no, they're never going to do this, and we have to settle for being some niche of some sort in the United States because we're Africans or African blah, blah, blah, blah, and they're Europeans, and this is a white man's country and blah, blah, blah. Then that, to me, constitutes it was for us, as a group of people, as cataclysmic as the impact that Darwin and that vision of science had on the European mind in the 19th century when the idea that the Bible and all of that was just a fantasy, that this was--that the truth of the matter was that we had evolved over a long period through a long process connected in some way to simians, etc., that had a very big impact on the world because the world had--for years everybody had thought another way. It was like, okay, they may not have agreed that--they may have all had a different creation story, but it was all that there was some central force that put this together, and when that began to fall apart, that began to affect people in the arts and all kinds of other things, you know. Sometimes there was--you know, it had an effect. It affected morality. It affected people's attitudes towards society, a whole bunch of things, because then it meant that there was no exterior guardian of the order of the world. Now the impact that these ideas had on black Americans, it seems to me, was the same thing because there had been a long progression towards deepening our relationship towards the social contract and towards the culture itself, and when people essentially turned their backs to that, started wearing other kinds of clothes and hairdos and all this other, changing their names, inventing these fake holidays like Kwanzaa and all that other kind of stuff, that this was an expression of a loss of faith of breaking away from a much deeper, I think, Afro-American tradition. Speaker 1: You don't think it could have been that people were just trying to find themselves, define themselves because they really didn't know their history? We knew some of the history but didn't know a lot of history, and people were making things up, you know just--why wouldn't it be that people were trying to find themselves? Speaker 2: Oh, obviously they were trying to find themselves, but that was based upon the loss of faith I'm talking about, is that it was a break --it was an attempt to come up with a different kind of an identity, but the identity is a bullshit identity. I mean the thing is is that black Americans are Americans. They're not going to be anything else. I mean like all these black women were going around talking they were African. They go to Africa, there's no way they're going to put up with that. I know a woman who moved to Africa, to Nigeria, married a Nigerian who had two or three other wives. Well, you know how long she stayed in that. They wanted to go back to their traditions. No, they don't. That's all some garbage. Story_ID: 5972 Speaker 1: So was that part of the movement that turned you off? Speaker 2: Well, no, the more I looked--I mean, look, everybody who--see, there's a whole convention that's at work, too, which is that from-- you have a number of things that are very complex that affect the way people become or affect what people become. That is to say, I mean you have this city and country thing when people move in from the country, and you know they're kind of backward. Now the kids who grow up in the city or the kids from the country when they get there, the other kids in the city, 'oh, you're a country boy, you're a country boy. You all sure are backwards. You don't know this, you don't know that,' blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, right. Okay, then the kids are hit with the shock of being told that they're backwards, country, this and that, and the kids attempt to adjust, and then they start rejecting part of their rural background and say 'oh, Dad, come on. We're not in the country now. We're in New York City. We're in Chicago. That's some old country Mississippi stuff. We ain't in North Carolina now, Dad. Come on, Mom,' blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, right? Okay, that's one layer. Then you have the whole adolescent I'm--you know, the adults are over there, and we're down there. Okay, now if you study American entertainment, you can tell that prior to the 1950s younger people used to want to be like adults but themselves. That is, they didn't think that the teenage world that they lived in was enough. Now when you take those two things, the country stuff on the one hand and the adolescent idea of breaking away from the parents and then the fact that the society itself began to cosign the idea that there was something we were going to learn from young people, that they have something going, you put all of that and you give it an ethnic point of view, then you begin to see something else, right, because you know with black people that country and city thing also had another element, right, which was Negro, don't you know you're in the North? Now you don't have to Tom these white folks. These white folks are not going to smack you for not Tomming so you got a rejection of that thing, right. And so we all grow up or at least in my generation we all grew up with there were two kinds of black people from the South. There was one group that was just normal workaday people who had a certain level of self-esteem. They would say that they had dignity, etc., who weren't overtly hostile but essentially knew they weren't in a situation where they had to pretend to be more genial when geniality wasn't necessarily the best response for what was going on. Then you had the Tom. It was just--you know, it was like I'm in a bar someplace with somebody I knew from East St. Louis I used to run around with. She told me--well, she said you know "Carl is from Alabama." I said What does that mean?" She said,"You can't sneak. There's nothing you can do about Alabama nigger-loving white folks now." She said "You can't stop them from doing that. Anything the white man said they are going to "Well, you know your right, Miss So-and-so," so you know. She said, "That's just the way they are," right. Her whole thing was anytime he made a strange decision, she looked at me and said Alabama, right, so that was her thing. Now all of that stuff, it seems to me, during the period of Black Nationalism just takes another form, but you see, adolescent rebellion is nave anyway, right, so what I mean is that when you put that you don't know who you are, you don't know you're African, right, okay, so that's the variation on the country versus the city, right. Then you take the we're not Tomming. We're going to be even more militant. We are not nonviolent so nonviolence becomes a form of Tomming, you know, because you're not standing up to these white folks. You're not going to fight for your right. You're not going to be a man, right. Okay, so then you have--you're embracing a conception of manhood that is kind of--it's like a western movie version of something. It really wouldn't work anyway, you know. If the proverbial push came to the proverbial shove, right, as one former 'let's-burn-these-cities-down' black militant said to me a few years ago, he said well, you know, "If these white folks had ever really taken us seriously, I don't know what would have happened to us. It just so happened that they didn't because they could have overwhelmed us like that. If they had ever decided, okay, we really don't care what anybody in the world says." You know, he said--like we were talking, and I said to him, "Imagine if America was like China, because China would make decisions, and everybody would say oh, and China would say good. So what? Bye, and they'd just close the door for years, and eventually they'd open the door. Are you all ready to deal with us or not? No? Goodbye." Now what he and I were talking about was if America was actually the way that we were describing it during that period, we wouldn't have had a chance at all. They would have just said to Africa and everybody else oh, you don't like what we're doing? Really? And what? You want to fight us over this, and of course, we know that the enormous hatred, hostility, and contempt that Africans have from one ethnic group to another, or tribe if somebody wants to call them that, suggests that there was going to be no great brouhaha among Africans who were coming in to independence over what was happening to us over here, and if they had actually decided to take their foot and really put it in our ass, we would have had a hell of a problem. So all of that was some jive, and that's why when you look at it, when you see footage of it today, it seems even more patently--actually I think that for people my age, since I'm fifty-six it was hard for me when I look at footage of those people talking now, right, it seems--now I see what it actually was. Now I see what it actually must have looked like to people who were my age when it appeared. I mean the people like Thurgood Marshall, when he was looking at these guys with these beads around their necks and these robes and this hair everywhere, you know, talking about cut the white man's throat. We're going back to Africa and the black colony and the white mother country and all of that, right, Thurgood Marshall and that sophistication must have said have these Negroes gone insane? And you can imagine what any black person with military experience must have thought about these guys running around in black leather jackets and berets with a handful of weapons, talking about violently overthrowing the government. They must have gone like--you know like Benjamin [O.] Davis and people like that. They must have gone do they actually know who they're talking about fighting? They must not so I think most of that stuff, however well-intentioned it might have been on the parts of certain people, was fundamentally a waste of time as far as I see it. Now if somebody wants to say well, you got black people to stop straightening their hair. Did it? Well, we know what actually happened. There was a period in which barbers learned how to cut people's hair to look like that, but then you know, you got to watch that fashion is a strange thing. You know I don't think there are any fewer black women with their hair straightened or adjusted on some level now than there were then, see, because this whole thing--we don't do that anymore. We braid our hair, see. They've got a place up here in Harlem where you can go up there and get hair from the Philippines and other places by the bag, and they'll actually take you up there and explain to you how they can mix up--they can make you a hair mix essentially. I guess you'd call it a braid mix, and they say what you need is a little bit of this, and you mix it up with that and with that. Now as it turns out, this is not the hair of African women by the way so you've got these women with these long braids walking around the street with their head up in the air as though they have now gotten away from this Caucasian obsession, and the thing is there's nothing to me that's more filled with a certain level of pathos and hilarity than to see the joy with which these black women take that stuff and put it back over their ear and the way they've been seeing those white girls do all their life like their braids and doing that. Now they've been waiting to get a chance to do that. They've been looking for years because, see, I know that black women have told me that there's a bunch of them in the bathroom with white girls, and they're all finer than the white girls. At some point the white girl does this, puts her head and goes like that, as if to say 'you black bitches, you can't do that' so now that they've got their stuff, they can go yes, well, I can do that, too, so I just don't know if any of that in retrospect was that important. Story_ID: 5973 Speaker 1: What events turned you off? Speaker 2: Well, I'll say this. Well, it was just a series of events and bad writing. The writing that came out was so horrific. I mean, you know, as Leon Forrest, the great novelist, would often say about that period, he said okay, where are the books? If so much was going on, if so much great material was produced, where are the books? Name them, you know, so it was that, and I remember I was fired from writing reviews for the 'Journal of Black Poetry' which was edited by a guy named Joe Goncalves, G-O-N-C-A-L-V-E-S, and he sent me this letter which I wish I had kept in which he was explaining to me that my asthetic had been too polluted by Western values, blah, blah. Now there were also all these ironies that I saw which was like I remember I was at some Black Power conference in L.A. and Ron Karenga's people, Ron Karenga and us which was connected with [LeRoi] Roy Jones at that time--because they were all cultural nationalists, they were going to reintroduce us to our African identity--had security. I'll never forget I saw these guys walking around muttering in Swahili into these walkie-talkies, right, and at that moment that was one of those joyous epiphanies. There's something strange about this. Here's a guy. He's got his whatever they call them (unclear) thing on, and he's got this thing hanging around his neck that looked like a tiki, as they used to call them, and he's walking around muttering this Swahili into this walkie-talkie, and at that moment I said this is a fraud because there was something about on the one hand you're rejecting--everything's supposed to be black, blacker than black and blacker than that, and then to really get black, you've got to become African, right, but these Negroes have embraced every kind of technology in the West while saying the West is no good so there was that moment when I saw that. It was just something that went in my mind immediately. I said there's something about this. I had already been like not liking it plus there was something about all of these mediocre simple-minded parrots walking around with their noses up in the air like they were superior which really repulsed me, you know what I mean, because it was like if you joined this order, they were like--to me they had that same thing. You know, they had that same snooty quality of the Temperance Union women who are depicted in the westerns where, you know, the guys are just trying to have a drink, and these women are well, I don't think that there should be alcohol sold in Tombstone, and so they had that same quality except it was like--except the material, the ideas if you want to call them that, were--well, they were all ethnic variations on something, and see, I had always hated that from when I was a kid. I always hated the idea that getting in some group made you automatically something, regardless of whether you did anything or not. In other words, it wasn't like being on a baseball team or a football team or a basketball squad or a debate team or something in which you actually did something. You had to earn your way onto that. Just to me, I didn't like that, you know, I mean, and you know, and then something else that started getting on my nerves which was how you had all of these Creoles like Ron Karenga standing up there talking about African purity of some sort when they were obviously the result of miscegenation. You know what I mean, and there was just something strange about that. I'm not talking about whether or not there is a connection that we have to Africa on some level, but there was something about that that was very, very strange, and then I just really started disliking that, and the more I was reading. During that time Larry Neal had introduced me to Albert Murray who became a big influence on me and Jayne Cortez had gotten me to read Ralph Ellison's 'Shadow and Act'. And so when I started comparing that material Murray was talking about in his writing to what was coming out of that, I said I got to go. I've had it with all of that, and so then I started going in the direction that I'm in now, if this is a direction. Speaker 1: You're also performing, too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In dramas. Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 5974 Speaker 1: What made you decide to move to New York? Speaker 2: I decided to move to New York for fear of getting tenure at the Claremont Colleges. I was hired there. I was the first full-time faculty member hired by what would be the Black Studies Center of the Claremont Colleges. Then they wanted to do what they called joint appointments, and so they were trying to get people from the Black Studies Center into the rest of the college faculties. Claremont Colleges are a cluster of five colleges. What used to be Claremont Men's School [College] is now called Claremont McKenna so they could still say CMC without it being Claremont Men's College, and you know you can't have a men's college anymore, and so I got on the Pomona [College] English faculty, and I taught a course, Melville course, and a couple other things. Melville wasn't the course I taught. I taught a course called 'The Hunt 'which was about various things that had been written in America, a thematic course I taught, Hawthorne, Melville, and Ralph Ellison, and a number of other people in there, you know, and I also taught a theater class, and I wrote a number of plays for that, and the plays started off in that agitprop LeRoi-Jones-derived style, but then they went away from that, and so once I got away from that, I was gone. Now the thing is none of this obviates any kind of criticism on my part of racist traditions, of racism at the moment, or any of that. I never got into (unclear) you all are wrong. White folks are all wonderful. I never concluded that. It's just that I came to find that a very inadequate way of addressing the world and addressing life and definitely an inadequate way of addressing writing. Story_ID: 5975 Speaker 1: Was it the anti-institutional part of you that wanted to avoid being on the tenure track? Speaker 2: Well, the thing that got me--the thing that caused me to go away from tenure was what I had seen it do to other people. See, personally I think it should be outlawed. I don't think you should get a job that you just have forever. In other words, unless you're a Supreme Court Justice, I don't know why you should be able to do a job for seven years and work for the rest of your life, and so I just saw these people. They seemed to me to become progressively intellectually ingrown and dull as a result of having this job that they were never going to lose unless they did something really, really, really crazy so I thought that it was time for me to turn in my course books and raise up out of there and come to New York. Speaker 1: Why New York because you were like 27 at the time? Speaker 2: I was 30. When I came to New York. Speaker 1: 1975. Speaker 2: I was born in 1945. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was 29 on the way to 30. See, I arrived in New York in September of 1975 so at that time I was going to be a drummer, and I was getting to be a writer, and I played around. I was playing with David Murray and a number of people, and I had played in California because I started playing the drums around 1966, but I never really got them together because I didn't really study them the right way. See, I was trying to go. I was trying to take a shortcut into the avant-garde by just ignoring all of these other things which I had done as a writer, but I was thinking that there was a way you could just dive in. It's almost like going to see Jackson Pollock and say I'm going to start painting like that. Now maybe you can if that way of painting is valuable beyond a certain point, but I never--I practice now, and I actually can play now. I could play then, but I was able to play more on the basis of my intelligence than on the basis of actually having mastered the real rudimental vocabulary of the drums, but I have some things that I played that I recorded within that style I think are all right. It might even be good, but they would have been better, though, if I had known more. Speaker 1: Was the attitude that New York was the place to be? Speaker 2: It still is, I mean except for people like you in Chicago. I'm sure that you all know that we're wrong. Story_ID: 5976 Speaker 1: You get here, and you're sort of in this very--where are you living? Speaker 2: Second and the Bowery on the Lower East Side, fourth floor, Two East 2nd Street. Speaker 1: And you don't live that far from Danielle, do you? You're in-- Speaker 2: Not really that far, but in New York, New Yorkers exaggerate everything, including like ten blocks. You're in another world. Speaker 1: So you're living a bohemian life, so to speak. Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so. Speaker 1: Okay, and you're in your element, I take it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You're real happy. Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so. Speaker 1: Okay, and when do you start writing for the 'Village Voice' almost about? Speaker 2: Almost as soon as I got to New York, through Gary Giddins whom I had met the previous summer. Because I came to New York for a symposium on jazz criticism that had been put together by Martin Williams who was their working at the Smithsonian, and he was what some people called the dean of jazz critics, and so I met Giddins there, and I came to New York, and I got to know him, and he helped me get published in the 'Voice', and so from that point I started writing about the 'Voice' more and more often, and then I eventually became their first black staff writer, just to show you how liberal they were. Speaker 1: Can I ask you a question? I mean just from a perspective standpoint, two questions. The 'Village Voice' was founded when? Speaker 2: The middle '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't that old a publication. Speaker 2: No, but it was twenty years old. Speaker 1: Oh, '50s [1950s]. Oh, yes, because (unclear) Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: And jazz criticism. Speaker 2: Criticism, right. Speaker 1: How old was that discipline at that time? Not that old, right? Speaker 2: The '30s [1930s]. It started in the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: It started in the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So was it an easy field to get into? Speaker 2: It's an easy field to get into now. All you have to do is send in a piece. You don't have to know anything about music. I mean after all it's about Negroes, some people would say. Speaker 1: That's what I was--no, but I was just saying that when you sat on that panel, though, were you really--when you sat on that panel, was it easy? Where you writing jazz critique? Speaker 2: I think I wrote some, yeah. Right. I published a few things. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd written some things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I want you to sort of capsulize for us this period that you're in at this point because it's really the 'Village Voice', that affiliation, that gave you prominence. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was where it began. That's very true. That's very true, and the saxophonist David Murray and I were sharing a loft at that time. Then he got married. He married Ntozake Shange, formerly Paulette Williams, and then he moved out when I was there, and we played a lot of jobs together and toured in Europe together in 1977. Then around 1979, I stopped playing. I think it was, I think it was 19--I think it was around '79 [1979]. I also--during that period, I started booking this club called the Tin Palace which was right below the place where we lived. Man, that became like the hot club on the Lower East Side at that time so we had all kinds of people in there, George Coleman, Farrell Sanders, Philly Joe Jones, Gary Barts, Kenny Barron. You know, sometimes you turn around, and Dexter Gordon would be in there, Art Blakey, all kind of people because jazz people, they're just--wherever somebody is supposed to be playing, they come, you know, and the musicians came to like the place so much that they would play an extra set that would start at two o'clock so usually when everything else was--so they would play an extra set so when all the other clubs in New York are essentially shut down and people would zoom over to the Tin Palace and catch that last show, those guys would be in there smoking so everybody, you know--so it was a big deal for awhile. Speaker 2: So you were booking the acts. Speaker 1: Right. Right. That's when I came to really understand a lot more about musicians and business and all of that, and I think that actually worked. Yeah. Speaker 2: And I thought that 1979 was also the year that you got assignments down in the South. Was it Rudy? Speaker 1: Rudy Langley? Yeah. Yeah, right. He sent me down to cover the 15th anniversary of the Freedom Summer of 1964, and that was the beginning of me moving into writing more of other kinds, more things outside of just writing reviews of jazz so I was writing reviews of jazz, and I wrote a review, I think, at that time of--during that period with James Baldwin's novel 'Just Above My Head', and I was writing some theater criticism for the theater critics so I was starting--so that the range of things that I was covering started to expand. Speaker 2: Was there anything about the experience in the South that sort of opened your eyes to things and changed you? How long were you there? Did you just go down? Speaker 1: No, I just went down for that little conference to cover the conference. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: You know, I didn't go down--no, no, no. I didn't go down there--it wasn't that kind of thing. No. Story_ID: 5977 Speaker 1: What is forming your views of things? Is it you're covering different subject matter? I'm just trying to--'cause you seem very heavily in the arts. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean, but also I was doing that, but that was also because of when I was covering the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] thing, and then I wrote this piece called 'Civil Rights Blues', and I got word from Ralph Ellison that he really liked it, and so that was a big thing for me, and it was during that period, too, that I came to know Ellison so I knew him over about maybe a ten to fifteen year period before his death. Speaker 1: Can I talk to you, though, about your fascination with Ellison outside? It's not the 'Invisible Man' I have a question about, and it's not that he wasn't a great writer. I'm just wondering did it ever trouble you that he never finished? Speaker 2: His second novel? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I'm sure it didn't trouble me as much as it troubled him, you know. I mean-- Speaker 1: I mean using your view of respect for him as a writer because you seem--I mean look at you right now. You're like I stayed up all night. Speaker 2: Right. Believe me, I'm sure he did that many times, but I just think Ellison is fundamentally a very tragic figure and that the tragedy of his life was functioning on a number of levels. I think his--I don't know that he ever recovered from the enormous hostility of the assault that was laid on him in the late '60s [1960s] by the Black Nationalists. He was like a pin cushion for that hostility because he was seen as this guy who was what today would be called Eurocentric, and he was like a defender of this, and you have all these people like Ishmael Reed who had great jealousy of Ellison and his prominence, his position, and you know they were are always describing him as a gatekeeper whose job was to keep other black writers down and all this and that, blah, blah, blah, and I just--you know, and he was like very viciously attacked by students when he would go out to do any of this stuff. I don't think he was prepared for that. I don't think he was--I mean he was attacked the same way Ward Connelly is attacked now. Ward Connelly will go on campuses to speak, and these people on these campuses will allow these students to come and just completely disrupt his talks, not let him talk, like they scream and holler and all that stuff. And Ellison would be subjected to extremely intense dressings down, attacks that I don't think he was ready for. See, everybody can always say that's easy to take. Well, he shouldn't have been bothered by that. It wouldn't have bothered me. It didn't happen to you, and you weren't somebody who was born in 1914, and you weren't somebody who had spent the majority of your life trying to put together this vision that was not an exaggerated sense of the real significance of black people to American culture, and you were not the one who had gone through all that he had gone through and to then be told by this younger generation on campus after campus after campus that you are completely out of touch with black people. You were one of these people who loved white folks and hated your own people, blah, blah, blah. I think that had a hell of an effect on him, and I don't think he ever absorbed that in the way that he would have needed to in order to incorporate it in his writing. Story_ID: 5978 Speaker 1: You said it was a revelation when you first discovered him [Ralph Ellison]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And his writing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then you had also written to him but hadn't had a response. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Then you learned--I can't remember where it was from. It wasn't Albert Murray, it was somewhere else. He said--oh, yes, he's. Speaker 2: Oh, Larry Neal. Speaker 1: Yes, and he's communicated to me. He said something. You had communicated. Speaker 2: Yeah, Larry Neal told me he said he mentioned me to him, and Ellison said oh, yes, I've got a letter from him. He writes very interesting letters. Yes. Speaker 1: But then you met him at a phone booth, you said. You were making a call, and he was passing by. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, over at NYU. Yeah. Speaker 1: But then you said that you communicated with him several times. What was the nature of those communications? Were they of a mentor and mentee? Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't quite that. We just had conversations. It wasn't really--no, that wasn't it at all. Speaker 1: It wasn't. Speaker 2: No, it was just a friendship. Speaker 1: But your friendship, were they satisfying interchanges is what I'm saying? Speaker 2: Were they satisfying? In what respect? Speaker 1: Yeah, because you said he was a tragic figure in many ways. Speaker 2: Well, he wasn't a tragic figure. He was a tragic figure in retrospect. That wasn't how he came off if you talked to him because he was funny. I mean, he was like--Ralph Ellison was a truly hilarious guy. He had a hell of a sense of humor, and he knew an enormous amount of stuff. When I say he's a tragic figure in terms of how it all added up, I mean every individual's life is a tragedy because it ends, but I felt he had been beaten down in retrospect. I wasn't thinking about that while he was alive. That wasn't clear. I think in retrospect I think he was mostly beaten down by those people in the '60s [1960s] and I think that he suffered an enormous disappointment in what he saw come forward, and I think that it was kind of--and I don't think he was able to figure out a way as a writer to really embrace and to really address all of that. Speaker 1: You know, a lot of times like if I admire someone, you know, and I'm in their presence, I want to soak up all that they have. Was that the type of interchange that you had at that point because you are establishing yourself still? I mean, in your-- Speaker 2: Well, we had--the thing was we talked many, many, many times over the years, and he would sometimes talk to me about something he was thinking about or, you know, I'd write something, and he'd give me a call and say that he liked it or he would--so it was a kind of--you know we talked--I would imagine we talked a couple, two, three times a month maybe in certain periods, you know, and he didn't come off--but what I'm trying to get to is I'm talking--when I say tragic figure, I'm talking about that in retrospect. I'm not talking about--he didn't come off that way in knowing him. Speaker 1: No, I understood that, but my question at the beginning would lead you to that because I was saying that he never wrote. Speaker 2: He never finished his novel. Speaker 1: Right. How could you--as a prolific writer, you look at someone who is your idol. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he never finishes his novel, and I'm not even sure--I mean I came out of a college campus, and he was a hero. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I graduated in 1976. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The 'Invisible Man' was a book that was a must read for everyone. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And people were touting it at the time that I came out. Speaker 2: They still are. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But all I'm trying to say is that at that time--but you see in the '60s [1960s] though, I mean like a great writer--a very, very, very fine poet like Robert Hayden was like really attacked, and I remember meeting Hayden at some kind of a conference, and Hayden was talking about how much it had hurt him the way these black students were attacking him because he wasn't writing what LeRoi Jones and those kind of people were writing. Up against the wall, motherfuckers, this is a stickup, and he was like--you know it was like they were telling him that he really wasn't anything, that he had missed the boat, that time had passed him, you know, boom, and so you look at it, and you just say that, you know, Ellison couldn't make it. He couldn't get to it. Something got in the way. Then you see there's the other problem. The longer the time goes on, the bigger the boat becomes because the expectation is greater so if the novel doesn't come out in ten years, then there's a greater anticipation in fifteen. Then at twenty there's a greater anticipation, and I remember, when he wrote the introduction for the 30th anniversary publication of 'Invisible Man', thinking that, wow. I know he was looking around saying, "Man, thirty years. I haven't written another novel." I was thinking that that's what he was thinking, and every now and then I would mention it to him, and he would go yes, well, so you never knew what he was really thinking about, but see, I think he should have--well, the first thing is all that what he should have done or shouldn't have done, who knows because you never--all I can say is that he stuck to his guns, though. He didn't back up on his position, and I heard him speak in public a member of times, and he held to his stuff so he may not have written more. He may not have finished another book, but he definitely was not pushed away from his perspective. Speaker 1: Did you read his--I mean the book written--his pos--the--. Did you read that because the reviews on it were horrendous. Speaker 2: They were correctly horrendous because it's not his book. I have a great respect for John Callahan, but I mean I don't know why he did that. I mean it's just too--he just took too many things and mashed them together in different ways and just, you know. I had heard passages that Ellison read in public that were better than any of the ones in the book, but Callahan probably couldn't figure out how to put them in the thing he wanted to put together. Story_ID: 5979 Speaker 1: Murray is forming you on the, sort of the jazz criticism side, right? Speaker 2: In a way, yeah. Speaker 1: [Ralph] Ellison also is forming you (unclear) as a writer novelist, though you were a novelist but on the writing. I'm just trying to understand what's forming you. Speaker 2: But see, I don't think that it really works like that. I think what happened was that--see, I was in very close contact with Murray a lot. We were talking a lot, but I don't think that he. What? Sit back, sit back? Okay, all right. I was in very, very close contact with Murray, and we were talking about a lot of literary things, a lot of books, a lot of this, and a lot of that, right, and so there were a lot of things. He referred me toward people. He made me reconsider like Hemingway and this and that, and I rethought certain things and you know, but see, the reality of the matter is that, even though I was very influenced by both of these guys, I found another way to go that was different than what they did, but--because I was past imitation. I was past the state of being an imitator. There had been a period when I was a kid when I really was a very strong LeRoi Jones imitator. I really imitated him, but you know, I went on. When I was being influenced by Murray and Ellison, a lot of it had to do with like the intellectual scope that they had and the breadth of the world that they thought about or the breadth at that which they thought about the world and trying to get a perspective that was big enough to deal with what this thing is that we're in the middle of, and so who knows, the hundreds of hours of conversations on the phone with Murray about all kinds of different things and not as much with Ellison, not hundreds of hours but a lot. We talked a lot, too. Speaker 1: But Murray, you were fascinated also. It seemed to be in some things I read that you had written about that he was inquisitive. You liked his--that he was inquisitive in a way that you liked. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a man about town. He was always going out. He was always going to openings and plays and ballets, and he went to everything. He was like a New York guy. He was not --new things that came up, he would go out and check them out. Ellison wasn't like that. He wasn't as much out in the world as Murray was. He was a more--but I don't know anybody else. I'm trying to think if I knew--I don't think anybody else during the period that I've known Murray when he was in his fifties--I don't think there was anybody else like him, whatever their ethnic background was, who was really moving through as many different circles and trying to get a perspective on as many different things as he was so I was very impressed with that. You're right. Story_ID: 5980 Speaker 1: What things were significant besides you getting--did you get fired from the 'Village Voice'? Speaker 2: Oh, you mean for that fight with Harry Allen? Definitely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Definitely. Speaker 1: What things besides that incident? What things were forming you as a person? Speaker 2: Well, I was getting a lot of. Speaker 1: That you consider significant. Speaker 2: Well, for one thing when I was working at the Voice when I was edited by Robert Christgau, by Ellen Willis, by this women M. Mark because she hates her first name Marcia so she goes with M. Mark and is referred to as 'M'."Hi, this is M."--and Karen Durbin, those are four of the best editors in New York City, and they were four of the best that I've ever had. In fact, I've had no editors better than the four of them, and so I think writing pieces that were edited by those four people had a very big impact on my development as a writer because they made me aware of a number of things and things to look out for and stuff like that. I think that had a very--I think they helped me develop. You know, they helped me go my way most effectively so under no circumstances would I ever have traded that experience that I got from being edited by them or working at the 'Voice' where I had such a freedom to write about so many different things because you know departments are so closed off in most publications. You can't write a theater review sometimes, then write about a painter like I did about Bob Thompson. Another time I would write about a review of some jazz band or an article about a jazz musician, then go out and write something about, you know, Jesse Jackson or Louis Farrakhan or whomever it is so I had a very great freedom, and I was able to do a lot of things so I thought that was very--that was a great experience. Speaker 1: Now when did you start or felt that you had really started developing an audience? Was it almost immediately or was it? Speaker 2: An audience? I have to tell you I never ever thought about that during that period because it was hard to tell. You know what I mean? See, with newspapers, unless people write in, you don't really know what's going on. All you know is that the newspaper goes out. People buy it. They read it, and then they line there catboxes with it, birdcages, you know, and some homeless people use it for other things, but so you don't really know unless people write you a lot of mail and stuff, and I wasn't getting a lot of mail during that time at the 'Voice'. Every now and then there would be some controversy over something that I wrote, but that didn't really let me know what kind of an audience I had. I didn't begin to understand that until much later in terms of the size of any kind of an audience, and I don't really--at this point I don't think I have any large audience. I mean I had--I'm well-known in New York City because of writing for the 'Daily News' now which I've been doing for the last four or five years, but as far as if I put a book out, people say oh, they got to get that book, I don't think that's true yet, and I don't know that it'll ever be true, I mean because who knows? I don't know. Speaker 1: In this whole process with the 'Village Voice' you were becoming a man about town sort of because you were writing critiques. You were going around. Speaker 2: Right. I came to know a lot of people, yeah, and I started--the thing is with New York that you get taken down different paths, and you get invited to this, and somebody writes you a letter. You get this award for that or something or whatever it is, and eventually you come to know these other people. Oh, yes, yes, I've read you, very good, very good, whatever it is, but you see, the big breakthrough was the collection. When 'Notes of a Hanging Judge' came out, that was it, but see, as I point out in the introduction in 'Notes of a Hanging Judge', by virtue of being at the 'Village Voice' at the time that I was there I got a chance to see the brain trust of the feminist movement come forward, and I got to see the homosexual movement emerge. And I got to see how those things had been very badly influenced by the Black Nationalists' kind of separatist attitudes that came out of that which destroyed the 'Village Voice' and created a kind of what they came to call identity politics which I call like a politics of narcissism now. So it was interesting watching these women and these homosexuals go through the same thing in which they were women are better than men, homosexuals. You know there was a thing where a homosexual--I don't even know if he's still alive-- said that it's no longer about gays and straights. He said it's about gay men and women against straight men, he thought at that time. Story_ID: 5981 Speaker 1: How did that even come about as the title? Speaker 2: The title? Oh, well, the title was--it's interesting that you ask that because it was an allusion to [James] Baldwin's book of essays, 'Notes of a Native Son', because you had native son book--I mean Richard Wright, and you had Baldwin's book, 'Notes of a Native Son', and to this day you're the first person who ever asked. Almost 15 years later you're the first person that says what about the title? The title was an allusion on the one hand to Henry Morgan, you know Henry Morgan and about the fact that when he--you know, Henry Morgan was a pirate. And then he became a judge, and when he became a judge in England, he sent a number of these guys that he used to hang out with, his fellow pirates, to the gallows so I was just announcing in the book, in the introduction, that though I may well have been one of you guys in the '60s [1960s] a number of you need to be marched to the gallows, intellectually speaking. So that was part of what was going to happen and also that there was going to be no mercy in this book, that it was not going to be--I wasn't going to come with something like but the brother's trying. Well, he means well or so and so put black people to work. I mean none of those things were good enough for me. Now I have been accused of being an elitist, but then I don't know anyone who's not elitist. That is to say I've never discovered among any people that I've ever met an absolute lack of a hierarchy of what they like. If they're going to eat some fast food, they have a place that they think sells better fast food than something else. If they're buying whatever clothes they're buying, they have an idea what clothes look better than other clothes, and anybody given his or her choice is going to get the best version of what it is that they like, which includes, I'm sure, even people who are into sadomasochism. I'm sure that when they decide to get an ass whipping, they go to the person who gives the best ass whipping. Right? I'm sure of that so I've never met anybody--people say well, you're an elitist. I say well, okay, you dislike, but what do you like? I like baseball. Well, do you think everybody on the team plays equally well? Of course not. That's absurd. Well, who are your favorite players? They never list the sad ones. You know the person who's not an elitist and likes sports? They never--their favorite players are never the ones who mess up all the time who stand on the bench. I've never seen some people say well, that brother sure can sit on the bench, can't he? Yeah, I like the way he turns to the left and right. Looks good in the warmup jacket, don't he? I've never seen anybody say that so I just think that that's all a big fraud when people talk about you're an elitist and I'm not. Speaker 1: Now back to 'Notes of a Hanging Judge', why did you--was there a lot of thought about the order and? Speaker 2: Oh, definitely. Speaker 1: Content? So why did you start with Jesse Jackson? Speaker 2: I started with Jesse Jackson because the book came out in 1990, and he had run [for President] in 1988, and I thought that a number of the themes that were going to come up in the book were connected to him, and I wanted to use that opening essay as a big overture, and that's why the last essay is out of sequence to 'Body and Soul'. It's not the last essay that was written that's in the book. It was written actually earlier than some of the ones that precede it, but I wanted to end it there because at that point I was able to bring together the things about Afro-American history, about jazz, about black religious music, about the relationship between jazz and Renaissance painting and the art of the Renaissance, and so I thought that a number of the themes that had come up through the book that included, you know, things like black identity about music, about painting, about history, about the South, you know, etcetera, that a number of those things that that would conclude the book well. Speaker 1: And how long did it take for you to put the book together? I mean the things were already written, but how long did it? Speaker 2: It didn't take that long. I don't remember how long but not that long. Once I knew what I wanted to do, I figured out the sequence because you always want a book to read well from start to finish. Now as it turns out, most people who buy books of essays do not read them from start to finish unless they're reviewers, but that book was a very--that was a very explosive book. That had a very big impact. That was a very influential book because a lot of writers, I've been told--have told me since then that when they read that book, they decided well, hey, he can do that. I can get up and tell people what I actually think, too, because a lot of people were just lying and faking and frauding in the sense that there were things that they really were disturbed by that they didn't like, and they looked at that book as an announcement of the fact that there was another--we were now past the period where we had to just, you know, see no evil, speak no evil, hear no evil among us, but also you know--I mean there's plenty of stuff in there about racism and other things where the other people get their drubbings, too. I always wanted to be like an equal opportunity paddler. Speaker 1: Is there one essay there that is your favorite? Speaker 2: Maybe 'Body and Soul'. Maybe the last one just in terms of the structure of the essay because of the way it's organized and the way that the themes are developed and the relationship between the past and the present and all of that and personal memories overlaid by reporting and by things about Roman history and all that since it's set in Italy during the jazz festival in the summer in the late '80s [1980s] Speaker 1: Were you aware that it was a significant body of work when you came out with it? Were you aware immediately? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that you. Speaker 1: You said a lot of writers afterwards said that it gave them permission, but it was also--et's look at the time. It's 1990. Speaker 2: '90 [1990], right. Speaker 1: Who was in office back then? Are we--was Reagan in office? Reagan. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think. Wait a minute. Was he still in office then in '90 [1990]? No, he was gone. Speaker 1: He was gone? It was [George H. W.] Bush. Speaker 2: He was gone. Speaker 1: Okay, he was gone. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 5982 Speaker 1: That period of people even not being--the black community not being as monolithic you know had started to emerge anyway. Speaker 2: Well, first thing, the black community never was monolithic. It was just that the black community was poorly served by people who pretended it was monolithic and always wanted to say a real black person thinks or black people think. It's just like when Jesse Jackson jumped up and said black people have decided that they no longer want to be called black. They want to be called African Americans. As soon as I heard that, I called everybody I knew and tried to find out did Jesse Jackson or anybody connected with him contact you? No. That was just some jive because he and some people got together and just decided they were just going to push that through, and before you knew it, it was out here, and I consider that still today one of the clunkiest, vilest-sounding descriptions of a group of people that's ever come together, just as a sound--African American. That's corny, not to mention the fact that I know people who actually have two African parents and were born in America who are African Americans, who actually are from Africa with two African parents. It's so boring. Speaker 1: So you would have preferred when it was still being called Afro-American? Speaker 2: Definitely, definitely, definitely. In fact, I don't use African American, though I did use it in the past. I have used it in the past. I used it before it got in. It's in there. I used it before it got in, and then when it got in, I rejected it because I was always looking for something to say. Speaker 1: So you're a contrarian also-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, I was. Speaker 1: --and you're an elitist. Speaker 2: No, the problem--see, the problem is that as a writer, you get tired of using any term over and over so you know, you say okay, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black. You say okay, Afro-American, Afro-American, Afro-American, Afro-American. I'll go back to black for a little while so okay how about Negro? No, not Negro. Yes, I use that, too, right. You say okay, now I'm tired of that. What about African American? Okay, I'll use that, too. You say well, colored, I'll try that one, too, anything, but now I don't tend to use African American at all. Speaker 1: That's--you know because I remember when it first came out, I resented it. I resented that all of a sudden we had to call ourselves something different. Speaker 2: Well, because somebody declares it. Speaker 1: I remember. No, he declared it. I remember that. Speaker 2: See, I really didn't like that. Speaker 1: I was upset. Speaker 2: I didn't like that. Speaker 1: But now I like it better. Story_ID: 5983 Speaker 1: I'm telling you the more I learn about Africans, the less I like it [the term African American]. Speaker 2: Now, now, now. Speaker 1: No, I don't mean that, but you see, the thing to me is that--see, you have to understand something. I don't look up to any of them. When I say any of them, I don't look up to Europeans. I definitely don't the look up no goddamn Africans or anybody from China or Japan or South America or Australia. I don't look up to these people. You know I just don't do that. I'm not looking for somebody to worship out of the past, in other words as a group. I mean I have very high regard for Italians in Italy because it's very difficult in Italy to get a bad meal so I have very high regard for a society that has developed its cuisine to that level because the way they look at it is that it's an expression of who you are because it's a form of hospitality, and civilization is always based upon hospitality. So I have very high regard for them in that way, but in terms of feeling that I've got to get on my knees or something because they're Italians, the food's not that good. You know what I mean. Now the--and so I mean this whole African worship thing, see, I don't really see the big contribution that Africa's made to anything. The biggest contribution Africans made to modern life was selling some of our ancestors into the Western Hemisphere. That was their big gift to the world. It wasn't what they did because it was the fact that they sold us or like I said they sold a number of our ancestors over here, and that's why you have a Frederick Douglass. There's no Frederick Douglass in Africa. That's why you have a George Washington Carver. That's why you have a Louis Armstrong or Duke Ellington, you know. What's that guy--Ben Carson? All those black geniuses in the Western Hemisphere who appeared and have actually changed our conception of human life and have added something, they're not Africans. They're the people that Africans--they're the descendents of people whom Africans sold so their big contribution over the last five centuries was cooperating with slavery. Speaker 2: That's still--I think that's a little simplistic because. Speaker 1: What else did they do? Speaker 2: No, I'm just saying that there is acknowledgment of African heritage. Speaker 1: No, that's not what I'm saying. Speaker 2: I know, but I know that's not what you're saying, but look at jazz. Speaker 1: But jazz is not African music. Speaker 2: But it has its origin in-- Speaker 1: No, it has--an aspect of it is African. No, no, but that's not what I'm saying. Speaker 2: I know that's not what you're saying. Speaker 1: But you see, but you see, what I am saying--who is the African Duke Ellington? There is none. Let's just get to that. Let's just get to that. Let's just put all the fog to the side. Who are these major figures in the arts, in the world of thinking, in the world of politics instead of--who are Africans on a scale above and beyond, equal to or above and beyond black Americans? There are none. [Nelson] Mandela is the only one that you can put in the grand pantheon, I mean in terms of like what he really did was so amazing when he came out of prison. It's astounding, but I mean you know, I've been to Africa. I mean they're Africans. That's all they are. That's not nothing I'm going to look up to. It's like when I was in England, I wasn't walking around. England has made a far greater contribution to the culture of the world than Africa. Africa hasn't produced a Shakespeare. It hasn't produced a Watt. It hasn't produced all these great physicists and stuff. Are you serious? I mean, and look, when I was in Africa--when I was in England, I wasn't walking around going oh, I was in England. I didn't feel that about them either, you know, because they're not the ones who did that, you know? They're not John Locke. They're not all these other people. There's some people who were born in the same place that those people were. Speaker 2: We won't get into back and forth because I disagree completely. Speaker 1: But, Julieanna, I'm trying to find out what is it, but all I'm trying to say is this. Look, look, all I'm trying to say is this. There is something called physics. There is something called medicine. There are these things. There are these actual things that everybody in the world now draws upon, right. These little folk medicines and these witch doctors and this other kind of stuff that these Africans deal with, they don't--I mean you can't compare what they're dealing with to the kind of medicine that has come out of the Western world that has dramatically affected the health of Africans. To this very day the World Health Organization can't get the majority of Africans to boil water. You do know that. You do know that. Story_ID: 5984 Speaker 1: This is it. I'm not talking about genetics. I'm not talking about genetics. I'm not talking about that makes people--that gives you the right to mistreat people, you know. In one of the essays, 'The All-American Skin Game', I said look, that was always the colonial justification for the barbaric treatment of subject peoples. Okay, you don't have a Westminster Abbey. You don't have a Sistine Chapel. You didn't do this. You don't have a telegraph. You didn't invent this. I'm not going and buying that, but at the same time I'm not going to pretend that these inferior cultures are different than they are, that these primitive ways that people live any different than they are, and they're not the only people on the face of the earth like that. You've got people as primitive in certain places of the United States as you've got an Africa or in the Far East or anywhere else. Now if you actually think that people who cut out the clitorises of girls, that people who bleed people because they think that that works, that people who go through all these things--they do this all over the world. I cannot ,on the basis of some skin tone, pretend that that culture is equal to a far more sophisticated culture. It doesn't make people genetically inferior as we can see. Why are Africans beginning to come out of tribalism? Not because of anything in Africa, because they get educated in Europe, and any African will tell you that. Among their own people they grow up with so much ethnic hostility, that it's not until they go to school in Europe or in the United States that they begin to see beyond their tribalistic backgrounds. Now they'll tell you that, you know, so what I'm saying is--I mean when I look at it, my thing is look, there's great vitality there. They'll invent their own version of modern life. When I was an Africa, I saw that there they're going to do what everybody else did, what the Japanese did, what the Chinese are trying to do, etcetera. They'll invent an African version of modern life, but believe me, among them, among them they know the difference between Western civilization is up here and where they are, which is down here. They know that because they're the ones who have to deal with stuff like, the fact that right now in Africa they have to inform these men who are raping 10, 11, 12, 13-year-old girls, that raping a virgin is not going to cure you of AIDS. That tells you what Africa is as much as anything. Now if you know a Negro in America, the most barbaric Negro you can find, if you can find a Negro in America who is going to go out here and rape a 12-year-old girl to cure him of AIDS, tell me who he is, because I want to write a story about him tomorrow. Story_ID: 5985 Speaker 1: One of the reasons why I was glad to leave the 'Village Voice' was because I encountered people like you there at one point in which I was getting into an argument about clitoridectomies with these people who, as it turned out, were perfect liberal left representations of younger nave types. There was an Asian kid. There was a kid with a Spanish surname. There was a Jewish kid, and there was a black kid so I was saying about clitoridectomies that I considered them barbaric. So they all got very pious, very disturbed, and they said we can't really judge that because we're not part of that culture. I said "really?" They said "yes, we don't really understand that." I said, "Well, I have a daughter, and I don't think that she should have her genitals mutilated unless she chooses to do that." I said, "Now if after 18 someone decides that she wants to go get her clitoris cut out, fine, but I don't think that societies are supposed to decide around 12 or 13 zip, it's gone, right?" Then I said "But of course, we do know that all this sexual research by all these Western white folks about the significance of the clitoris and female sexual experience is something that we should just throw aside. I'm sure that the Africans must know more about that than us. Further, if we were to have discovered that clitoridectomies had been introduced into Africa by Europeans, you all would be climbing the walls about about how this is another example of European oppression of women in the Third World," blah, blah, blah. I said, "Now here's the way I look at it. Either you have an international conception of justice and human rights or you don't." Now the thing I find fascinating about you all is that as long as you, as they used to say in the 1890s, wave the bloody shirt at the white folks and Western civilization, you're always ready to jump up and start foaming at the mouth, jumping up and down on the desk and waving your fists and all of that. I said but the moment we begin to discover the nature of humanity is that anybody can screw you up, you know, even if they're part of the people who have been oppressed by colonialism or something, you all don't want to deal with that because this is a bit too complex, and I said so if you really believe that we who are not a part of that culture cannot judge it, then we should go along with what the colonizers said. You're not really here so you don't understand this so you shouldn't say anything about it or we should just assume that Pol Pot knew what he was doing when he slaughtered all those people in Cambodia because we're not Cambodians. We don't know anything about that culture so I don't buy that. I don't buy it. I go with the Nuremberg conception. It's a crime--you know, it's a crime against humanity. It's not a crime against Jews. That's not what the Germans did. They did something else. They made it very clear to us that genocide is a crime against all of us, not a crime against a special group, and we should always be on the lookout for that, and that's what my perspective is, but I found that at the [Village] 'Voice', that was very difficult to have because in fact the 'Voice' was the first place where I ever heard the term 'politically correct' uttered. Story_ID: 5986 Speaker 1: You were saying that there were things that were starting to really get you about the 'Village Voice'. Speaker 2: Well, there was--well, what bothered me was when I started noticing something that was in the 'Voice' and one or another thing. I started noticing if there was ever a story about the police in any kind of scuffle with some black people in Brooklyn or anyplace else, it was always the police were racists (unclear), and it--Now, see, my experience in the streets, you know, like my father was a criminal, you know, and I ran with a lot of knuckleheads at a lot of different times, and I was in cars where there were things in cars that were not supposed to be in cars that were thrown out the window before we got stopped, right, and I've been in the middle of--you know, I've been riding through the streets in stolen cars, riding through the streets, ready to pull off whatever kind of mayhem could be pulled off, right? So see, this whole idea that all of these, you know, all of these kids are just out there in the streets just kind of just skipping along, la-di-da-di-da-di-do-di-da, and the police are just always just harassing them, see, I know better than that. Secondarily, I know that every time the police come in contact with some black people, the cops are not in the wrong, but I started getting this feeling that you couldn't have written a story in the 'Voice' about a confrontation between some black people and some cops in which the cops weren't in the wrong. Then I started just noticing a lot of stuff like that started to fall in line, you know, that there were a lot of ideological constraints. Then it was--became--then the paper was owned by--you know, Rupert Murdoch owned it for awhile. Then another guy owned it for awhile, and then you had these different people who just--they just got kind of got stuck in a way of looking at the world, and I started to realize at a certain point that a lot of these people were--they were at war with their own middle-class backgrounds in ways that caused them to have a very rabid kind of an ideological hostility towards the United States. And that started to bother me at a certain point because I didn't see America as the great Satan, and I thought that there were a great deal of things that had come about in America that were extraordinary, and I thought that the coalitions between, you know, black and white and others, between men and women, between things that had constantly pushed the country towards realizing its goals were something we should have been proud of. I thought that this enormous battle 600,000 people died in called the Civil War was something that couldn't just be dismissed as some kind of Marxist thing, that it was just all about economics, about the industrial North and the rural South (unclear). That was too simpleminded, and I felt that just being a protester didn't automatically make you a good person or make you somebody who could be trusted or make you somebody who could--who, if you got any power, would not necessarily be as corrupt in your way as something else so at a certain point the Voice became to me very, very predictable, and it was about time for me to go, and so when Harry Allen and I had this fight or at least when I swung on Harry Allen--he was just arguing--poof. Speaker 1: So describe that. What happened? Speaker 2: We were arguing about rap music. Yes, we were arguing about rap music. Speaker 1: Gangster rap. Speaker 2: Gangster rap, yes, and I was very irritated about the celebration of these thug types and the bitches and the hoes and stuff, and he was very adamantly supportive of that, and then to protest this thug material, I responded to him in a thuglike manner and punched him in the mouth so I thought that--so there was kind of a--so we started with one--a bit more pacifically, but then by the end the exclamation point was in the language that he claimed that he was in support of so I was somewhat surprised when he called the police, but then when the police got there, they looked at the cut on his mouth, and they said do you know this is New York City? He said yes, well, I think--. They said terrible things happen to people in this town. If you ever call us again because you have a cut on your lip and you want us to arrest someone for that, we will take you down, and they left because I mean, you know, this is a grown man so these are two cops so they actually thought there might have been an assault so when he said he cut my lip right here, and they're like "What?" It was like--you know, so they like no, no, no, this isn't really something. Then fortunately for me, the editor took it far more seriously, and he fired me, and so I've always said that the best thing that ever happened to me was being hired by the 'Voice' and being fired by the 'Voice', not necessarily in that order. Speaker 1: Were you--do you regret (unclear) that you had let your temper get out of control? Speaker 2: Well, my temper has gotten out of control so many times over the years. I mean, you know, in fact, you know, probably a parodic nickname for me could have been temper control, but I was just--I'd always been that kind of person. I've always had that thing in me, you know, and fortunately now I'm at a stage of life where I've finally gotten over that, but I still have those thoughts. I mean, there are times when things happen, and I think to myself--well, I'm not going to go into what I think, but let's just put it like this, that now and again that demonic side does reappear in my consciousness, but I don't act on it. Speaker 1: So you're out of the 'Voice', the place that had sort of given you prominence, you know, and sort of given you a platform. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 5987 Speaker 1: Were you doing NPR [National Public Radio] at that point? (unclear) Speaker 2: No, once I left the 'Voice', I was a freelance writer. Then things just really started taking off. I just started getting, you know, calls from here and from there to be on this and to do this and to sell this book and to write this and blah, boom. And so things just started taking off so it was like I went to--so that was like--that actually was like getting kicked out of the nest instead of going down like, you know, some of those birds you find when you're a kid, crushed up down on the ground. They couldn't make it. I actually went up in the sky, and as you can see now, I am flying over the former nest and, you know, bombing in the droppings. Speaker 1: Was there any sense during any of that period where you had just a little bit of oh, my god, you know, what am I going to do next? Not even a second? Speaker 2: I don't know. I mean, I'll tell you this. I wasn't happy to leave there that way, but I felt that that was a good--but it was the time for me to leave because, you know, most of the people who stayed at the 'Voice', their careers didn't amount to much, and they ended up trying--petering out of there, and then they become--they're like some minor reporter on the 'New York Times' or something so, you know, it was good for me to get out of there. Story_ID: 5988 Speaker 1: 'All-American Skin Game', where is that compared to when you left--let's see. That was before, right? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. No, the 'Notes of a Hanging Judge' was first. Speaker 1: No, no, no, I know that was first. Speaker 2: Then 'All-American Skin Game'. Speaker 1: But what year was that? Speaker 2: '94 [1994], '90 [1990]. Speaker 1: Okay, but you didn't leave the 'Voice' until when? Speaker 2: I left it in '88 [1988] I think. Speaker 1: You left the 'Voice' in '88 [1988]? Speaker 2: '89 [1989], something like that. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I left in '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: So you left before you even did 'Notes of a Hanging Judge'. Speaker 2: I think when I wrote--yeah, I think when 'Notes of a Hanging'--no, when 'Notes of a Hanging Judge'. Speaker 1: I thought you were still there. Speaker 2: No, see, Stanley Crouch was a jazz critic and staff writer at the 'Village Voice' for 10 years. Speaker 1: Okay, okay okay. Speaker 2: The first one. '79 to '89 [1979-1989]. Speaker 1: Okay, so things start really taking off. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the 'All-American Skin Game' is '90 to '94 [1990-1994]. None of these pieces were published in the 'Voice'. They were all published elsewhere. You know. Speaker 1: What did you mark in there, Stanley? Speaker 2: I don't know. What did I mark in there? Speaker 1: You marked some things for reading. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was talking about--this is about race. As for science in the November 1994 issue of Discover, Paul Hoffman writes race accounts for only a minuscule .012 percent difference in our genetic material. So that goes back to what you think when I was telling you--when you were thinking I was telling you these Africans, unlike us, are genetically inferior. Let me see. This one is 1995 to 1997 so these are all books. So those three books can actually kind of be read as one book in a way because they are all extensions of each other, and there are certain themes that weave through them, but I don't know that I'm going to be writing many books of essays for awhile. I think I'm essayed out. Story_ID: 5989 Speaker 1: How did 'Don't the Moon Look Lonesome'--how was that germinating inside of you, you know, I mean, because that's your first novel, right? Speaker 2: The first published one, yes. Speaker 1: First published one. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd written two before that. The first one my first wife lost, but that's not why we broke up even though I'd been working on it for about 10 years. That's okay, though. I mean, you just--things just goes by the by. Then the second one, I just couldn't get finished. I'm presently trying to take parts of it and put it in this other book and see if I can make a full book out of that. 'Don't the Moon Look Lonesome' began as a short story which was supposed to be about 20 pages. It was intended to conclude this book of short stories that I'm now trying to transform that into a book of short stories but into a novel that seems like it's a book of short stories, but it just got out of hand. The story I always tell is that we went--it was--we took the prisoner, the 20 pages, and locked it in a 20 page cell, and we came there the next day, and somehow the prisoner had sawed through the bars, taken the bedclothes, gone down the wall, gotten across the yard, gotten up the big wall and, as [Norman] Mailer once wrote, out into the free. Once we got out, the local police, the state troopers, the dogs, by the time we caught it and brought it back to the penitentiary, it was 526 pages so all we can say is it got out of hand, but the reason it got out of hand was because the character, Carla, the blonde singer from South Dakota, just kept getting bigger and bigger and stronger and more and more powerful, and she just took the book over. See, the book wasn't initially--first it was not going to be a book, but then secondly, I didn't think that it was going to be from her perspective, but it was going to open with her perspective. Then other things would go in, but they never came in. She just was not going to have that. Speaker 1: Now, Stanley, about the book, because as I told you this morning, I thought that when I read the book, I'd start--well, first of all, I didn't know if I wanted to read the book because I had heard some--I had heard that it was a difficult read, which I was totally--I don't know who told me that, but they're totally wrong about that. Speaker 2: Some buffoon (laughs). Speaker 1: Because it's a very lyrical book and I thought a very beautifully written book, but I also didn't want to like Carla, and I found it very strange at the beginning. I'm like why is he writing about this white girl? You know, and that was my reaction. Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: And then I became sympathetic to her because even though I have white women who I have been sympathetic to in interracial relationships and I knew they love that person, I still realize I came from a perspective of a black female who has issues with those relationships so I felt sympathetic to her, you know, in many ways and sort of understood that in a way I hadn't understood it before, but it still struck me strange that a black man would choose this and this subject as his first novel out of the box. I mean one--I don't even think this novel is reminiscent of your essays sort of leading up to--mean that character, choose that character as the lead character, I guess is what I'm saying. Speaker 2: Well, all I can say is, like I said, I didn't intend it to be what it became. It just took off and went in that direction, and once it started to go, then I started saying well, okay, let me see, you know, and personally, I don't like to write about myself under the guise of fiction. Now I don't mean I don't use my experience or something like that, but as a writer, I'm not interested in myself. A lot of people when they write, that's the person most interesting to them. In my case, I would always--I'd rather write a story. I'd rather try to imagine what kind of person you are and what your childhood was like and if I met some people in your family and some of your ex-boyfriends, people who've worked with you. I'd rather try to imagine that than try to disguise something. I'd rather try to imagine that than try to describe something that happened to me or try to--no, not try to describe, try to disguise something that happened to me and disguise my emotional reaction to something and pretend it was something else so she completely liberated me to go the way I wanted to go, and see, what I was hoping most in the book was, as it developed, was I was hoping to help begin what I think is the most important thing to be done in American literature, which is to try to reflect the real cultural complexity and ethnic complicity of the society. I don't think that--I don't think any writer should be told what to do, but I think that the large challenge before us is writing about the kinds of things that we actually know happened. You're sitting here. This is your project. There's a white guy working the camera with whom you get along or he wouldn't have the job, you know. There are other white people you know who may know you and this and that and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Now the kind of person you are, the complexity of the world that you're dealing with, what your thoughts are and how they fit in with everything you know, those aren't the kinds of things we tend to write or read about in today's novels, that they're very simple, and cross-racial relationships are usually depicted so simplistically that you don't really get that kind of give-and-take, up-and-down kind of thing that happens. You know how, for instance, in the novel Carla loves Cecilia, and Cecilia loves her, and they're good friends, but Cecilia still doesn't like her going with Maxwell or any other black guys because she says to herself--at one point she says I'm sitting here trying to think--what I'm listening--when she's listening to her cousin LeeAnn who's got a white boyfriend, right, and she's listening to this white woman who's got a black boyfriend, and they're talking about their interracial relationships, and she says, "I'm sitting here trying to figure out what white man I would like even if I didn't want to like him and can't think of one 'cause that's not the kind of person I am." You know what I mean? That's just not me so it's not a matter of--because see, when she says that, that's when she's telling you what the real thing is. It's that she's saying I'm not the kind of--in other words, I would tell you if there was a white guy that so appealed to me that even though I didn't want to be with him, I'd feel that. I'm not feeling that, she's saying, right, so Carla has to deal with her and appreciate her and understand these different things, and you know, there's that moment when Cecilia says to her the thing I've never seen a black woman say to a white woman in a book. I don't mean that it's never been said, which is that thing where she says to her you know, you, like most white people, act as though everybody's on your side. Everybody's looking out for you, right? She said black people don't get up in the morning and go out on the street thinking everybody's looking out for me, right, and it's at that moment that deep in the book--it's near the end, maybe 50 pages from the end, Carla actually realizes that for all the experiences of different black guys she's gone with, the different white guys, moving up and down the social scale, etcetera, etcetera, and having had terrible experiences here and there with white men and with black men, that it never crossed her mind that when she does go into stores and do this and do that, she actually assumes that a certain kind of support and generosity and genealogy, etcetera, will come her way, and then she starts to notice that most of the black people she knows, they put another kind of thing on when they go in a store. See, to me that's one of the most fascinating things you can see in America, that is to be walking with a black woman like you, you know, or people who are like good-natured, witty, happy-go-lucky on the surface--I don't mean superficial--to watch that transformation that goes down when they go in a store, and one of those people has just a little bit of that look in their eye like 'what are you doing here?' Then you see something else, and that's when they go into Marine Corps, and like one black woman told me, she said, "Now when I encounter that," she said, "I can be a bitch, but I can also be a butch bitch, if necessary." You know, I said "Well, what is a butch bitch?" She said "A butch bitch is the kind of bitch who tells a white bitch without saying it I will snatch your white ass across this counter and put my foot in it. That's a butch bitch." I said okay, so I'm going to use that somewhere. You know what I'm saying? Story_ID: 5990 Speaker 1: How do people react to the book, like did you get much reaction from white women? Speaker 2: About it? Speaker 1: Um hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what were they saying to you? Speaker 2: They were shocked, the ones who talked to me. Now I got a review in which one woman got very upset because Carla had a big booty, and she said she didn't think that that was an advance for that to be brought up, and there was one woman who told me she thought that was insulting to women, and I said well--I wanted to say well, since you don't have one, I can see it might be insulting to you. Speaker 1: You know, I was just at a place where there were--actually my aunt's funeral, and one of the, you know, cousins had a white girlfriend, and the comment was she's got a black behind, the exact same thing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But anyway, okay, go on, but I mean did they--I'm just wondering what the comments were. Speaker 2: Well, one young woman told me, who is trying to be a singer, she told me that at certain points the book actually kind of frightened her, and I said what do you mean, and she said well, there were times when I was reading the book when I actually thought I was reading about myself, that I wasn't reading a book and it would be so much--it would be so exactly the way I felt about certain things that I actually had to stop reading it because I was shocked because I would be going along, and I'm reading a story, and suddenly it's as though I'm in the book, you know, and one woman who was--one woman, Diana Flanagan who was the husband of Tommy Flanagan who died recently--a great pianist--, she's from Iowa, and I've known Tom and Diana 20 years, and she said, "Stanley," you know, she said, "you know, before I read this, I thought I knew you before I read this book, but when I read this book, she said I realized that there's a whole other area to your understanding of the world and so on and the way people are and how they interact and all that," and she said, "of all the times we've been around each other, I would never pick that up, but you really knew things, and she said I'm from Iowa". She said that Midwestern portrait that you have of her and of her family and all that, that's exactly correct, and she said the way in which this woman comes to realize these relationships that she has and how she decides to fight for what she believes in, she said she was actually shocked, and I've had that happen a number of times now, but I actually--quite frankly, I was shocked by the way it was responded to in the critical world. Story_ID: 5991 Speaker 1: Well, part of what I was trying to do with the depiction [in his novel 'Don't the Moon Look Lonesome'] of Carla's boyfriend Maxwell and his family was to show what I consider the traditional Afro-American family, which was in so many cases two extremely strong personalities in the house. See, most black guys don't grow up under women whom they get the impression of are wimps, if you want to use that term today. That's usually not the thing, and so Eunice is a very powerful figure, but her husband Ezekiel is an equally powerful figure, you know, but at the same time, their relationship has complexities and all kinds of different things in it, and they both have something I was after, too, which is a kind of intelligence that's often missed if you look for an academic version of intelligence because part of what the book is about is it's a treatise on intelligence, too. That is that Carla comes to learn that there's so many different forms of intelligence that you can encounter and come to appreciate if you're willing to pay attention. Now if you only have--if you're only interested in a certain kind of thing, there are things that you can just miss that will just go by, and you don't even get a whiff of them so that when she starts to pay attention to Eunice, you realize that Eunice isn't an educated woman. Eunice is very, very, very bright. For instance, how when she and Maxwell, who both know know a lot about visual art, they take her to the (unclear) Museum, and they can't see what's going on in the paintings, but she can so she straightens them out because they're standing too close to the paintings, and you can't really see them, what they are that way. You've got to step back, right, which, of course, is a metaphor for everything else, and then when Carla looks at the paintings, she notices that there's all these moving forms under these so-called black paintings, right? It's what painters call chromatic black so that's like a metaphor for what the whole book is about, right, is that maybe you have to get in the right position to really see the forms, the motion, the freedom from what today is called a monolithic image of black people, you know, so that's kind of like a metaphor for what the whole book is about is that when she starts seeing that because that's what it's about. It's about chromatic black on one level, that there are all these different things going on, right, and Maxwell's parents accept him and accept Carla in a way that younger black people don't because that's when she's talking with Leeann, and LeeAnn is talking about how she has to live downtown because you remember the part where she says she has to be around these boring white people downtown because they don't bother her about her sex life whereas if she lived up in Harlem, she might be getting bothered about that or she would have to become some bongo princess if she moved to Brooklyn and go through all that so she's seeing--there's a kind of thing like, okay, it's not so much Paradise lost, but this is the home front. This is the real stuff here, if you will, and finally that's what liberates Maxwell from his own doubts about whether or not he should succumb to these pressures from the outside world because in terms of some kind of nationalistic idea that, you know, Carla thinks at one point on the one hand he's talked about how before he became known, these black women had no interest in him at all. Then once he started becoming known and his star started rising, then the next thing you know, whoosh, they're all around them in the club and everything so they're fine, too, so Carla notices that. She's looking right at (unclear). It's not like, you know, Hattie. You know, it's like fifteen Hattie McDaniels are chasing him down the street. It's not something. It ain't really like that. It's like that panoply of all of these different kinds of black women, and they're in there, and then she gets paranoid, and she starts thinking about all of these different types so she's always in the middle of something, and she grows through these different relationships. See, another thing I wanted to do was to show the reason. See, the book has a lot of things. See, a lot of things have to do with threes in the book, and one of the reasons that she goes with three guys is because that's part of the form, that there are a lot of threes in the book, three glasses of water, three doctors, three this, three that, three that, you know, because there are a lot of threes in the classical epics, and of course, there's the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and then there's the past, the present, the future, and there's triangles. You know, there are a lot of threes so when she goes with Jimmy Joe, Bobo, and Maxwell, but see, she's a different person with each of those guys because even though--see, I had to imagine that, but I imagined--see, I've always assumed, once I became an adult, that people are different in different relationships and that the relationships happen as they're growing up as they did with her. She's coming into womanhood, but she's a different kind of woman when she's a kid, when she's with Jimmy Joe, when she's in Chicago, when she dances to the band and they go out and she hangs out with him and learns how to play bid whist, dominoes, all of that, and then she starts noticing two playing that bid whist and those dominoes and how fast these people's minds are working. Oh, this isn't a lightweight game, and when she's with Bobo, he's a different kind of a guy. He brings something out of her. He makes her--see, Bobo liberates her to become an adult woman because just through her--that she has to submit to her own erotic identity in a way because when she gets involved with him, she actually finds things out about her that make her blush in terms of like the way she actually is. Now she had plenty of time far and before that, but she didn't meet that guy that made something happen for her. Then when she's with Maxwell, that's another kind of thing. She's already done that so now it's more of a thing of homebuilding and all that so you see her as a college girl with a boyfriend. You see her as a woman, late twenties, early thirties, involved with this guy who's a self-destructive junkie, doesn't live with him because it's too chaotic. You know, it's her place and his place. Then there's the big--you know, that's why there's a big moment for her when she moves in with Maxwell. That's a big deal to her because she'd always--when she was going with the rich Irish guy, she might wake up in his expensive place up on the Upper East Side, but she kept her little place on the Lower East Side because she always wanted to be able--she always wanted to have her home so when she actually has to move her piano out and move everything in and go into Maxwell's house, that's a big thing. And see, so for me, Julieanna--see, I hadn't seen those kinds of things done with female characters before where you really got a chance to see how a woman who's 38 when the book opens, the different ways that she is and then moving in with a guy when you're a grown woman, when you're 34, 35 years old. That's not a small thing when you fought all your life to become yourself and get your own place and be independent, and you worked as a waitress. You've done all kinds of stuff. You've worked your way up, and now you're starting to get some work, get some jobs, and this guy charms you and keeps telling you maybe you should move in with me, and so, you know, she finally gives in, but it's a big decision for her. Story_ID: 5992 Speaker 1: What did your wife think of the book? Speaker 2: Quite honestly, I don't know if my wife ever really read it. Now she says she read it, but I don't know that she really read it, you know. Speaker 1: Before it came out? Speaker 2: Or after. See, when I was writing it, she wasn't reading it, but see, I don't think she ever really read it. Speaker 1: Because I'm not sure if I were your wife--I would have been asking well, that's fine, honey, but maybe you should not come out with this book. Speaker 2: Right, right, right right. Speaker 1: That's what I might be saying. Speaker 2: Right. Now she claims--now I'll say this. She does claim she read it. I've never believed she read it, but she's claimed she's read it, but I know she read parts of it because there were things in it that she liked that she told me about like the scene where Carla is in the bathroom and these two black women come in, and one of them starts talking about how unhappy she is, and she's caught in the bathroom because the first woman come in, and the first thing they do is they snorted some cocaine, and she's had the experience of walking in on people using drugs before so she doesn't really want to get up off the toilet and make them go (unclear) so she tries to sit it out for real. Then she has to finally--it gets so far out there that she starts making some noise to let them know, and then it goes into a whole other thing. But then after that the thoughts that she has afterwards about sweetness and being sweet, and you're always told from when you're a kid. Your mother said to be sweet, be sweet, and you come to find out at a certain point that that's a strength. That's not a weakness because that's a lot of what the book is about, too, because it's about trying to redefine in human terms qualities that are often dismissed by ideologues when they try to talk about the sexes and all this, you know, how everything is economic and it's all a construct. It's like all of that when it's--because part of what the book is about is what constitutes civilization. What is it? What makes it civilization? Now a lot of what--so the things that she often thinks about and the things that people talk about are the things that are the way in which you both express and protect your humanity from the descent into a certain kind of cynicism that can have--that can be reductive spiritually and emotionally, but at the same time you have to be ready to take it. That's the whole point. When Cecelia gets that woman out of her involvement with crack, it's why she says--it's at that point when Cecelia goes into that crack house, and those Negroes are sitting up in there, waiting to spend their two or three dollars on a woman, and she lets them know that's the end of this, fellows. I mean, I found our her out in the street. He's supposed to at school. He's not supposed to be out here so she can be out here having sex with you all so she can get money for her drugs. This is over, right, and so--but the thing is Cecelia's story and her story and these various stories tell you over and over that there's a cost. You're going to pay. It's not that you're going--there are no free rides. You're going to pay. It's like life is going to tattoo you on the booty with its foot, not with a needle, with its foot, and that's what's going to happen, but it's okay. It's all right. You'd prefer for it to be different, but it is like that. Story_ID: 5993 Speaker 1: You said that you were surprised by the critics. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or the criticism. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had a very nave idea about this book. I thought this book was going to be swept up and celebrated and blah, blah, blah, and I was going to be praised and carried through the streets and horns and all that. I thought I was going to just go straight to the top, going to be (unclear). Well, of course, that didn't happen because I felt that because it went into so many areas of stuff that I hadn't seen and it dealt with race on a far more complicated scheme or far more complicated way than I had seen so that race just becomes a metaphor for human complexity and going back and forth across lines and all that, but you know, it didn't happen so boo-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo so next, and so on and so on and so on. Now I'm coming after them again with more, and I'm not done with this. I'm going to try to make a miniseries of the novel. I'm trying to get that together now, but it solidified something. That book clarified everything for me as a writer that I needed to feel about writing because I felt--I told my wife after I finished it, I said even though I wouldn't be happy if I had to check out now, I'd feel far, far less disturbed because I had finished this book because it really--it's a real summing up of what I know, what I know how to do as a writer about writing dialogue, setting scenes, writing in different styles, creating different kinds of people, going across different class lines, taking you into night, taking into the day, dealing with nature, dealing with psychological development and emotional problems, familial complexities, sibling rivalries, all kinds of different things come up through the book. See, there's a white character there that I found fascinating that nobody really dealt with Ramona in the reviews because Ramona was--see, like where she was coming from, see, I've never seen like what she was coming from and what she was talking about. It was all true, but she also knew it was fake. Remember how when she realized that she was on campus and all these black kids were being so hostile towards a white kid and then she remembered that these middle-class black girls started concentrating on dropping the Gs so that they would sound more street and that it was all like a kind of a Halloween--it was almost like a Halloween game in which they were like trying to taunt and chase and scare the white people every day and that it was like their version of heavy metal rock (unclear), but even though she knew that, she still decided, because the guy she was in love with was a racist, she decided to go with him, and see, what I was after with that was--see, one of the things, Julieanna, that stuck in my mind for over 40 years--no, over 20 years I've been thinking about it this way. See, I've often wondered what the women who were married to those men who murdered Emmett Till. I've often wondered what--at night when everybody else is asleep, and they're mothers, and they know that these guys tortured and murdered this boy for saying something untoward to a white woman. I've often wondered what that's about in their head, not what they say, just to think about you being a mother, and you've got to look your son laid out like that, you know, with his features distorted by being under the water and all that, and so part of what Ramona was about was something that I've always believed, come to believe over the years, which is that, you see, for you to have a successful bigot who's got a family, his wife has got to go with it. She's got to submit, too. In fact, there's a book called the 'German Women', which is about how all of these women in Germany had to submit to the Third Reich's vision to make it work, and so Ramona doesn't come from a racist background, and we discover by the end of that chapter, the you and me that used to be, that she actually isn't a racist, that she's--the whole thing is a fraud but that if it comes down to the fact that she's a woman who, you know, was successful. Like she said, every now and then we'd have to find a guy and have a nice sexual relationship, had never really been extremely appreciated, never really had been in love with a guy, not really, really as an adult so she finally falls in love with this guy, and this guy is like zongo out there except that on the surface you couldn't tell even when she says we figured out that, though, how to keep them in low positions in our businesses. Now you got to hide when they made that the law, but we know how to keep them where they're supposed to be, but we never go to court so it's like it's a whole other kind of a thing that she's thinking and the way her mind works, and I've never seen anybody depicted like her so I was waiting for some white reviewer to say well, because I don't have any doubt that the majority of white people in this country know somebody white like her who's not in a field jacket. She's not missing teeth. Her hair's not matted. She's not sitting there with, you know, three automobiles in the front yard that don't work and a bunch of kids walking around with unchanged diapers, drinking beer, and walking around with her navel out. She's not one of those. That's not her so she's a much more dangerous person in a way. Speaker 1: Your role as a commentator versus that of a novelist, I mean, you are you going to be able to wear both hats? Speaker 2: I don't even think about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 5994 Speaker 1: What are your dreams or aspirations, to do lots of novels, to do? Speaker 2: Well, what I hope to do is I hope to write a novel about a painter and an actress. I hope to write a novel about the world of business, and I hope to write a novel about politics so those are my plans for that. Now in the world of film, I have other plans, and I would also before--if I can stay at it because nobody ever knows how long they're going to live, but if I can maintain productivity and maintain my health maybe till I'm 70 or something hopefully or more, then I'd also like to write some children's books, too. I'd like to just be--I'd like to bestride the entire thing. Eventually I'd like to write for the theater again. I'd like to write for film, write novels. I've been working on this thing that's got these short stories in it, and I'd like to write, like I said, a children's book, and Wynton Marsalis and I are supposed to do an opera for City Opera so we're supposed to do that, and so I think we're supposed to do that for the 2003, 2004 season. Story_ID: 5995 Speaker 1: Well, in theory I'm opposed to affirmative action, but as I've pointed out that--didn't I answer that before? Speaker 2: Off camera. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Well, what I found--what has happened with me with all of these things, see, my real position on everything is that I said I think either in the introduction to 'Always in Pursuit', I think, or 'All-American Skin Game' that I don't care whether the cow comes from right to center or the left to the--yeah, yeah, anyway in one of these introductions. That's in the 'Skin Game'? You're sure? Speaker 2: I think (unclear). Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I think so. Speaker 1: How about this? Speaker 2: It doesn't matter where the milk comes from. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. I've written that I don't care whether the cow comes from the right, the left, or the center of the pasture. I'm only concerned with whether or not the milk is sweet so I don't really care about any of that because I think that the country is too complex, and there are too many things demanded of us for us to assume that only one perspective will always be right so I'm always prepared for somebody from the far left to come up with an idea that's usable, somebody from the far right, somebody from the middle, or all three of them arguing together finally coming to conclude something, coming up with something that might really be functional. I don't really care about any of that, but I have found that when my book first came out, people would--I would get called on these conservative talk shows, and somebody would always come on and say yeah, well, he sounds like a man who thinks for himself. What do you think about affirmative action, and I would always say well, you know, in theory I don't agree with it, but this guy named [New York state assemblyman] Larry Seabrook in the state of New York who has tapes of hiring agencies agreeing to only send white applicants for jobs and also admitting on these tapes to the purported potential employer that yes, other people had called in and asked for that same kind of thing. Story_ID: 5996 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the black community or concerns? Speaker 2: Well, I mean the black community is in enormous trouble right now because it's in a very decadent state. Not the black middle class--they're making it. You've got that terrible thing that's happening with so many of these black kids that bought the idea that to be a good student, to be literate that, to be able to command the English language, etcetera, that that in some way is white and not just educated so that's creating a problem with the black middle class, I mean, but I think eventually people will come through that. Then the people in the lower class, I mean that's the worst position for them to take because that deprives them of preparing themselves with the tools that would allow them to really change their fate so we've got to backtrack at this particular time, it seems to me, and reassess the the cultural vision that presently exists if black people are not going to become--actually start to become a side pocket of American reality at large. I mean, black people in the middle-class and upper-middle class and upper-class, I mean they'll chug right along, but that large body of people at the bottom who are not apparently committed with the intensity necessary to education and all, you know the education to vastly reducing teenage pregnancy, to getting these knuckleheads, you know, either in the penitentiary or off the streets or converted will, you know, exist in this abysmal situation that they presently exist in. You know, I mean, before they tore down the Robert Taylor Homes, there was a woman in there who served her children dinner in the hallway because these knuckleheads came in the courtyard every night as soon as the sun went down and started shooting off their pistols so here she is with kids, and she's serving them their dinner out in the hall because she's afraid of them are her being shot while they're sitting at the dinner table, you know. Story_ID: 5997 Speaker 1: If I were leading the country, what would I do? Well, the first thing I would do is I would try to figure out how to actually rebuild the public schools, but I would want to rebuild them using the model of a place like the Kipp Academy [Charter School, Bronx, New York] which is here in South Bronx which is run like a private school, but that's not how I would--it's run like a private school except that you get in by lottery, and they don't care what kind of grade point average you have when you come in, but their kids perform higher than the national average in reading and math and all these skills. It's better, but they just figured out how to do that so the first thing I would do is instead of coming up with another theory, everything I wanted to do, I would seek out the people who had been successful doing it. If I wanted to take on teenage pregnancy, I would have research done to figure out what were the most effective programs in the country for reducing teenage pregnancy, bring those people to Washington, and find out what their methodology was, and that would be the national methodology. It wouldn't be based on theory. It would be the same thing for the public schools. This we know works, and if we do this, we'll be able to get X done. Then I would do the same thing with reduction of street gangs, and then finally I would opt and would be run out of office for it, but I would opt for the legalization of drugs because I know that all of this--see, there's all these people, all this imbecilic, cliched, repetitious blather about they're out there, they're warehousing young black men. They're warehousing black people, right? They're warehousing black people because most of the people who are there are there for drug offenses. My attitude is legalize drugs. What will it do? First thing, it will destroy the grip of terror that these drug dealers and those competing for drug turf have on the community. It will also make it impossible for these young people who get corrupted in the drug trade to be drafted in, and they make $500 a week, $1000 a week, whatever they do, first being just on the peripheral. You know, they're working at the periphery of the trade, and then eventually they get more and more into the center. All those jobs would be gone, right, and that's going to be a hard battle because that's--see, the thing that is most fascinating about the United States to me is that you can have the most debasing images of women on pay television, right, probably in every state in the country just about now, right, but the idea of somebody being able to buy some drugs, oh, oh, drugs, what do you mean, right? Now my attitude is we just have to look at the reality of the matter. That twelve years of prohibition allowed the Mafia to become a multimillion dollar national syndicate of crime and corruption, right. Had there not been prohibition, the history of American crime would be dramatically different, dramatically different. I don't think these things like the Mafia would have gotten anywhere near the size that they got if they hadn't been able to amass those millions of dollars, you know, so those would be my fundamental things. I mean, I think I might nuke Afghanistan or something. Story_ID: 5998 Speaker 1: What do you think about black political leadership? There've been two black mayors in--oh, no, no, three of major--four of major cities, U.S. cities. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: More than that. Speaker 2: More than that, yeah. Wait a minute. You got. Speaker 1: I was going to say New York and Chicago, but I thought no, no, no. There's L.A., and then there's Detroit. Speaker 2: First thing you had--yeah, yeah. That's what I mean. You had [Los Angeles mayor Tom] Bradley for sixteen years in L.A. You have the sixteen years. You have. Speaker 1: [New York mayor David] Dinkins was--he was not--. That didn't work. Speaker 2: No, he wasn't. He was a weak mayor. He was a weak mayor, but I've had it. I'm worn. Story_ID: 5999 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Who knows? I don't know. I don't think about that. I mean the basic thing is is that, see, if I keep producing material that I think is good, that'll be it, you know. Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: Both the best and the worst things I've done because most of the worst things I did was when I was younger so if I do some great things as an older guy, then those who might start off like I used to be might not be discouraged when they find themselves still struggling to try to get through the things in them that's keeping them from getting to the higher side of themselves. Speaker 1: And Stanley, I couldn't help thinking throughout this (unclear) of interviewing you about your mother and your family. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And your growing up in the sense of community. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And is your mother still alive? Speaker 2: No, she's dead. She died in 1992. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you think is the sort of legacy that they helped you with? Speaker 2: Well, I mean they were--she came--she was born in 1917. She came out of that post Civil War vision that developed through the last three-and-a-half decades of the 19th century in which people were very engaged in education. They knew that was a really important thing to get, that they had a very strong community orientation. You had an extended family sort of thing which didn't allow you to get away with very much. You stayed in your own neighborhood, and they were all very supportive of the kids at large and were always encouraging them to go on to have big dreams and to try to follow them, you know, so I thought that was really something. That wasn't like--see, it's a strange thing which is that you get more whining and crying and they won't let you from Negroes who are doing well now than you got from the blue collar Negroes I grew up with because their thing was that yeah, we're going to do this or yeah, we're gonna, you know. We're on the move, and we're gonna get up there, and you all just--everybody gotta--you stand on the shoulders of the one below you and stand up, and you've gotta stand straight so the next person can stand up and blah, blah, blah so I mean it's kind of strange to me sometimes. I'll be with these Negroes with swimming pools and stuff in L.A., and they stand up there talking like somebody has chained them next to a cotton bale, you know, in the Mississippi mud waiting for the steamboat to come. You know what I mean so sometimes I don't know what that is, but I think that has something to do with how screwed up the minds of some of these black middle class kids are because their parents have already convinced them that there's nothing there. There's no--as Gertrude Stein would say, there's no there there, right, so you know, they've already discouraged them instead of encouraged them a lot of times, unintentionally by the way. That's not what they intend to do, but I think not being engaged, and I think that those people basically will--of course, you have other types. You always do, but the bulk of the people were moving in that direction, and what I hope is that someday we'll have a renaissance in which the very best of what came out of the past will be reasserted, and it'll be reasserted as something that was developed right here in this culture and that worked decade after decade after decade after decade until people disavowed that in favor of some kind of superalienated ethnic narcissism. Story_ID: 6000 Speaker 1: What do people most misunderstand about you that you care about? Do you care about it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually, I really don't--one of the reasons that doesn't bother me at all is, see, the people who misunderstand me are the people who think they're intellectuals or pretend to be. The people who do understand me are the people who read the Daily News who are a far greater number of black Americans and others who are always coming up to me in the street and saying stuff, saying I read your column. I love your column. One day I was--this Puerto Rican kid came, was a messenger, delivered something to my house, and he said, "Oh, you're Stanley Crouch." I said yeah. He said I read your articles in the Daily News, very interesting articles. He's like 16, 17. I was stopped on the street by a black guy who was driving an ambulance who said hey, hey, hey, are you Stanley Crouch? I said yeah. He said yeah, man, yeah. I've had guys drive subways, nurses, all kind of black people who would not--a number of--who wouldn't be black intellectuals, very rarely associated with them, by the way, or would feel comfortable talking to, by the way, and who, unlike me, am out of touch with black people, right--no, who unlike me are not, according to them, out of touch with black people so I don't really worry about that, and any time I'm in a public forum with these other people, I always lay something down, and these people always come up to me and say yeah...