 Story_ID: 5485 Speaker 1: ...Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Nathan Conyers, "N-A-T-H-A-N C-O-N-Y-E-R-S." Speaker 1: And please give us your date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: I was born July 3rd, 1932 in Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an automobile dealer. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 19th of August 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the city of Novi, Michigan and we're in our Jaguar Novi dealership on the corner of Ten Mile and Haggerty Road. Story_ID: 5486 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Red meat. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The fall. Lots of red in the fall. Speaker 1: (laughing) And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I have two favorite in this hemisphere. One is a Caribbean island, St. Martin's-- lovely place. An island that's divided between the Dutch government and the French government. And so you get a lot of wide ranging foods and activities. Great island. And most recently, Turks and Caicos have been very close and friendly island. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the last-- name of the last one? Speaker 2: Turks and Caicos. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: "T-U-R-K-S, C-A-I-C-O-S." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's the--It's just kind of like south of Cuba near (pause)--It's near--I can't think of the name of the island now. The island that started off all the offshore banking. What was that island? I'll think of it in a minute. Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really. Well an idea that I like to convey which I got out of several books has to do with the fact that ordinary people can do extraordinary things. That you don't have to be something special or the best there is at--in your occupation, field of endeavor. That ordinary people focused and with the proper attitudes can do extraordinary things. That's one of the messages we give when we we're in school situations and graduation speeches. Story_ID: 5487 Speaker 1: Mr. Conyers can you give us the names of your parents and spell them--their names for us? Speaker 2: My father's name was John James Conyers, "J-O-H-N, J-A-M-E-S, C-O-N-Y-E-R-S." Mother's name was Lucille Simpson. Her maiden name, "L-U-C-I-L-L-E, S-I-M-P-S-O-N" Conyers. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were their dates of birth and where were they born? Speaker 2: Dad was born in Georgia--in a small town called Monroe, Georgia. And the date of his birth was March the 6th, (pause) 19--I wanna say six or seven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother was born in a small town in Mississippi called Pelahatchie. Speaker 1: You have to spell that for us. Speaker 2: Sorry, you have to look it up in your Funk and Wagnall [New World Encyclopedia]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (Laughing). Speaker 2: And--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Pelahatchie? Speaker 2: Pelahatchie. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not far from Brandon, Mississippi and another small town called Gula, "G-U-L-A." Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: And my mother--my mother's date of birth was September 2nd. (pause) I think it was like 1912. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your parents have a story that they imparted to you about how they met? Speaker 2: My dad migrated to Detroit [Michigan] for work, having not finished grade school. And my mother was sent to Detroit from Mississippi to live with her aunt in Detroit. And my recollection is t hey met at some social event and dated, fell in love, married. Story_ID: 5488 Speaker 1: Did either of them have stories about their ancestors? About what their--what your family was doing during slavery or reconstruction of Georgia or Mississippi or--? Speaker 2: My dad [John James Conyers], for example, was raised by his father, whose name was Brown Conyers. And as a matter of fact, they came during the--before the Civil War from a plantation that was called the Conyers Plantation. After the slaves were freed, many of them did not know where to go or what to do. And actually went across the road from the plantation and formed a small village where they lived, which subsequently became a town in Georgia, which is called Conyers, Georgia. My grandfather whose first name was Brown was born and lived during the slavery period and was designated as Brown because he was the--he was the issue of the slave master and the slaves who cohabited quite frequently in those days. And to distinguish him as--as one of the Conyers' illegitimate children, they called him Brown Conyers. The rest were white Conyers, I guess and he would be a Brown Conyers. Speaker 1: Yes. That's interesting. Speaker 2: To go back beyond my grandfather, there are no legitimate stories. I never met my grandmother. Nor have I have ever met or have give--been given a name of any of their forbearers. So that the slavery system had so disrupted any traditional kinds of family relationships that we cannot go any further back on my father's side. And I have a similar story for my mother [Lucille Simpson Conyers]. My mother had a brother and two sisters. And there were three fathers to those four children. And it was not talked about in the family. And we--I never knew my mother's mother or any of her heirs. So in going back and tracing our roots to try and put together some kind of genealogy, we cannot go far back. But we can see the footprints of my mother and my father as they developed in life, migrated to Detroit [Michigan] and came together. They were--they were very hard working. Everything that we got, they had to earn. And my dad became active in the union movement shortly after coming to Detroit, which created even additional burdens in those days. Story_ID: 5489 Speaker 1: What did your father [John James Conyers] do for a living? Speaker 2: He worked in plants. And he ended up at Chrysler Corporation. And he ended in their spray paint section that sprayed the bodies of cars. And he often told a story that there was a difference in pay between black workers and white workers in the automobile plants, who did the same jobs, but were paid less--they--the black workers. Which was one of the issues that prompted him to become active in the union movement, which he did at a very early age. And as a result of his unionizing activities, suffered physically from the brutality that went on in those days. And was often fired from his job for his union activities. But ultimately moved from Chrysler Corporation, once Chr--he participated in the Chrysler sit-in strike that ultimately unionized Chrysler Corporation. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you say, "He suffered physically." You know, for those who are gonna be watching this in the future. Did that mean that they had actually beat him up? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously The boss actually had him beat up. Speaker 2: He also participated in what famously is now called the Miller Street Overpass Action [May 26, 1937] at Ford Motor Company when Harry Bennett's guys came out to break up these union agitators. And they carried him out of there. He was physically assaulted on literally dozens of occasions. And as a result of his stalwart activity--and he became an international representative for the UAW [United Auto Workers]. And spent his last fifteen years as--a--as an international representative. And he was assigned to the Chrysler account. That union activity--being a young black kid coming up from Macon, Georgia, he never finished grade school, was where he started from. and where he ended up at the time of his death, was a respected member of the Detroit [Michigan] community, who was an activist, who worked hard for--in the Democratic Party and union activities. And began to teach his four boys some concepts, which were very basic to the union movement, i.e. organization. Several people collectively going together to handle an issue is far superior than several people individually trying to attack the issue. Speaker 1: Yeah. Always there in crowds. Speaker 2: He understood that. And as a union organizer, he was very good. He was able--He was able to begin to bring just separate groups of people within the plant together. He organized the baseball team. He was the coach of one of the Chrysler local seven baseball teams. Where you had--you had that whole migration from the South--so you had a lot of white southern culture clashing with northern white culture clashing with black culture. The union next to the church in our community was the great amalgamator. It was the one that took everybody in and said, "Okay. Now look, together we're gonna be able to move forward. If we fight each other, if we go our separate ways, you know it's gonna be impossible." So he was a--he lived a life of being a communicator and bringing people together and having them rally around some very basic central issues. The footsteps that he took in his life from where he started to where he ended up was monumental for all of the handicaps that he had to go through. I often said to my dad before his death, "Wherever I end up it will never--my footstep will never be as large as his. Because I started with the advantages of having him as a father and Lucille [Simpson Conyers] as a mother." And there were--there were four sons that could work towards certain goals. So dad, as a union organizer, for example, was out of town often. He was organizing in Cleveland [Ohio] and Cincinnati [Ohio] and other places in the Midwest. And so left at the house to run the family was mother. Story_ID: 5490 Speaker 1: She [his mother, Lucille Simpson Conyers] indeed was a true matriarch of the Conyers family. She ran the household and everybody in it. And it wasn't--It wasn't--Larry, until I was forty-five years old that I began to understand how difficult it must have been for Lucille Conyers, being the only female in a household of four boys and a husband [John James Conyers] who were all very heavy handed, inconsiderate that--and Lucille's first child was a girl. And her name was Dorothy [Conyers]. She was the first-born, but they lost her in one of those awful kitchen accidents. Where she pulled a skillet off of a stove at eighteen months and did not recover from the burns that she received. So mother had this traumatic experience to begin with, losing her first born, a daughter. And then having four hard-legs after that that she had to contend with. But she ran the household. And did a--just was the backbone for all of us. And was the one who taught us our personal values. Story_ID: 5491 Speaker 1: Can you name the rest of your brothers? I guess there's are four more. Speaker 2: Congressman John Conyers was the oldest brother who is alive and well as the dean of the Congressional Black Caucus today. The second son was Carl Edward Conyers who probably was the smartest and handsomest of the Conyers kids. But he never straightened his life out. He had a problem with authority, ran into trouble with the law, spent time in prison and was killed in an incident at a Detroit [Michigan] nightclub--but when he and the bouncer got in to an argument and a tragic waste of probably the most talented of John [James Conyers] and Lucille's [Lucille Simpson Conyers] children. And then there was myself, Nathan. And my youngest brother was William. William Henry Conyers who was four years younger than I was. And who unfortunately at the age of thirty-one contracted leukemia. And was unable to recover from that and passed away. Those were the boys. Story_ID: 5492 Speaker 1: Can you think back and reflect on some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the Black Bottom section of Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Well as many of my neighbors of the time will tell you today is that we were really poor. But nobody understood that. Because everybody had the same economic condition in a way. I was born on Arndt Street, "A-R-N-D-T." A little small street off of Black Bottom. Brother John [Conyers] was born on Sherman Street. Arndt Street still exists. Sherman Street has been changed through urban renewal. Black Bottom is gone, as we knew it. So that the sights and sounds that I experienced with the street car running down the middle of the street and very small mom and pop black owned businesses dotting Hasting Street and Shane Street, those are all gone. One of my earliest recollections as a kid going to school was that the teachers lived in the community. We would see them walking to school. Our doctor, Dr. Givens, lived a block away from us. Lawyers lived at the end of the street. So in the segregated communities of Detroit that I grew up in, we had a fairly good mixture of talent and people all living together. Principally because there was no place else to live. But it created a community. The neighborhood was very distinct. The rules within that neighborhood was well understood by everybody. In our little house that we rented, which was the first floor of a two-family flat, there was no air conditioning. There wasn't even a fan for a long time. You cool the house by raising the window. And there was a wooden screen in the window. Or you open the front door and there's a screen door at the front door. And the way you latch the screen door was with a little hook and eye. And the doors would stay open all night. And the cool air would cool the house. It was a--it was a lifestyle that did not survive the changing economics and integration activities. Speaker 1: Okay. What are some other aspects of that lifestyle that didn't survive? I suppose people slept with their doors open, I guess basically, you're saying? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: There wasn't as much crime then? Speaker 2: No. And the neighbor had--I mean if you think about it takes a village to raise a child back in those days, the neighborhood raised the children. You--If you were discovered doing something inappropriate the adult who spotted you had the freedom to punish you on the spot. And then take you home and watch you get punished again. So it--there was a neighborhood in the true sense of the word. People watched out for other people. And there was fairly little crime. And much of the crime was the petty crime of stealing candy out of the confectionary store. And, of course, this was a day when everything was in bulk. When--If you wanted to buy crackers, there's a cracker barrel and you took out five cents worth, or whatever it was. Beans came in bag--Sugar was in hundred pound sacks. Penny candy was really penny candy. And you got a lot for a penny. The first show I can remember going to was the Priscilla Theater on the-- down on--two blocks from us on McDougle [Street]. And on Saturday, my recollection is for seven cents, you got in the show to watch the Saturday double feature. They gave you a candy bar and a comic book. And--. Speaker 1: For that same seven cents? Speaker 2: And you could spend the afternoon there. And if my mother [Lucille Simpson Conyers] went to the theater on Wednesday night, she would get a plate. And she would accumulate the utensils for the kitchen by going to the--by--I mean that's what was going on in those days. Speaker 1: I heard about that, you know, yeah. Speaker 2: At the confectionary store, potato chips were in a big glass container. And you bought them by the size of the bag that would cost a penny or two cents or three cents-- would get you a bag of potato chips. Well the potato chip guy would come by and change this big container of potato chips every Saturday morning at about 6:45 in the morning. And he would throw away the old potato chips, which were now considered stale. And he would refill the glass container with fresh. Well if you were there, he would give you the old potato chips. And we would get up at 6:30 on a Saturday morning and line up with the other kids in the neighborhood to get a free bag of potato chips, which my taste buds said was just as good as what he was putting in as taking out. That was the kind of community. We lived a block from a place on Charlevoix [Street] that was called Franklin [Wright] Settlement. It was the only community center in our area. And it was free. And you signed up and you got a wooden pass. And with that wooden pass you were a member and you could go in and out. And you could watch--They had outdoor movies. They had a swimming pool. And they had all the--all the sports. But it was a--It was a different time and a different tempo to life then. Story_ID: 5493 Speaker 1: Did most people have jobs in that neighborhood in those days? Speaker 2: Yep. At-- my recollection is that you knew when somebody was out of work. If the guy across the street had lost his job or something, the neighborhood knew it. And I can remember the mothers taking food over to the house-- the old clothes. And it wasn't that we had a lot. It's just that the concept of sharing was not only a nice concept, but really necessary to hold the neighborhood together. People shared where they could. When I was twelve years old sitting on the steps of my Arndt Street house on Christmas Eve, I was waiting for the Good Fellow truck to come. Because the Good Fellow truck knew how many children were in the house and their ages and sex. And they would have these old hundred pound sugar bags that they had filled with clothing and shoes. And there would be a toy on the top that was age and sex appropriate. If we didn't get that bag, we didn't have a Christmas. That was the toy that you had to play with. And often the bag turned out to be the most fun to play with than anything else. But, you know that was the way it was. And so everybody kind of watched out for everybody else. Not that there weren't-- you know that there weren't problems and there were--there were some drunks in the neighborhood that everybody knew about and stayed clear of. But we knew everybody. I have since then lived in neighborhoods for years and never knew the name of the person who lived across the street from us. That would have been impossible back in those days. Story_ID: 5494 Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you? And what did you like to do? And what were you interested in? Speaker 2: I was a kind of frail little kid growing up. I couldn't climb trees as fast as the average guy my age. Couldn't throw a baseball as far as the average kid. I was a kind of nerdy little kid growing up, skinny. And for example, I mentioned that my mother's [Lucille Simpson Conyers] first-born was my sister, Dorothy [Conyers], who died tragically. And then she had John [Conyers]. And she always wanted to replace that daughter that she had lost. The next son was Carl [Edward Conyers]. And then she knew for sure that this would be a girl. And out comes Nathan. So as a child, I was always on Halloween, John was Captain Marvel and Carl was some other chara--I was the fairy princess. Speaker 1: (Chuckling) Really. She did that? Speaker 2: And I had the long curls and the princess costume. And my mother unconsciously tried for some period of time to make me into something that she desired very much. And I was a major disappointment (laughing) in that I didn't--I didn't fulfill that wish of hers. But growing up as a kid, I was not physically active. I was the last guy to be chosen on the baseball team. You know, when you, "Okay I'll take him. Then you take him. And I'll take--." I'd be one of the last guys they'd say, "Okay, what are you gonna do with Nathan?" "Alright, we'll take him and two other people." Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's--It's hard to believe looking at you. You're tall, strong. You're about, what 6'1"? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Two. Speaker 1: 6'2". You know, you don't look like you'd be the kind of-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) But I was a kind of skinny, thin, tall kid. And what I found out early-'Cause you gotta compensate for some of these issues. Is that I found out that I could talk to people in a way that they would listen. I was the spokesman among the four kids when it came to asking the parents for a favor. John and Carl would come to me and say, "Look, we wanna go to the movies on Saturday and Sunday this week. And, you know the rule is we only can go once. But the shows are such that we need to see both of these. Explain it to 'em." And I would go in and I would sell the process. And I guess I did it. I was successful enough so that I began to understand that throwing the baseball wasn't the only way that you could get recognition or obtain some kind of status within the group. So that at a very early age when the neighbors would walk by and pat you on top of the head and say, "Young man, what are you gonna be when you grow up?" We had a lot of friends who wanted to be cowboys and policemen. And I fell upon one day an answer, which said I wanna be a lawyer. I was amazed at the reaction that it--I mean people thought it was great. They patted me. They--stick with it. Growing up I continued to say I wanted to be a lawyer. I had no idea of what that meant. But it worked. So I continued to say it. And suddenly I find myself, a second year guy at the university, still saying I wanna be a lawyer. And so at some point you pass the point of no return. And so you suddenly--you really do want to be a lawyer. And I--And that's what happened. And I became a lawyer. John on the other hand growing up wanted to be an engineer. Matter of fact when he was drafted in the--during the Korean War, he was drafted in a engineering battalion out of the National Guard. And didn't decide that he wanted to--a legal career until he came out of that Korean War. Speaker 1: Now when he was young he said he wanted to be an engineer? Speaker 2: An engineer. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Maybe he was thinking about the kind that drove trains (Laughing) or the kind that built things. Speaker 2: That builds things. And strangely enough, John and I became lawyers. Strangely enough, my youngest brother Bill [William Henry Conyers] was in law school when he contracted leukemia. Guess what my father's [John James Conyers] dream was as he grew up? Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: He wanted to be a lawyer. I cannot ever once in my life remember my dad saying to me, "Nate, you ought to be a lawyer." But through osmosis, his dream became our dream. Story_ID: 5495 Speaker 1: What kind of books did you read when you were--? And what kind of information were you given that fed that idea that you wanted to be a lawyer? Speaker 2: Well early on nothing at all. I became--When I put my mind to it, I could be a good student. And reading was easy for me. Writing wasn't. I had poor penmanship. And I had teachers back in those days that if you did not make your loop correctly, they would chastise you significantly. And they would say, "You know, your writing indicates your intelligence." And so I had poor penmanship. But I could read. I could express myself. And if I wrote something, often I would have someone type it out so that it was legible, at least. And I would get good mark. However, I was not a good student. I didn't do a lot of--I moved from that dorky little kid into a guy that got involved in theater in high school, a guy that was a part of the drama class and then the debate class. And then a-- an outfit which was called back in the late '50s [1950s], the Panel of Americans, which was one of those non-profit groups of people that were into diversity kinds of issues by bringing various cultural segments of America together on a panel. And be--And talk about current issues. Speaker 1: So you did this in high school? Speaker 2: And college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] . I--then as I moved in to Wayne, I discovered something that was called extra curricular activities. And I became involved in the Student Council and then the radio club and then-- just all kinds of activities. And my marks suffered. So much so that after two years at the university, I was still a freshman. And I had taken to signing up for a full load of classes for a semester. And I would end up dropping everything except two classes. I would get an A in one of those classes. And I was likely to get a D or E in the other class. So I was trying to maintain a C average. Because at that time the Korean conflict was winding down, but there was still a draft. And at the university you had to have an-- a deferment providing that one, you're a matriculating student. And two, that you were making normal progress towards a degree. And three, that you had a C average. I began slipping in all of those categories (chuckling), and finally was drafted. Story_ID: 5496 Speaker 1: And went into the Army and served twenty months of my twenty-four month status. Because while in service I became involved in troop information education and all the kinds of non-combatant things that happens in a Army unit. I was the ANR director. I gave this-- the speech every week on why we hate Communists, and why we're fighting and wherever it was we were fighting that week. I was the mail clerk. I found out that you could get released from the services ninety days early if a university would accept you. So I spent the next twelve months getting my university to go through my transcript. Finished some incompletes that were on there. That was enough to move me up to a C. And they would accept me back. So I got out in September rather than in December. Went back to school, having discovered that a degree was important. And getting into law school was important. That in the Army I saw that average national cross cut of eighteen and nineteen year olds from all over the country that scared me frankly. I was never sure who the enemy was. And it made me say, "I better--I." When I went back, I spent a-- I spent one year taking extra courses each semester, plus summer school. I ended up with like forty hours in one year-- All As. Speaker 2: Now let me (chuckling) just backtrack a second. This is interesting. As many people as we interviewed, lives have been changed by the military (chuckled). And just the people that you met-- that you meet in the military, this cross section of America, you know scared you-- made you afraid. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah they-- Speaker 2: Be one of-- You didn't want to be one of them. Speaker 1: They did not understand the world I was living in at all. And they weren't interested in the world they were living in. They were interested in what they were going to do after duty hours that evening. And back then, you could have beer on the post. And they had what they call 3.2 beer. It was a watered down beer version. Because there were a lot of people under drinking age there. And I would watch my fellow members of my tank company go out and drink a beer that had almost no potency to it. But they would become drunk. Because they wanted to. Because that is what you were supposed to do in the evening after duty. The most startling situation while I was in Fort Hood [Killeen, Texas]. We went-- we had a hand grenade course, where all morning they'd teach you the basics of what a hand grenade is, how it operates, where the pin is, where the handle is, how you count the timing mechanism, the different kinds of grenades. And then in the afternoon, they'd take you out to the grenade range, where there're pits. And there's a person in each of the pits. And you give 'em a live grenade. And the range officer--a lieutenant would go from pit to pit to show--"Okay now hold the handle, pull the pin. And remember what we said in the morning." You know, there would-- there was a young guy who had been sitting three seats from me, who slept through the whole morning session. Who walked into a grenade pit where the lieutenant was talking to one of the recruits with a live grenade in his hand, the pin pulled, the handle off, saying, "I lost the handle." And that's as far as he got. And the grenade exploded. Killed the lieutenant. Killed a person in the pit and only wounded the guy who had--took his arm off. The guy who was holding the grenade. And I said to myself, "Wow, this is not where I wanna be." There are just a handful of people I met in service who seemed to have an idea of a future that was similar to mine. And so-- I mean it scared the bejeebers out of me. So that when I got out. I said, "I better get serious about this." And fortunately, I had the ability to go in. And I worked hard. And from there on I-- from there, I went into law school. My first year at law school, great marks. And then I kind of slid for the last two years. I sort of figured I'd pencil my way to graduation. You know, I could do this and this and still graduate. Story_ID: 5497 Speaker 1: Backtracking all the way back to grade school, through high school, you know, through college, who were--? Were there any teachers or mentors, you know, that emerged in school or other wise, you know? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, absolutely. There-- I've had the good fortune of having two good parents [John James Conyers and Lucille Simpson Conyers] and a host of people who were concerned about me at various stages of my development. So that-so that there is always somebody on the outside that was trying to correct the course I was going in and say, "No, no, look you don't need it--." In the ninth grade, I flunked physics. And the ninth grade is the step before you get into high school here, which is the tenth grade. Mr. Weinberg was the name of my professor-- teacher. And they passed me on in to high school anyway, even though I had flunked this. So, you know, how you take your little autograph book around when you're graduating. And you have your classmates and your teachers signed it. Mr. Weinberg wrote in my autograph book, "To the smartest guy I have ever flunked." Which I thought was a-- an amazing and kind of curious thing to say. And he would pull me aside the day of graduation and he would say, "I meant that." He said, "You know, you have some abilities that if you can focus on, you can accomplish some things in life." You-- Well that was an eye opener for me. I mean, I really had to stop and think what he-- What do you mean when you say something like that? And it gave me the courage to go and try some things. So that when I got to high school, there was a-- there's Detroit [Michigan] public radio, as part of the NPR [National Public Radio] system, had programmed local programming. They would go in to high school and get people out. Because I had a good voice, they asked-- The auditorium teacher said, "Would you like to go down and audition for some parts on our public radio station?" I said, "Yes." I went down there. There were groups of people from high school. And I looked around. And if you can remember radio in those days, there's a-- there was a soundman attached to live shows. There are people with scripts and microphones and directors. Then there was a guy over at a truck that had records. And had manual sound equipment that could make the horse gallop or the door open or the squeaky something. I looked at-- I said, "I wanna do that. You guys can be the voice. I wanna do that." Because that put me next to the director of the show, who would-- when they would sit down to preview what they wanted to do. "Here's the kind of music I want, Conyers. Here're the sound effects you-- And we got recorded sound effects." And they were-- They were all then on like seventy-eight [RPM] records. You know, cars going by (imitates car motor sound) coming from this direction. It was-and it exposed me to the music library that these studio-- radio studios have that exposed me to classical music. So that I connect my ability to get in to that with things which-- things like what Mr. Weinberg said. He said, "Look man, you've got some abilities here. But you gotta use it or you're gonna lose it." It also occurred to me because of my childhood, where I was not the popular robust athletic guy. I was really fairly pedestrian as a kid-- little kid growing up. But people began to tell me that ordinary people can do extraordinary things. And I am a product of that. If that makes any sense. Story_ID: 5498 Speaker 1: What things were you actually focused on in school? I mean--or what things distracted you really from doing--? Speaker 2: Good grades? Speaker 1: Doing what others perceived was--is--or living up to the capacity that others saw in you? What distracted you? Or did you just not realize that you had the capacity? Speaker 2: I don't know. I was-- The first African American counselor in the Detroit [Michigan] public school system was a man named Dr. Alvin Loving. And he came to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan] as a counselor. I was never--I was never in his section of students that he had official counseling responsibilities for. But we became-- we'd--we found each other. And we were-- there was a small group of people that he had an interest in. And what seemed to happen to me is that I found myself exposed to unusual situations that were character building to be involved in those things. But distracting from your studies. And that between the two of them it seemed to me that it was more important to be a part of something that was happening, rather than to study things that had happened or look into the future. And so I was always a kind of distracted student. And what I said in terms of, "I'm gonna be a lawyer," was really an expression, rather than a desire, until I got in to the university. And then I found that my talents and my interests were compatible with the study of law. Story_ID: 5499 Speaker 1: How was law school for you? And when you--? After you reapplied yourself to it and started really digging in? Speaker 2: Great, loved it. And going to Wayne State University's [Detroit, Michigan] law school, which is a camp--a city college--city university, you know, you live at home and you go to classes. Which is quite unlike the typical student away from home living on campus, was just fantastic for me. Because it got me involved in my dad's [John James Conyers] activities [as a union organizer]. It got me involved in my brother John's [Conyers] political activities. We could relate in the urban setting to the kinds of courses we were taking in law school. I had a thoroughly enjoyable time. Brother John went to law school exactly one year ahead of me. And because of his ability to be disciplined and organized, John learned speedwriting. And in every course, he would take down in speed writing everything the professor said everyday in every class. You know, that's organization. I mean that's dis-- I mean that's a guy focused. That he wants to get everything he can out of it. Well when I started law school, I got all of his notes from the same professors in the same classes that he was in a year (chuckle). So I knew where the joke was coming in the professor's monologue. And it really made it very interesting. Because many of the professors recognized that I had a secret ingredient, which is my brother's notes from (chuckling) the year before. And we enjoyed ourselves with that. But things always worked out. And it wasn't because I was more talented. I was-- I just made the right choices at the right time. Story_ID: 5500 Speaker 1: What did your prospects look like upon graduation from law school? You graduated in what, '59 [1959] was it? Speaker 2: Yes. 1959 Sept-- In June, we graduated, studied for the bar. Took it in September and passed it in December. And got our results in December. So I-- it was a kind of whirl-wind period of time from graduation. We had in our moot court competitions, and because we were part of the urban setting, we were able to get in to court systems. We could-- We clerked for some of the judges in Recorders Court in Wayne County [Michigan] Circuit Court because we were involved in politics. And there were often judicial appointments that came out of the governor's office. And at that point, we had Governor G. Mennen Williams, a Democrat who was governor. Who made some early appointments. We got a good feeling of what the law in an urban setting was all about. And as we studied for the bar [exam] and looking around to see, we all wanted--the group of people that graduated, we wanted to practice. We were not interested in joining the legal staff of Chrysler Corporation or--we wanted to practice law. And that's when I sat down and talked with Damon [J.] Keith who was in a very prestigious law firm. One of the old law firms. And of course, there were all--they were--there was only one integrated firm in the city of Detroit [Michigan] in 1959 that I knew of. That was a firm that was called Goodman, Crockett, Eden and Robb. George [W.] Crockett was a member of that firm. Robert Millender was a member of that firm. And I had an opportunity to go to that firm, once passed-- having passed the bar. But Damon Keith came out of a law firm that originally was called Loomis, Jones, Piper and Colden, which are some very strong names in the black community of Detroit. The first black judge came out of that law firm. Charlie Jones was appointed to the Recorder's Court. Percival Piper was one of the early black assistant Attorney Generals for the state of Michigan. I mean it was really a--. I mean we represented the House of Diggs, which was the largest funeral home then, and the Stinson Funeral Home. We represent Senator Diggs, Charlie [Charles] Diggs before he be-- went to Congress. So it was a law firm that was caught in that time period where black lawyers were not taken seriously. There were very few black judges. They were not--even in Detroit in those days, not many members of-- on juries that were African American. All the law offices were located in a-- on Gershon Avenue, not far from the Recorders Court, the Criminal Court building. And they did a lot of street practice. We--where they'd go to court and they'd wait. And they'd walk up and down the halls and find people. And Damon--when I became--. Story_ID: 5501 Speaker 1: Damon [J. Keith] was the youngest member of a law firm called Colden, Snowden, Smith and Keith. Their offices were in a building on the East Side of Detroit [Michigan], not far from our criminal court, which was called the [Breitmeyer] Tobin Building, which was filled with black lawyers. When I graduated from law school, I decided that that was the firm I wanted to go to. And Damon Keith hired me to start as a law clerk, 'cause I hadn't passed the bar yet, at $35.00 a week. And gave me an office in what was an old library in the law firm that had fallen into disuse. Speaker 2: Now $35.00 a week is a low salary even for those days. Right? Speaker 1: Oh absolutely. It was--it was--it was-- I took the job because of the opportunities, not because of the pay. My wife, for example, Diana-- We were married a month before I started law school. She had graduated from the university and was a teacher. So my wife Diana actually put me through law school. So much to the consternation of her mother, by the way, who thought that that was a bad idea that, you know, once I got out of law school they wouldn't see me any more. And here we are celebrating our 46th wedding anniversary this month. So it all worked out very nicely. But it wasn't the money that-- the--we could've done better somewhere else. But it was the opportunity to join what I saw was a black law firm that had a history, had a commitment to what I was interested in. And it gave me the ability to clean up the library, get all the pocket parts in place, dust off-- order new volumes. And I became essentially the law clerk for the whole building. When lawyers wanted to know if there's a case that covered a point they were arguing with, I would do the research for 'em. And it really got me into what the practice of law was all about. I was transitioning from the student studying the principles of doctrines and law for three years in law school to a practitioner who needed an answer to a question before-- right after lunch. And it gave me a world of experience and understanding. And then you begin to read the law cases and you see the-- how vague things can be in the practice of law. So it was a tremendous experience. I passed the bar. I became a lawyer. And we stayed in that building and in that law firm for two years. Story_ID: 5502 Speaker 1: Damon [J. Keith] decided to break away from the law firm and do something that was unheard of in those days. He was going to move his law practice to what we called the West Side of Woodward Avenue. Woodward is the main street running down--separating east and west. There were no black law offices west of Woodward in the city of Detroit [Michigan]. And Damon decided that that's the place he needed to go. And he created a law firm that was called Keith Conyers and Anderson [later Keith, Conyers, Anderson, Brown, & Wahls]. And we left the [Breitmeyer] Tobin Building and we went west of Woodward to the Guardian Building, where we established a practice of law that survived until he left to go to the federal bench. And I left to become a car dealer. And another lawyer, [Myron] Mike Wahls, who was a part of that firm, became a judge. And we had a--we had just a tremendous ten year experience in the practice of law. Speaker 2: Now west of Woodward Avenue. Is that black community too? Or is that outside of it? Speaker 1: This was-- this--I mean--remember we talked about Black Bottom and the ghetto. That was all on the east side of Woodward. So when you moved west, you were getting into the silk stocking neighborhoods. And the legal offices that handle civil cases, not criminal cases. That were into tort litigation and contract and represented corporations and--and when we moved there, one of the issues, "Will our clients be able to find us?" Cause they're not used to going over there to find a law office. But they did. And we had a very successful law firm going for that period of time. And I mean it was filled with extraordinary experiences. We represented Willie Horton, who was on the [Detroit] Tigers team that won the pennant. And--we had a general practice that permitted me, as one of the lawyers, to form lots of businesses that were developing during the civil rights era. The '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], we are--we've come out of Selma [Alabama] and Danville [Virginia] and all the places. And there is--we're moving towards the riots of Detroit. And we're moving to the reformation of Detroit and its political institutions. So that Henry Ford, for example, after the riots of 1967, '68 [1968] in Detroit, was determined that there ought to be a better way for conflict resolution than burning the city down. And Henry Ford II was singularly responsible for the creation of, for example, New Detroit [Inc.], which is a coalition organization that was comprised of business, government and local neighborhood leaders. A concept which was to be replicated throughout the United States in the formation of organizations that could sit down and talk about things and create a forum for discussion before things got out of hand. And so it was a very volatile period of time. And practicing law exposed us to just lots of things. Jerome Cavanagh was mayor of the city of Detroit when the riot hit. Ray Girardin was police chief. Coleman Young was to become the mayor of Detroit a few years after that. The whole--looking at the whole political economic and social events of Detroit was undergoing radical changes. We had the first black elected official to the city council in those days. At a time when while the black population was very high in Detroit, we weren't well represented in the political arena. But that was about to undergo tremendous changes. Charlie [Charles] Diggs gets elected to congress. The majority of the common council of the city of Detroit becomes people of color. Judges are beginning to be elected to the various offices. We got governors who were concerned about the city. And so it was a very dynamic period of time. And to be a lawyer in that--and to be a lawyer in the offices of soon to be Judge Damon Keith, put you in the center of activities. Story_ID: 5503 Speaker 1: You might remember during the riots there was a--an incident in Detroit [Michigan] that was later--the book was the 'Algiers Motel Incident.' Well John Doar was the chief of the Civil Rights Division in the Justice Department. When they heard that there had been some brutal killings by police officers during this riot period, they wanted to do an investigation. But they had tried to get people who were thought to had been witnesses or had information. They could not get them to talk. Speaker 2: Now this is what year? What are we talking about? 19--with John Doar being-- 19--1987. Is that right? Speaker 1: No (Simultaneously) no, 1967. Nineteen-- Speaker 2: It was '67 [1967] during the riots period. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) yeah, yeah, 1968. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah. Speaker 1: The riot is subsided. And they're trying to do--no the riots are going on. And John Doar calls Damon Keith. And we have our law office in the Guardian Building. And he says-- He said, "Damon, we need a place where people feel safe coming in talking to us. They won't talk to us by ourselves. But you and your law firm is well known in the city. And people have confidence. If you ask 'em to come in, they'll come in. And they'll talk and our people can hear." And that's where the genesis of the information for the Algiers Motel incident was formed. I mean that's how dynamic-- I mean we're talking about life and death issues. And I'm a young lawyer looking at how to get my brother elected in 1984 [sic, 1964]. John [Conyers, Jr.] is the longest serving African American in the Congress in the United States. I mean that one event by itself is staggering. Speaker 2: What is--I mean what the--excuse me. Can you go over the specifics of the Algiers Motel incident? Speaker 1: There was a motel in Detroit called the Algiers Motel. And it was a hotel that rented rooms by the hour or by the days. And all kinds of nefarious people could--well there were some--there were some people gathered in the hotel when the police raided it. Several people were taken into police custody and never seen again, and their bodies showed up later. And the people who knew what had happened--knew what had happened to those girls-- and people--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) So these were women mostly? Speaker 1: And--no, there were men and women there. But the wit--the key witnesses turned out to be two or three women who saw what happened. And who we had to hide from the police. So that they could testify to the Justice Department. And ultimately, the whole story broke and came out. And the trials were held and the police were indicted. And it became a signal that the police department in the city of Detroit, with their stress units and their big four cruisers that invaded minority communities, you know, needed to be restrained. It was the basis of those kinds of incidents that catapulted then State Senator Coleman Young into the mayor's office several years later. Whose number one priority was to try and gain control of this paramilitary force called the Detroit Police Department. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. And what did they actually--What did they actually--What were they found to have done? The Detroit police after--? Speaker 1: What John Doar, if I remember correctly, used was the violation of the civil rights of people who were dead and alive. It became a civil rights violation federal case because they did not want it in the state court jurisdictions. And how many people were convicted or--I can't recall that now. But there's a good book out on it that you can read. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And a movie. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: I think they made a movie out of it. Speaker 2: I think so. I think so. But I was trying to get at what did they actually accuse them of? I mean they murdered people? Or what did they do? Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe so. Speaker 2: And what was the motivation of this? Do you know? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) They found whites and blacks co-mingling in the-- in this environment. It was racially motivated Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Anger on the part of the police--. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 5504 Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of the issues that led to the riot of '67 [1967]. You know, throughout the '60s [1960s], there's a rights activities going on. You got John Doar from the Justice Department going South on behalf of the Kennedys and the Johnsons--and [Lyndon B.] Johnson to investigate. And what--And you were involved in sending lawyers South too. Speaker 2: Our law firm--If we look at 1963, the name of our law firm at that point was Keith, Conyers, Anderson, Brown and Wahls. As a matter of fact, it was around 1963 that a young senior from the Detroit College of Law School [Detroit, Michigan] came and interned, clerked for us for a summer, whose name was Dennis Archer, who became mayor of the city of Detroit subsequent to Coleman's [Coleman Young] leaving office. We became involved in the national Civil Rights Movement and the local Civil Rights Movement. Our attorney Myron ["Mike"] Wahls, who subsequently became Judge Myron Wahls, who was in the state appellate court system as a judge, went with Claudia Shropshire to Alabama--to Selma [Alabama], where the voting rights issues were very hot [1965]. And a couple of the Freedom Riders. Remember the buses that were heading to the South--Anniston [Alabama], this place where one of the buses were burned [1961]. Damon [J. Keith] permitted Mike to go south. And there were large demonstrations in Danville, Virginia [1963]. And they had passed those local civil disturbance ordinances that said that if five or more blacks congregated in a public place, it was considered riotous assembly. And they had--they had arrested hundreds and hundreds of people in Danville. And I went there with another civil rights lawyer from Detroit who was--whose name was Dean Robb. And we there met lawyers from other parts of the country. For example, there was--there's a law firm of Kunstler and Kinoy out of New York [New York]. They were very active in the movement. [Arthur] Art Kunstler [sic, Kinoy] came to Danville and was leading the defense team. There was one black female lawyer in Virginia, whose name I cannot think of right now, who was active. Len Holt, who later wrote a book about Danville, was an attorney there. And what happened was is that as the attorneys would come in. They would stay for a day, five days, a week and do what they could. But it was a very dynamic period of time. Because the federal courts had become involved. And the process was to remand these local ordinance cases out of the state courts into federal court. Who would then release all of the people who had been arrested. And we could raise the constitutional issues in that court. So we were very active in the early '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 5505 Speaker 1: In the city of Detroit [Michigan], there was civil rights issues that were coming up. One of the first federal cases in the city of Detroit. A--one of the banks had built a new building. And their employment policies weren't consistent with what it should be for a bank in the--in downtown Detroit. And demonstrations occurred there. And we participated in the--we participated in the legal arguments. As matter of fact, our law partner in one case, [Myron] Mike Wahls, who was trying a case in recorders court where defendants had been charged with trespass. The first federal sit-in cases. And the prosecutor was attempting to pull a jury to hear that criminal trespass case. And was clearly and openly excluding every black prospective juror that took to the bench. And Mike Wahls was one of the lawyers handling that who was objecting to the prosecutor's right to do that. And with peremptory challenges, you don't have to give a reason. But we were arguing that it was a--it was volative of constitutional rights of the defendant. The prosecutor found an old case in Michigan law in which the preemptory challenge, a black defendant was accused of being a part of the numbers business. And the prosecutor had peremptorily challenged every black prospective juror. And the rationale of the court that said that there's nothing wrong with that, was that it was well known and documented that all blacks played the numbers. And so therefore they would be prejudicial influence. And it was perfectly permissible for the judge to permit the exclusion of blacks from that jury. In arguing that in front of the first federal case, the then sitting judge turned to my law partner, Mike Wahls, a black lawyer, having read this decision about all blacks being in the numbers game, turns to Mike Wahls and says, "By the way, Attorney Wahls, what is the number for today?" Well it got on the record. And we were able to throw out literally dozens of cases. The Supreme Court excused the judge from further activity in the trial. Judge did not win reelection the next time he came up. And it was all a result of somebody being sensitive to the kinds of remarks that judges were so used to making. I mean we had judges sitting on the Recorder's Court-- the criminal bench, who if you were charged with crystal ball reading. And we had a judge who once told this little old lady, "Here's a crystal ball. Tell me what your sentence is gonna be that I'm gonna give you." And we had the disrespect. We had the--all of the--all of the indicia of racism that was just absolutely standard that was going on in the city of Detroit. So we were involved as a law firm. And brother John [Conyers] ran for office for the first time in '64 [1964]. So we all became politically active with that. So there's a build up of real emotion and stress that was growing in the city of Detroit, that culminated in the riots of '67 [1967]. It just blew the lid. We had a relatively liberal mayor, [Jerome] Jerry Cavanagh. We even had a relatively liberal police chief, a guy named Ray Girardin, who was a newspaperman by trade. Speaker 2: So the police chief in Detroit doesn't come from the ranks of the police? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) yeah, he's appointed by the mayor. And typically, historically had come from the ranks. And Jerry was trying to break that tradition. Jerry Cavanagh is the guy who appointed the first civilian vice chief who was an African American. A guy named Hubert Locke, who was a minister in Detroit at that time. But there was all kinds of unrest going on. And--but we were finding support. We were finding allies in various places. A former Supreme Court justice of the state of Michigan, George Edwards, had left the bench. Had come down to be chief of police. I mean he--here's a justice of the Supreme Court, who's now the--and he's out trying to stabilize that police department and bring it under some kind of control. Story_ID: 5506 Speaker 1: The first black family that we know of moved into Grosse Pointe [Michigan]. Grosse Pointe is one of the old moneyed suburban communities east of Detroit [Michigan]. And this black couple, buying a home in Grosse Pointe, had created a--quite a stir. And it had tarnished the image of Grosse Pointe as being a fairly--while it was old rich that was there. That they were--they're really understanding of what was going on. It created such a stir that they created a coalition that tried to quiet the unrest in Grosse Point. And part of that was to invite Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] to come and speak to the Grosse Pointe Coalition group made up of several of the churches there. So that was my last best opportunity to spend some time with Dr. King. He was in Atlanta [Georgia]. He had accepted the invitation. He was in Atlanta. And he and Andrew Young were negotiating with one of the local Atlanta companies. I can't remember if it was Coca-Cola or the--or Delta. And they had been in session for two or three days. But he had agreed--John--Brother John [Conyers] had helped arrange for him to accept this speaking engagement in Grosse Pointe. Well Dr. King called John that afternoon and said, "We're gonna be there. We'll get there this evening. I would like to avoid a ceremony at the airport. Can you have somebody that we know pick us up and get us to the hotel? Cause I wanna rest before we have to go out." And so John called me and said, "Would you go out and pick up Dr. King and Andrew Young?" Story_ID: 5507 Speaker 1: You're going out to pick up Andrew Young and Martin Luther--Dr. Martin Luther King. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Dr. King. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes. And I--When you do a thing like this, you got out to the airport and you go to the airport security. And they clear you. And they make you take your car around to the runway side. And when the plane comes in, they make everybody sit down. And they offload the people they wanna get out. And then they escort you into town in a deputy sheriff convoy. When Dr. King and Andy got to the car, and got in, the lieutenant said, "Drive down five hundred feet, you'll see two sheriff's cars. Pull in behind them. We'll put two more behind you. And we'll take--we'll escort you into town." Well when my driver rolled up the window, Dr. King said, "Do we have to go in with the county sheriff's people?" He said, "My experience with county sheriffs has not really been great. (Chuckled) And can we get into town without them?" I said, "Dr. King, we can do whatever you wanna do. You wanna go in without 'em? We'll avoid them." And we did. We didn't go where we were supposed to. And we took to the highway and we got into town. The ride from [Detroit] Metropolitan Airport to the Statler Hotel where he was staying, which is in--was in downtown. It's just a shell of a building now, on Washington Boulevard--was probably one of the most interesting forty minutes of my life. As Dr. King and Andrew were discussing what the next step was going to be. And Dr. King was just in the--beginning to establish the connection between poor people and minorities. And he was--he was beginning to conceive that this was a much larger singular group of people whose rights have always been abused. And Andrew was trying to make a distinction between the two groups and the dangers of bringing them together. The driver was driving. I was sitting in the front seat, turned around, listened--listening to the colloquy of these two guys and asking questions. It was absolutely breathtaking. In which you could see Dr. King's ability to see beyond what I could see. And even see beyond what Andrew was talking about at the time. We got down to the Statler Hotel and John [Conyers] was there. Police chief, our former Supreme Court Justice was there. And we bring and introduce everybody around. Everybody knew everybody. And just then here come six Wing County deputies just mad as Hades that--they were here to arrest me for violating the conduct and breaching the security and putting the life of Martin Luther King in jeopardy. They almost had the handcuffs on me until Police Chief George Edwards reminded them that they were in downtown Detroit and this is his jurisdiction. And he's the one that arrests people here. What happened was that night Dr. King went on and talked to the Grosse Point Co--Council, whatever it was called. And he left. And he never returned to Detroit again. I didn't take him back to the airport. But when we were talking earlier about people and moments in your life that create the person you are, that was one of those moments. Fortuitous. Not there because of any brilliant planning on my part or that I had earned the right to do it. But just a simple request. "Can you have somebody pick me up at the airport?" So I don't have to go through the airport ceremony with the little girls handing him flowers. And he was tired. He wanted to avoid it. And that created one of the high points of my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Can--is there any specific thing that he said that really sticks out in your--that you remember? Speaker 2: I heard him at future speeches use the same words that I had heard that day. But he was about ready to begin the poor people's march [Poor Peoples Campaign]. That was the--that was the impressive thing that I remembered. And he just had a patience that was--that was supreme. Story_ID: 5508 Speaker 1: What incident led to the riot? And what did you do--What were your activities during the riot? Speaker 2: The build-up to the riot had to do with the police department and the black community. That were getting further and further at odds. Blacks were being arrested, not charged, held incommunicado, often beaten. As--the [Detroit, Michigan] police department created units. One was called stress. And its job was to keep the black community in check. It boiled over near the intersection of Clairmont [Avenue] and 14th street. Which is--was the black community's West Side newly developing ghetto. And the police had attempted to stop someone for something. They called more police. People started gathering. And it was exactly the spark needed to ignite the tinderbox. And it spread from there in a way that belied it being a race riot. It became an economic riot. What happened was that people started exploiting the businesses along the street, breaking windows, taking stuff out. There are pictures of blacks and whites together carrying sofas out of the furniture store window. Sharing and lifting the television set on to the sidewalk. So that it wasn't--It wasn't your classic race riot where--that pitted whites against black. It pitted all of those people who were oppressed and abused against the department. And it was because of the nature of that, that Henry Ford II said, "There must be a better way for conflict resolution than this." And therefore started working with the city government. You know. Three years later he and Coleman Young agreed to the building of the Renaissance Center in downtown Detroit. And Henry Ford II was the driving force in putting the coalition of financial companies together to do that. And then we moved from there to the Coleman Young era of Detroit. Story_ID: 5509 Speaker 1: When was Coleman Young elected? You--we were trying to figure this out. Speaker 2: Coleman was elected--He was twenty years in office. So it was about the mid-'70s [1970s] that he was elected. Early '70s [1970s] perhaps. John [Conyers] was already in the Congress. We had gone from the Mayor [Jerome] Jerry Cavanagh during the riots. To Roman Gribbs became the mayor for one term. Then Coleman left the Senate and ran for mayor and won. And then won four or five consecutive four-year terms. Speaker 1: He was influential prior to becoming mayor from the senate--state senator? In terms of the development of the Renaissance Center? Speaker 2: Yes. The Renaissance Center was developed while he was mayor. Coleman had been a state senator and represented areas of the city of Detroit [Michigan]. And there had established a fairly strong reputation as a fighter. I mean Coleman Young is the person who stood up in front of the House UnAmerican Activities Committee. And instead of getting run over, he stopped them in their tracks. He was--he'd been an activist all of his life. And he had been one of the leaders in the National Negro Labor Movement [Council] or something like that. So when he became mayor, we saw for the first time an African American in the job, of mayor of the city of Detroit, who was not afraid to confront the issues head on. And so Coleman did that. And became an idol--an icon to the black communities of the city of Detroit. Which by now had a majority of the population. So it suddenly became a safe district for him. We remember the early days when the Southern Congressmen and the United States Senators would come out of the Southern states from safe districts. And the [Theodore] Bilbos and the [John] Rankins could do whatever they wanted to do and would always be reelected. When John [Conyers] first ran, it was--in a newly created Congressional district through reapportionment. And he was running against some rather normal, old, conservative political people. And part of his program was to let the new blood in--to break the hold--the strangle hold that the old conservative party had over us. But then John's district became a safe district. And John is now been in the Congress of the United States for thirty-eight years. And is in a--and is unopposed this year [2002] as he--you know they run every two years. Story_ID: 5510 Speaker 1: And you see ironies over a lifetime of being young and energetic maturing and suddenly being the old, not the new in whether it's cultural or political or economic. John's [John Conyers] status, is similar to people who preceded him from safe districts. My not going into the political arena but going into the business arena was fulfilling one of my father's [John James Conyers] dreams of having a family owned business. And interestingly enough, I am now the senior African American automobile dealer in the country. I've been a car dealer longer than any other blacks have been. So in one family we've got John, a senior member of Congress and Nate, a senior member of the black automobile dealer fraternity. And a reporter once asked me, "If your father was alive today, which of his sons would he be proudest of?" And, of course, that's rhetor--you can't answer that. But you'd say, "He'd be proud." You know. I mean--I mean we are living his dream with our bodies. And now the issue is, can that transfer to our children? You know, John late in life married. Has two young boys. I have five children. I've got ten grandchildren. What can we pass on? How do we make what we've experienced relevant to them? And it's not easy. Story_ID: 5511 Speaker 1: But we go back in 1970. You know, what--what--you said before that your father's [John James Conyers] dream was always to have the family involved in a business. You--and--what were the specific, I guess chain of events that led you to established a dealership? Speaker 2: Well first of all you have to understand my dad's insight was that the economic front would be the last frontier that blacks would have to challenge. That all of the other taboos and resistance would give way slowly one at a time. But the one thing that was gonna be the most sacred and the most difficult to breach was economics. And so he said, "What we need to do is fight that war. Let us get into a business activity that puts us in a position to make breakthroughs on the economic front." And we talked about that for so long and so often, it became almost counter-productive. It became an issue that you knew you were gonna talk about. And we--you would all commit to it, but everybody was going down their own road. John [Conyers] was gonna be an engineer, then a lawyer. I'm gonna be a lawyer. My younger brother [William Henry Conyers] is a schoolteacher going into law school. And we're all talking about a family business. My dad is retiring from UAW [United Auto Workers]. And it--and it's like now a unfulfilled dream that you just keep alive by talking about it. John goes into the Congress. We're all native born Detroiters [Detroit, Michigan]. Who--what kind of business does the family like this get into? Well I remember in John's first term in Washington, we were in D.C. And we were talking to his A.A. [adminstrative assistant]. And we said-- his name was Larry Horowitz. He's alive still in Detroit. Said, "Larry, what kind of business activity could the Conyers family get into in Washington D.C. now that we have a congressman in the family?" And he said, "Let me--let me research it." And two months later, he came back. We called a family meeting. And Larry said, "I have discovered that more and more blacks are in the federal government system, are moving up to go to lots of receptions, have need of a black tie regularly. And there's not one black tuxedo rental company in Washington, D.C. And that's what you guys oughta get into." I'm practicing law. I said, "Larry, it--We ain't gonna open up a tuxedo rental business. Tear that up. Go back to the drawing board." Well he finally said, "Look, if you guys are in Detroit. That's the motor capital of the world. Why aren't you in retail automotive?" Because the first African American car dealer had been appointed by then in Detroit. His name was Ed Davis, as a Chrysler-Plymouth dealer on the West Side of Detroit. And we said, "Let's look and see if there're some other dealerships." The riots have now occurred. The smoke is smoldering. And it turns out to be a Ford dealership, exactly one mile from the epicenter of the riot, located on West Grand Boulevard and 14th. And that time what we used to call white flight was rampant. Every--anybody who could get out was getting out. And that dealership became available. And strangely enough there was no black owned automobile dealership for Ford Motor Company in the state of Michigan. And that wasn't accidental. It wasn't an oversight. It was the hard hand of racism that was preventing blacks from ever getting into the retail dealership operation. And so any attempts of trying it would be met with failure. Ed Davis was the first guy to crack the line back in 1965, I think it was. Ford had not done anything in the state of Michigan. But Henry Ford II had become active in trying to find ways of ameliorating the situation. And Henry Ford II committed himself that we ought to have some black dealerships. I've always imagined that somewhere in the Ford Motor hierarchy from the top--from the Chairman of the Board's office came down--an edict, "We need to create some minority owned dealerships." From the bottom up, were people dealing with the issue of white flight and people leaving the city, dealerships closing, market share shrinking, can't find anybody to take those stores. And that somewhere about mid-range in the Ford Motor Company, the edict from the top and the issue from the bottom hit one guy's desk. He said, "How am I gonna fill all of these dealerships. Oh they wanna make some black dealers. Bingo." And they started making black dealers with no reference to economics. Their theory was, "If you--it's a black neighborhood, and you put a black businessman in there, he's gonna do well." And the demographics that they used to determine where dealerships should be were thrown out of the window. It was just a matter of black accommodation. And so in that first wave, many blacks were put in situations were--which were just impossible. They could not survive. And we were very close to that. Because we were put into a situation on West Grand Boulevard and 14th where the demographics weren't very good. But it was two blocks away from Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan], where we went to high school. It was in Congressman Conyers' congressional district where we were well known. My dad had been a part of that community for years and years and years. So we moved into a business in an area that we had a relationship with the community. We did not, as many blacks going into business in that period of time--a guy was born in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. He trained in Omaha [Nebraska] and they gave him a dealership in Tuscaloosa [Alabama]. Where he was a virtual unknown. And that was an impossibility. The fact that we took a dealership in our own backyard got us through the birth process. Permitted us to survive. The community knew us. We knew them. And we were able to do business together. So thirty years later--I'm in my third and fourth generations in families that have started doing business with us back in 1970. And during the tough period, what we call "repeat business" is critical to survival. Story_ID: 5512 Speaker 1: Did Dr. [Martin Luther] King's death and the subsequent riots in '68 [1968] affect your decision to get out of practicing law and to open a business at all? Speaker 2: No, no. It was fulfilling my dad's [John James Conyers] dream [of a family business]. And we had--we had this curious decision to make. John [Conyers] was in the Congress. I was in a very prestigious law firm in downtown Detroit [Michigan]. My dad was retiring. And it seemed like one of us, John or myself would--if we were gonna indeed culminate this lifelong talk of a family business, one of us was gonna have to leave what they were doing and run the family business. So you were it. We spent a couple of weeks trying to convince the other that they're the ones who ought to stop doing the--That John oughta leave the Congress and run the--I mean he's the senior--he's the elder. He oughta run the family business. He's convincing me that there's a lot of leverage to be gained by him being in the Congress. If I leave the practice of law and run the--we couldn't convince each other who was gonna run the business. And this is a true story. One day John said, "Look, we gotta make a decision. And we're having trouble with it. Why don't we do what we did when we were kids, and we had a decision to make. Let's flip for it. Let's flip a coin. Heads you run the business. Tails I run the business." I said, "Okay, he's my older brother after all. I have to yield to his infinite wisdom." And he took a quarter out of his pocket. And he flipped it. And it--while it was sailing in the air, he asked me to call it. And I called heads. He caught it, turned it over, looked at it. And he said, "You run the family business." And he put the coin in his pocket. When my wife [Diane Conyers] heard this story, she said, "Nathan, did you win or lose?" And I said, "Only time will tell." And thirty years later we have announced that we won. A true story. Story_ID: 5513 Speaker 1: What did your partners think about this incident? Our leaving the firm to open the--? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Well Damon [J. Keith] had been appointed a federal judge the year before. So that--there we lost the anchor of the law firm when Damon went to the federal court. By the time I was looking at leaving the practice of law and going into business, nobody could understand it. The--my lawyer--my fellow lawyers and judges, members of the firm. My wife [Diane Conyers] said, "We didn't sac--." I mean my wife put me through law school. "You know, we didn't go through all this sacrifice for you to sell used cars. You know, we could've done that--." And we slowly convinced everybody that it was a good idea. Judge [Myron "Mike"] Wahls became a judge. And the--and the rest of the firm held on for a couple of years. And then they went their separate ways. And it was the end of the law firm. It was the end of a--of what was a very exciting part of my life. Lawyers I see today ask me, "Are you sorry or glad you made the decision?" And I tell them,"I couldn't be happier." There's something about the business world and running your own business that gives you more satisfaction than winning a two million dollar judgment in court. Story_ID: 5514 Speaker 1: 1970, the [Richard Milhous] Nixon administration is talking about black capitalism. And a lot of new businesses are starting, at the time that you start the Conyers Ford dealership. So--and you're part of the creation of something called the National Black [Automobile] Dealers Association [later involved in Ford Lincoln Mercury Black Dealers Association and the National Minority Dealership Association]. Can you tell us about that? Speaker 2: I became an automobile dealer on January 2nd of 1970, Conyers' Ford in Detroit [Michigan], corner of 14th and the Boulevard. Three months after--now I'd left the practice of law to open up this business. When I walked into this business, there were seventy employees operating in the store we bought. Each of whom knew more about the automobile business than I did. So my job was to hold the group together, learn what I could as fast as I could, overcome some issues that were not of my making and grow the store. And so I concentrated on that. Three months into the business, [Reverend] Jesse Jackson through his Operation Bread Basket and using [Albert William] Al Johnson, then an Oldsmobile dealer, to call a meeting of all the African American dealers in the country. And at that time there were about twenty-eight of us across the country and I was the newest. I was the new kid on the block. And Jesse with his insight and infinite wisdom--had fallen ill, as a matter of fact, by the time it came. And was in the hospital suffering with pneumonia. And he came out of the hospital to address this group of people assembled at a Holiday Inn on Lakeshore Drive [Chicago, Illinois] somewhere. And Al Johnson was handling it. And Jesse beseeched us to form an organization. That he would be able to provide leadership for and support and assistance to. The group elected not to do that. And frankly many of them were frightened by Jesse. He was an activist. He had held Dr. [Martin Luther] King, [Jr.] on that balcony. And some of these brothers, who were going in the car business, did not see that, that course coincided with their ability to want to migrate into the greater white and economic communities. And so they were very reluctant. And so we ended leaving Chicago, not forming what Jesse wanted. And Jesse was very angry about that. But Al Johnson two months later called a meeting--I believe it was Al called a meeting in St. Louis [Missouri] and invited everybody back; not under the auspices of Breadbasket, to see if they wanted to form an organization. And they came together. Maybe about 18 of us, decided to form an organization. Formed it in St. Louis. And I became the first chairman of that organization. And I was the newest member there. And the reason that I was elected was that I was in Detroit [Michigan], which was the home of the automotive manufacturers. So I had access to Ford, General Motors and Chrysler. It was the Big Three then. Too, I had a brother [John Conyers] in Congress that had to be of some benefit when trying to do some negotiation. And--. [break in tape]. Speaker 1: Okay. We're talking about the National Black Dealer's Association. Speaker 2: And the third reason I was elected is I was a lawyer. I had--I had legal background. I had been trained in developing business organizations. And they thought that, that would be of help. And so we formed an organization in 1970. Speaker 1: Searching for the name of it? Speaker 2: I'm trying to make sure that I've got my organizations right. In 1970, we formed an organization and--. Speaker 1: I think it's the National Black Dealer's Association? Is that it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay. Speaker 2: And it died. It died because most of our members lost their business. And pretty soon there was just two of us left. And we couldn't.--didn't have a quorum to call a meeting. Story_ID: 5515 Speaker 1: We went through the '70s [1970s]. And then in the [Jimmy] Carter Administration, we began to form line groups. That is the Ford--the National Association of Black Ford Dealers. Chrysler formed a group. General Motors formed a group. And if you remember back in the Carter years of 1979, 1978 we had that oil embargo. The gasoline prices went through the roof. The automobile industry took a dive. And the Carter administration with a couple of rather prominent and instrumental blacks from the city of Detroit [Michigan] who was in this--the Assistant Secretary of Transportation was a guy named Bill Beckham who was from Detroit. He had been in Coleman Young's administration, as a matter of fact. And the--President Carter said, we need to create a group to have a look at the automobile industry to see what role the federal government should play. I mean we were dealing with the Chryslers' bailouts back in that period of time. And the government wanted to do something for the manufacturers. And at that time the National Association of Automobile Dealers petitioned that the president should do also something about the dealer body that was going through terrifically tough times. Well the black dealers who had just recently gone into business were dying. And we said, we were becoming extinct species. We weren't gonna survive this downturn. And that the president ought to do something special for us. And so in 1979, we got President Carter to announce a plan to save the industry which included a piece for minority automobile dealers. And we did that through working with [brother] Congressman [John] Conyers' office. Our friends in the Congressional Black Caucus. And what happened was that they--The President through SBA [Small Business Administration] and its Disaster Relief Fund declared the state of black dealership business in the United States an economic disaster. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] The state of black--okay. Speaker 1: That qualified us for low cost direct loans from the SBA [Small Business Administration] without having to go through their--the SBA guarantee process. And as a result of that for Ford dealers perhaps twenty Ford dealers at a total cost of about twenty-two million dollars in direct loans saved us from disaster. We had lost half of our ranks in one year. We had gone from thirty-six to eighteen, something like that. So President Carter's move--and there was a guy that ran in the [United States] Commerce department. The office--it wasn't OMBE any more. They changed the name from OMBE to--can't think of it. But his name was Daniel Hinson [ph.] was the director of--I almost said it. And he helped us organize into the National Association of Minority Automobile Dealers. And I became its first president. I became its first chairman. I think Bill Shack was the first president. Story_ID: 5516 Speaker 1: But that was a very dynamic period where we were attempting to create a foundation in an industry that was closing in on being a one hundred years old. And that we only had a history going back to 1960. And this was 1970. So we were ten years old in an industry that was eighty years old. And as a result of the creation and Jesse Jackson's activities we were able to confront the manufacturers. As a Ford dealer we were able to sit down with the Ford management and begin to talk about how flawed their concepts were when they started making black dealers. By putting them into demographically unsustainable areas. And that a training program was necessary. That we could not create an African American retail automobile dealer in the normal process. Which is that you get a job. You work your way up from being a porter to a salesman, to a sales manager, to a general manager. That ladder was not available to African Americans. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Because of racial discrimination? Speaker 1: Because of racism. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay. Speaker 1: And the other way that you got to be a dealer is that your dad was a dealer or your uncle was a dealer. And you had the inside track. Well neither of those approaches could work for us. So we had to really kind of artificially figure out a way to create a dealer. A black dealer. We had--we were looking for a bastard program that would help overcome all of the imbalance that was going on in the system. And we were artificially creating dealers. Which meant that the loss ratios were gonna be significantly higher. And so if you get an inexperienced guy, put him in a bad location, undercapitalize him, you've just created the formula for failure. And we were able to begin to talk to the manufacturers. That if they were serious about doing it that they had to change their concepts of what they were doing. And so for the last thirty years we have been--we've been working to try and--I mean when we had our first annual meeting of black dealers, the fir--we could all go in a phone booth and hold a meeting. There just was a few of us. At our last annual meeting we had two hundred dealers and one hundred people from the factory and one hundred vendors. I would--the president of Ford spoke to us. I mean we had moved a long way. But we are still fighting the same issues. Story_ID: 5517 Speaker 1: Tell us about the growth of Conyers' Ford? And I know in '84 [1984] you expanded and purchase a--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] In 1984, we were looking at the demographics of that area we were in. And there had been a buildup since the riots. Things were--money was going in and then it plateaued. And then things started declining. And it became clear that we could not stay at that location. And quite frankly I was in a quandary. Ford Motor Company wanted to move us out of the city. But what my dad [John James Conyers] had taught us and the reason we were in the business was to show that blacks could run sound business operations in our community, that would be competitive with anybody else. That would be priced right, that would have the customer satisfaction. And I was reluctant to move out of the city. That if we moved out of the city life gets a lot easier. And we said, "No we wanna stay." So the only place to stay was to leave the pot and go into the kettle and moved from 14th in the Boulevard down to East Jefferson. The heart of downtown Detroit [Michigan]. And we said, "It is worth the risk." Because with sixty-seven percent of the population then African American, there was no African American Ford dealer in the city. And the issue was were you gonna somehow conveniently let racism play a role in developing what it was that you entered the swamp to do? So we said, "No. We're gonna stay in Detroit." And so in '84 [1984], we moved down to East Jefferson opened up [Conyers] Riverside Ford. We owned the facilities of Conyers Ford. So we turned that into our body shop and we'd do wholesale parts out of there. And we started working with the downtown Detroit scene. And we have had good years and poor years downtown. But we by that time had built up a big enough base. We had been there long enough. We had sustained the cyclical ups and downs of a market. We knew how to survive. And so we've been there. And now my issue is to move that dealership into my children's hands. And let them sustain it. To move this dealership, which we just opened a few months ago, as a matter of fact, into my children's hands and let them sustain this. We now have--we've been dealers at other points for short periods of time in between. But right now we have two dealerships. We have a Ford dealership in downtown Detroit and we a Jaguar store out here in Novi [Michigan]. And they are about as far apart as you can imagine in any measurement that you wanna make. And what we're--what we're still trying to do is to live the dream. That says that we have the capacity to run successfully both kinds of operations. And we are now at the point where we're looking at the issues of succession. I'm seventy years old. What happens to our lifetime of activity? Does it continue beyond my lifetime? Does it grow and prosper? Or does it fall apart? Story_ID: 5518 Speaker 1: This has been truly a family business in terms of all the involvement of your children--. Speaker 2: Oh when we started off my dad [John James Conyers] and my brother [Representative John Conyers Jr.] were all partners in this business with me. John had to bow out when we got into the [President Jimmy] Carter years and we were getting money from federal government. He relinquished his then interest in it and my dad passed away. And I became the lucky guy that had it all on my shoulders. Speaker 1: Now did your--was your father--I suppose he was excited about this in terms--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh absolutely. It was a great way to end a great life. He was excited in his last days on earth. The night he died which was New Year's Eve and we discovered him the next morning on New Year's Day. One of my friends said, "He lived a full and active life. He was ready to go." And I said to my friend, "When I found my father dead in his bed that morning he had his stocking cap on. He wasn't ready to go. He was ready to have another day. He was ready to have another round, another go at it." And that was his life. That was the way--he was always ready looking for what the next challenge was gonna be. And I can't think of a better way to pass from this earth than to pass being excited about the future. Speaker 1: So he wasn't sick or anything before he died? Speaker 2: He had begun to have the beginnings of Alzheimer's to the extent that he lived with us and we cared for him the last--he lived in the home with us. And we had promised our mothers and fathers, myself and my wife Diana, that none of them would ever have to go to a nursing home. That we would--We would surround them with our village and take care of them. Speaker 1: Okay. And at the present time now, most of the family is involved in the business. Right? That's--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Most of my family is. I have five children. Nancy you've met out here. She's the only child that I have out in this store. I have two at the [Conyers] Riverside [Ford] store. Which you oughta stop by and see before you have to leave town. I have--my oldest son, who was my general manager there, decided he wanted to go back and finish his college degree. So we let him off for two years. And he'll be back in the business. I have a--I have a younger son who is currently in the NADA [National Automotive Dealer Association] dealer academy training to be a dealer. That's Peter. And I have a daughter Ellen who's the lawyer out of my kids who wants to be a dealer. And she's a product of the city. She graduated summa cum laude from Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan] undergraduate, went through Wayne's law school, handles all the legal affairs for our businesses. And wants to be a dealer. And I have another daughter who is my administrative assistant. She's married. She has three children and we're giving her time off to raise her family. But it's a collective activity. And the thing that's exciting right now is how--and I've been around long enough to see African American dealers who pass away often unexpectedly not leave an estate intact, so that their families can continue it. And so it stops with them. And succession is the thing that we're all grappling with right now. How do you make it work? How do you--how do you try and protect your kids all your life, so they don't have to go through all the things we went through. And yet make them strong enough and able to understand what the issues are today? And it's something that we're just beginning to deal with. And to the extent we can deal with it, then we can create a foundation. We create something that lasts longer than we do. We create economic wealth. And that's our challenge today. Story_ID: 5519 Speaker 1: The success of Conyers Ford and now the Jaguar business seems to, from what I've read, hinge upon customer service. Black people have traditionally--and you wanna support black business. But you always hear the old (unclear) that black people don't know how to service each other. What, how-- Can you address that? Speaker 2: I think every black person alive in the United States today still has some imprint of slavery within themselves that causes a lot of self-doubt. It is not there accidentally. It was put there very deliberately at a very high expensive price to us. By disassociating ourselves with our past, our history in slavery tearing apart our culture, ripping apart the family and isolating us. So that the only condition that we could ever talk about was the slave condition. We're all impacted by that today. Every one of us. And it comes out in various areas where when we talk about other black people, we're really reflecting what we feel about ourselves. And that's the reality of what's going on today. And what we have to do is to create the self-image, the self est--I mean [Reverend] Jesse Jackson has spent the last twenty years of his life talking about, "Yes I can. Yes I am. I am somebody." And trite as it may seem, it goes to the heart of the issue that we have as a people. It goes to the heart of the issue that separates us as a people that brings other groups together as a people. And so when we say that, "His ice is colder than my ice." or "His price is better than my price." Or--we are dealing with our own self-image. What we have to remember is that it is in business a two-way street. Customer service is ultimately what you get when you survive. When you--if you can take care of people, you can continue on in business. If you don't take care of people you cannot. We've got people in business today who between me and you shouldn't be in business. We've got people today who should be in business but are afraid to and are not in business. When I was a child the best and brightest of black young people in our community looked for a job with the government. If you could be in the post office, if you could be in the Social Security. If you could--if you had a job with the federal government you in your community was looked up as a person of high standing. There were no strikes. There were no layoffs. It was--you got pay raises every two years automatically. That was the best and brightest for our kids. And in my lifetime I've seen it move from the federal government kind of job, to the factory. I mean if you had a job and you were a union member I mean you could make more money than a schoolteacher could make. Then it shifted to corporate America. If you could get a job working for a corporation and the perks that would immediately attach. You'd have a car, spec--that's where our best and brightest went. We are now at the era where we have to convince our young people, the best and brightest of them that the ultimate opportunity is in business. And that's what we're--that's what we're trying to do. Story_ID: 5520 Speaker 1: What effect did the riot have on Detroit [Michigan] psychologically and materially? What I'm getting at is that Detroit was the center for black business and culture at one time. And at such a high level. And it seemed to have a--the people seem to have not been able to get over the riot in some ways. Speaker 2: It wasn't so much getting over the riot, as it was getting over Coleman Young. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Coleman Young presented himself to the city of Detroit, which endeared him to the black residents. And made him a disliked and often hated object in the white community. Coleman would not take prisoners. He would brook no compromise. And he would--he would say the kinds of things that white business people found unacceptable. And so what happened was that many of them relocated out of the city of Detroit. Those who stayed said there would be no growth for their businesses as long as Coleman was in the mayor's seat. Coleman's reaction to that was to get even more vitriolic. And so you had a standoff between the economic development people and the black community. And it created a stagnation. A stagnation which affected not only white business, but black businesses also. That further enhanced the image that--when Saks Fifth Avenue that had a store in the New Center area, left Detroit, they went to the Somerset [Michigan] collection. Black customers followed them there. Because they were--they were Saks customers. And that's where the Saks store was. Those of us left in the city had a decision to make. And that is whether the economics permitted us to stay, or whether we should also move ourselves to areas where family income was stronger. That we did not have to deal with all the marginal credit issues that we have to when you are in Detroit. So what happened is that the--what the riots precipitated was the stunning event that captured everybody's imagination, city government was considered hostile to white businesses for the next period of time. And so they all sat on their hands during that period of time. Most of them sat on their hands, and did not do things to assist. We fall into then a real economic chaotic condition. We become the murder capital of the world. The public schools system goes to hell. And all of these domino effect things occur. Story_ID: 5521 Speaker 1: When Coleman [Young] decides not to run and Dennis [W.] Archer becomes the mayor, there's a sigh of relief. The business community now has a person that it can deal with, who has been a lawyer. Has been a state justice on the Michigan Supreme Court. He is a civil discipline person who does not have a history of that kind of activism that frightens the business community. And it was seen as an era that ended the Coleman Young period and began the Dennis Archer period, with a healing of the wounds. And the curious impact is that Dennis got lots of support from people outside the city [Detroit, Michigan]. But he got much less support from people inside the city than Coleman got. As a matter of fact, when he ran for office for mayor, one of his opponents, Sharon McPhail, pulled more black votes in the city of Detroit, than Dennis Archer did. But Dennis Archer pulled all of the white votes in the city of Detroit, and enough black votes in the city of Detroit so that--so that he won. From Dennis Archer to Kwame [M.] Kilpatrick is our current mayor. Detroit is going through an evolutionary political process. As we try and re-identify who we are and what our strengths are. Casinos handcuffed us for several years as we decided did we want casinos. If not. And finally we said we did. And then where were they gonna be? And then they weren't gonna be there. They were gonna be someplace else. Then they weren't gonna be there. And lawsuits. It created an environment that was very unstable for businesses. So they sat back and said, "Let's wait and see what's gonna happen." Detroit's future is really very bright. Really bright. Detroit is the last city in this country almost not to develop its waterfront. I mean they were able to do Cleveland [Ohio] and Cincinnati [Ohio] and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and Balti [Baltimore, Maryland]--I mean everybody else figured out what to do with your waterfront. We still got cement silos on our waterfront. We have not developed that plan that says, "This is one of the shining stars that we have." And we need but to develop it in a proper way. There is activity again in downtown Detroit. There's building going on. There is what is critical for downtown Detroit. And that is housing in downtown Detroit. People have to live in your central city. They cannot just work there and go home at night and abandon the downtown area. That's what Chicago, [Illinois] found out, that made Chicago survive all of the problems of the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s]. Business did not flee from Chicago. Businesses did not abandon the central city. People st--I mean living on Lakeshore Drive is still the best thing you can do, you know, what I mean in the city of Chicago. We did not handle ourselves. But it means that we still have an opportunity to make that development. And as we began to see the fledglings of it, casinos beginning to take a proper--you know, it's not gonna be the thing that saves the city. But there's gonna be a part of it that's gonna create some economic opportunity. We got now two ball--new ballparks in downtown Detroit. The [Detroit] Redwings-- and Detroit has often been saved by its sports teams. What got us out of the riot was the Detroit Tigers winning the World Series. And suddenly that was a healing and brought us together. The Redwings winning the Stanley Cup is a healing thing that brings us together. So that the potential for Detroit has never been greater than it is now. If we but know how to deal with it. Story_ID: 5522 Speaker 1: Do you really love this city [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I--it's the only city I know. I mean you're looking at a guy who was born, went to school, public school, raised, worked, lived, married, family. I mean I'm a throwback to the people of one hundred years ago. Who used to get born in a house and they died in the same house. You know. They might have traveled fifty miles away from that house during their lifetime. In today's world and I talk to people for example who work at Ford [Motor Company]. They worked at Ford for twenty-five years. They've moved twelve times. That is totally foreign to me. I mean I don't know how--I don't know how you drop roots anywhere that way. I don't know how kids identify with what's home and what's not home. But that's what's happened to our society. When you say, "Do I love Detroit?" Boy! I really do. Because it is my home. Story_ID: 5523 Speaker 1: The music scene in Detroit [Michigan], I know your brother [John Conyers] is very much interested in music and you are too. Can you discuss I guess why you think Motown [Records] moved, you know, during that period of time. I mean, you know, during that period of time in the early '70s [1970s] out of Detroit. Speaker 2: No I really can't. Berry Gordy, I can only assume cut a deal that made it practical and profitable for him to leave Detroit. Speaker 1: Do you think he had the same concerns that you expressed that some of the developers had about Detroit's ability to develop under Coleman Young? Speaker 2: I don't think so. 'Cause Berry was--he went to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan] with us. With John as a matter of fact. And was just always--I mean carried sheet music. I mean we had other things in our pockets. He had a roll of sheet music in his back pocket. And he found--I mean the thing that made Motown was the studio they found on West Grand Boulevard, not far from the old Conyers Ford. Where they got the sound that they wanted in that recording studio. It's still there. And it's part of the Motown [Historical] Museum, as a matter of fact. And his sister Esther Edwards--Esther Gordy Edwards still runs the museum here in Detroit. But I think it was one of those decisions that permitted him to kind of get mainstreamed and not regional. And exploit Hollywood and Los Angeles [California] for the other kinds of media activities. I mean they could get into movies and they expanded their talent base significantly. But I think--I think--I think Berry Gordy always has had a love for Detroit. And if you ever talk to him, you know, they still talk about their days in Detroit as being their--the high point of Motown. Story_ID: 5524 Speaker 1: What do you see as Detroit's [Michigan] legacy? Black Detroit's legacy kind of? Black Detroit's legacy? Speaker 2: Oh I don't know how to--how to begin to answer that. If you--if you look at the history of black businesses, Detroit has played a prominent role. Often at the top. Sometimes near the top, but never at the bottom. There has been--there has been the ingredients for entrepreneurship in Detroit that to me only rivaled, you know, New York [New York] and Atlanta [Georgia]. Atlanta had its growth of business and Andrew Young had a lot to do with that. After Andy left the United Nations and Congress, he probably single handedly created more import-export businesses that flowed into Georgia than any other person. I mean he was just a master at it. They had fallen in love with him in Africa. So it was a entree to get some import-export businesses going between the--his state and the continent. Detroit had the uniqueness of the labor movement and the strong church. We had some very dynamic ministers in the Detroit area back in the '40s [1940s], '50' [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. Charles Hill was pastor of one of our leading churches. Isaiah Scipio was--Jesse J. McNeil. We had some awfully--in the African American community in those days the church was the center of social and often political activity. It was around the church that we found out who we were and what we should be doing. That strength remains in Detroit today. Not as prominent as it was. And the other influence was the influence of the union movement. Which taught the concept of group action. The concept that united we stand. Not a slogan that came out of 9-11 [September 11th terrorist attacks], but that came out of the crisis of the labor union movement in the '30s [1930s]. And because of that and because in our housing stock we had more single-family dwellings than any other major city. Created the ability to do block club activities where block clubs would form and organize and do self-help kinds of projects. You put all those together with the overlay of an union activity which says, "You know, if the seventeen block clubs in this area would get together and form a block club council would could get more done with the city in terms of keeping our streets clean and the lights on in the alleys." Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] It was organizing legacy. Then. Speaker 2: It was--that's the legacy of Detroit. And it's held us for the most part in pretty good shape. Story_ID: 5525 Speaker 1: What it [Detroit, Michigan] fails to do is to promote and encourage black businesses. Not for the benefit of the black businessman or woman but for the benefit of the community. We haven't figured that out yet. We look at other ethnic groups who understand that if we put you in business your job is to bring other people into that business and teach them and send them off. So that there was a culture that promoted that kind of activity, that we have trouble with in our community. People will say, you know, "Why is Mel Farr not a Ford dealer today?" It's a tragedy. It's a travesty that a guy could have devoted himself to the business and to his community. And to attempt to do things differently and not be supported by that community. We haven't learned that business is good. See one of the old concomitants of the union movement was that union labor was the strength and employer management was the enemy. And out of it you get the--all the kind of socialistic concepts that profit's bad. You know, profit is--means that you raped somebody. You've taken advantage of somebody for your personal gain. And so a part of that union movement that has built up Detroit in an organized fashion still suspiciously eyes business. We haven't recognized that profit and business is good for the community. We haven't figured out that cycling dollars within our community that we don't take it spend it once and it leaves our community. But it goes from this business to the next business, to the next business creates the kind of economic foundation that a community needs. We haven't--we haven't--We haven't worked through that yet. We're close to doing it. But then we have to be very careful that we don't--we don't move into a Comcast situation. Where we have a black entrepreneur who builds a business based upon the black community, but then sells it to a large white conglomerate. BET [Black Entertainment Television]. We have to be careful that we don't become a conduit for someone else to build their economic base with. And all of that is just a matter of development. It's maturations. It's understanding more when you're in the fifth grade than you did when you were in the third grade. And it's exciting. And what we need to do is convince people to move into the arena, not to stand back from it. Story_ID: 5526 Speaker 1: After all these years do you think that black people in terms of their business acumen is--are growing? Or are they--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh absolutely. I said the same thing about black businesses twenty years ago, as they said about black baseball players. In your lifetime there's a time when owners and managers and racists said, "Blacks can never play baseball, because they can't think fast enough. It's just not a game--they could jump. They can run fast. In football, yeah you can have a lineman that's black. But you can't have a quarterback. That requires a certain set of skills that these people have--." Level the playing field. Use the same rules to judge everybody, we excel. And we're excelling in business today. We will have our Jackie Robinsons and our greatest heroes can come out of the business world. Put together a group of people and let them run Chrysler Corporation. And they can do better than what you--what you see out there today. I mean we've got some highly skilled people with-- that aren't trapped by the incest of the business community. Who's not the grandson of or the uncle to and everybody is still in that same--I mean we bring fresh blood, ideas, energies. I mean the whole concept of diversity is that you wanna use all the talents you got in your community. You don't wanna exclude some. Because it's fashionable to do so or economically beneficial to do so. There is no question that one day we will excel in the business world. And we will do it on the backs of people who have struggled in it. Some have exceeded. Some have failed. But we will build upon that until we reach where we should be. Story_ID: 5527 Speaker 1: Do you feel a part of the political legacy of Detroit [Michigan]? You're in--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 1: I guess that--I mean by comparison. You're associated with Damon Keith and your brother [John Conyers] running for congress. And Charles Diggs and other people, and association with Coleman Young. Can you tell me what it was like when your brother won his--the night he won his congressional election for the first time? Speaker 2: The night? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Election night? We didn't know he won. It was--John won on a recount. In that newly formed Congressional district with about six candidates running, John was leading at the end of the unofficial count by seventy-seven votes out of like 90,000 ballots. We were scared to death that any recount could topple his election. So the celebration didn't occur until the recount was finished. And his number dropped from seventy-seven to forty-eight, his first election. Since then he has seldom been challenged. What was it like to win that first race? It was a tremendous community effort. It was a relatively interracial district he was in. It had labor and business in it. And he won because he worked harder than anybody else in that race. We got him going--we didn't get him. He got us going door-to-door. I mean he touched more people. His message was clear and concise. And he prevailed. And once he got in--it's almost like Damon Keith, which is something you didn't ask me about. But when Damon was nominated to become a federal judge he found himself in a contest with Otis Smith who had--who was a Michigan Supreme Court justice. And the United States senator who was to make the nomination to the president couldn't figure out which way to go. And it was months of very tense activity before we could get the then United States Senator Phil Hart to nominate Damon Keith. And there was a period during there where Damon said; "I'm not gonna do this anymore. I'm withdrawing my name." And we were in the law office then. I said, "You've gone too far. You've brought too many people with you. You don't have the right to withdraw. You will be in this race." And there were questions about, "Well can Damon really be a better federal judge than the other guy can?" Damon has excelled himself on the bench. He has become--I mean next to our Supreme Court justice, next to a couple of people on the Federal Court of Appeals. Damon has justified the trust and faith that his people had in him over the--I mean he's the one who wrote the [President Richard] Nixon opinion that said, "No. No. You do go to court to get--to get an order if you're going to do surveillance on people." He handled affirmative action cases in--he has created an illustrious career as a jurist. That's what we can do. That's how we take--Damon Keith will tell you that his grade school class, half of 'em went to prison. He didn't. And the difference between what he was doing and they were doing was indistinguishable. And so there from an ordinary person we get the extraordinary results of the life of Damon Keith. And it tells you that all the hype about how you gotta be born to the cloth or you gotta go to this school we have the abilities to rise. And everything that we've touched, that we've been given a fair opportunity at we have risen. We have done well. And when we get to this last--as my dad [John James Conyers] said, "The last threshold, the economic threshold that ultimately then does even things out, if you can maintain yourself in the economics of this country, you will be--you will be accepted. You will be a full-fledged member." And that's the one they will resist the most strenuously to keep us out of. But we're winning that one. I mean in my lifetime I've seen us go from five [African American automobile] dealers to 500 dealers. I've seen the black automobile dealer move from a collected sales--annual sales volume of ten million to three billion dollars. So there is something happening. There's some progress. There's movement. And once we get to that line it's, you know, sort of like a--sort of like a bell curve, you know. Once you get to the top of the bell you're accepted. Everything begins to work normally then. Story_ID: 5528 Speaker 1: Mr. Conyers did your brother's [John Conyers] political outspokenness ever adversely affect the business? Speaker 2: Yeah. There've been times where we have lost business because of my relationship with John. But fortunately at [Conyers] Riverside Ford and Conyers Ford which is at the heart of Detroit [Michigan], we gained infinitely more business than we lost. Speaker 1: Okay. I can see that. So what are some of issues of dealing in heart of black communities with the Ford dealership? I know we're out now in Novi [Michigan]. Right? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Novi. Speaker 1: Novi, Michigan. That's right Novi. The clientele is different here? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Chuckling]. Speaker 1: I mean you got two--I think different--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Chuckling] I think it is. Speaker 1: Yeah. Very different--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah. Speaker 1: Dealerships--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah. Speaker 1: Going on. You know. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I mean this dealership is a luxury brand. It's located in a very strong economically sound community. We have--we are in a absolutely new facility that we build ourselves with architects from California, London [England] and Detroit putting it together. We're able to hire a staff of people here that's indigenous to the community. And the demographics here are exactly the opposite of what we have in Detroit. In Detroit we have the oldest physical facility of a Ford dealer in metropolitan Detroit. We have in retail automobile circles what we call a PMA, Primary Market Area, where you are suppose to do the majority of your business. And control the car buying of your brand within that circular PMA. And we have one here. And we are covering our PMA. In downtown Detroit we're next to the Detroit River. So our PMA is not 360 degrees it's 180 degrees 'cause we can't sell in or across the river. We're in a downtown area where we have little housing stock. But it ranges from public projects on one side of our market area to the most expensive townhouses and condos on the other end. Next to Joe Louis Arena we have riverfront apartments, which is just the best address in Detroit to have. We have a lot of commuters that go by the dealership there; who either work in the downtown area or have some reason to travel. So when I get up in the morning and I get to the end of my block if I turn right I'm going to Riverside. And that creates a whole environmental set of feelings and expressions. Or if I turn the other way and I heading to Novi. The sun come out and the birds are chirping and it's a very, very warm and rewarding kind of experience. So we're balancing here two distantly different kinds of automobile dealerships. And it's just as important that we succeed in both of them, as it is that we don't succeed. Just as important that we do the job in Detroit and that we show that we can do the job in Novi. Story_ID: 5529 Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois] with Al Johnson Cadillac there are members of the black community there no matter if they move out of Chicago they're still gonna try to buy from Al Johnson. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Do you have that same kind of loyalty? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Loyalty. Right. And manufacturers and dealer organizations track loyalty. And we have one of the highest loyalty ratings of our Ford dealership. We haven't been in business long enough to get rated at Jaguar. But we've got people who--we've got people who will not buy anywhere else. We've got people who've force us to sell to them. Speaker 1: You find yourself shipping cars a lot too? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Not much anymore. There was a time when shipping cars was very advantageous to the buyer. Where transportation costs were measured by the distance from Detroit [Michigan]. So that cars would cost more because of additional transportation costs to go to Texas. So people from Texas would come up here and buy cars. And drive them back. And they'd save considerable amount, hundreds of dollars. But they have equalized transportation cost now. And the transportation cost is the same wherever you are in the country. So that's taken some of the edge off--now some of our old friends--I mean we got people in Washington D.C. that came from Detroit that come back. And we got people in Washington state who come back and buy cars from us. And we also have people who would never buy another car from us again, because of some experience that they've had with us. So we don't run a perfect business and we make mistakes. And if you look at those situations as opportunities it's amazing. It's amazing the emotion that is involved with car ownership today. And if people sense that you are concerned about their issues, they stick with you. Even if you don't solve 'em the first time. If they think you are legitimately concerned and interested in their problem they'll stay with you. If they don't feel that you are--you can do everything right diagnosis, fix their problem on time, under budget. And if they don't feel that you're interested they won't come back. Speaker 1: So it's relationship that's really important? Speaker 2: The car business is a people business. And people tend to do business with people they like more than they tend to do business with people they don't like. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what--one of the things we do is to preach to our customers that the product is the second thing you sell to a customer. You are the first thing you have sell. You sell yourself to that customer and have them believe in you. They'll follow you, I mean unless you prove not to be trustworthy or something. But in our black community that concept is dealt with suspiciously. "What's he trying to do now?" And what you need is you need advocates. You need somebody to sell somebody on your ability. Because they can do it better than you can sell yourself to somebody. We do a--we do an assessment on where our customers come from. And there's eight or ten categories. Typically advertising is the highest group of--they came here 'cause they saw you in the paper; they heard you on television. They--radio, received literature from you. Typically that's the largest group of people who do business with you. Our largest group of people who do business with us are people who have done business with us. Former customers who are coming back. Why do you buy at Riverside Ford? 'Cause that's where I buy my cars. The second largest group are people who referred them to us. People who do business with us and referred their friends to do business with us. And with that reference comes a confidence that, This company may be okay because Harold my friend has recommended that I go there. And then it's our job to prove that. And advertising play the role of nine percent of the people who come in and shop. The other big item was convenience. You were conveniently located for me. So it's a people business. And to the extent that the businessman understands that it really gives him a heads up. Story_ID: 5530 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community in general? Speaker 2: In Detroit [Michigan] that we re-establish a black community. With all of the touted benefits of integration we have lost some very important elements. And I think--I think it's incumbent upon us to recreate a community that has the same kinds of standards and issues and neighborhood feelings that we had once before. That people care about people. That we know who we live around and who comes into our neighborhood. And that we are very proud of ourselves and our neighborhood. If--that's my hope for Detroit. Is that we re-establish the communities that we've had here. And there's signs that, that may be beginning to happen. As new housing development--new stock enters the market. Originally gentrification was the reason. White folks were moving back into town and they've restored the old houses or built new block or subdivision. But more and more we are having black families move into the new housing stock. And that gives you some sense of identity it seems to me. And it gives you the potential of organizing and doing the things that neighborhoods need to do. Story_ID: 5531 Speaker 1: How do you think with the current battle out around reparations going on now, what are you--? And I know your brother [John Conyers] is very much involved in this. What do you think about the reparations discussions? Speaker 2: I think--I think the more that we talk about it the more acceptable it is to discuss the issue publicly. The more opportunities will open up for us. Whether reparations ever wins the day and fourteen million black folks get some money because of what has happened in our past to me is less important than what the information that reparations has to offer to everybody is. It forces you to look at some of the very unjust and cruel systems that were byproduct of the days of slavery. And the more you expose it. The more you can began to build on that guilt a basis for leveling the playing field of trying to eliminate as much as we can. In my businesses I tell my employees that their prejudices and how they feel about people and groups of people I don't really care about. What I care about is what they do. What their acts are. I can measure whether you're discriminating. And I don't wanna get into the mindset of your prejudices. But if the light turns red, then you have to stop, because that's the rules of the game. And we don't care whether you wanna stop, think it's fair to stop. I can measure whether you stop or not. And so I--what I'm concerned is your acts of discrimination. That's what Title 7 was created to try and address. You know? "You can't do this." It says. "You can't do that. And if you do it we're gonna--we're gonna make an issue out of it." How long is it gonna take? A long time. It's gonna take a awful long time. Until we're threatened by extraterrestrial creatures that force us to identify as human beings against something that isn't human beings. But it's not to be--we should not despair because there is progress. There is--there're things that are going on. The fact that we're sitting here is progress. Story_ID: 5532 Speaker 1: What do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Legacies are for other people to figure out. I don't know what my legacy is. I don't know how--where I end up. I should have retired five years ago. And I am now in more debt today [chuckling] than I've been before in my life and enjoying it. It's like raising kids. I'm absolutely convinced that parents never live to see the ultimate fruition of their children. In fact, it can't even happen while they're alive. They have to pass on to free children to now take those last final steps of development. So you never know what the final chapter in the book is that you've been reading all your life. But if you have--if you've done what you thought was the best to do and you've carefully followed some kind of moral persuasion you're at peace with it. You say, "It's gonna end up okay." I'll let somebody else write my legacy. Speaker 1: You've got a lot of time left. Especially all the debt. You gotta keep working [chuckle]. But tell me, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That gets very trite and self-aggrandizing. But I mean the best anybody can ask for is that in the period of time that the Lord gives you to be on earth that you've had a life in which you've made a difference. That you've made a contribution. That you've been a positive force to improve things. If you can say to yourself, you've done that; it's a life worth living. You don't have to reach a goal or a height. Or--it's just living in a way that makes sense for you. Who knew I was gonna live to be seventy? Over half the kids in my grade school class are now dead. And some of them in the short period of time they lived they made a contribution. There're other people who live a long time never quite get around to it. If I could--if you were to ask me, "What achievement in your life are you most proud of?" Speaker 1: What achievement in your life are you most proud of [chuckling]? Speaker 2: I have helped in one way or another thirty-seven African Americans become automobile dealers. That's why we entered this world. That's what my daddy [John James Conyers] wanted us to do. And that's my proudest achievement. And we're still counting...