 Story_ID: 638984 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Hugh Barrington Clarke, Jr., H-U-G-H Barrington two Rs, Clarke C-L-A-R-K-E, Jr. [HistoryMaker Hugh Barrington Clarke, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 14, 1954, Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: And sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is February 29, 2008 leap year day. Speaker 1: That's right. Where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are currently at my law office in Lansing, Michigan, 215 South Washington Square, Suite 210. Story_ID: 638985 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer. The first question is do you have a favorite food and what is it? Speaker 2: Yes I do. It is curry goat and rice and peas. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Jamaica. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Sometimes. I have two of them one of them I really can't say (laughter). I can't say with the camera running but one of them is always, grow up and be somebody. Story_ID: 638986 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] side but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Gwendolyn G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N F. Clarke C-L-A-R-K-E [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke]. Her maiden name was Khouri, K-H-O-U-R-I. Speaker 1: K-H-O-U-R-I okay now is there a story behind her maiden name? That's kind of an unusual name for-- Speaker 2: Both my parents were from the islands so her father [Alfred Khouri] was East Indian and Syrian. Speaker 1: Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side and-- Speaker 2: I can go back to her grandmother and a couple of aunts and that's about it. Never met my--never knew my grandfather. My parents living in Detroit, Michigan when they moved here back in the mid-'40s [1940s]. My father came first and then my mother and my eldest sister Norma [Norma Clarke Mays] came about a year or so later. I was born in 1954 and I can remember once or twice as a small child probably I'm guessing between maybe four and eight having been to Jamaica a couple of times. I may have met my grandfather once but the second subsequent time I never met him. My grandmother's name was Lucille and her subsequent last name became White [Lucille White (ph.)]. Uncle Rashford [ph.] and Aunt Gat for Agatha [ph.], which would be my mother's aunt and uncle that's what I remember. I mean subsequently that's a loss of cousins--needs some cousins and what not but those are the ones I remember most. Speaker 1: Okay are there any stories about the Syrian and Indian part of the family? Speaker 2: No I'm sure there are but none that were ever shared. Speaker 1: Any cultural I guess residuals from the Syrian culture or the Indian culture? Speaker 2: Probably more so from the Indian culture in terms of diet and food and cooking with a lot of curry, garlic and those types of seasonings and spices but other than that I think we're sufficiently immersed in the American culture that whatever may have been just didn't. And even growing up in Detroit, it was more of the West Indian or Jamaican culture. Generally people from Jamaica will tell you they're from Jamaica but they will tell you that they were West Indians okay and they would tell you it was the West Indies and that's what it used to be called. I can remember mailing addresses-- Story_ID: 638987 Speaker 1: We were talking about your mother's side of the family. So there are no stories about her Syrian ancestors or the Indians or even the black ones of course? Speaker 2: West Indians don't have much to talk about their history a lot that was pretty much it. Even in later years, say ten years ago, trying to get my father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] to talk about things 'cause their answer is always, "Why do you want to know?" But it's more interesting because his sister [Idabelle Clarke Pickersgill (ph.)] would tell me stories about him growing up okay but I never heard those necessarily from my mother's side of the family. We were pretty much submerged into the black culture in Detroit [Michigan] or actually the West Indian culture 'cause I can remember when friends would come over and there was like a sunroom in the back where the record player was and they'd dance and pick up their feet and listen to calypso music. You know still trying to maintain more of that identity than anything from the Syrian or East Indian aspect of her life. Speaker 1: Okay so that didn't happen to play as big a role. And she--your mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] was more a product of the black community in Jamaica than-- Speaker 2: Well I guess you could say that or more of the African community--or more of the Jamaican community--British Jamaican because like I said I can remember mail coming to the house that would come from her mother [Lucille White (ph.)] and would be addressed there. Look if you made it out of there and you came to the United States, you were doing something big and I can remember those envelopes Kingston, Jamaica BWI which would have been pre '68 [1968] which was British West Indies because they were a British colony or under British rule at the time. It was more of that background I think that they brought than anything else. So if you were frying chicken, we were eating curry goat okay or lamb if you have it. You might be having some type of a ethnic American fish dish where we were having fish and when I say fish when my mother cooked fish she cooked the fish. It was from the top to the tail everything was there. I can remember plucking the eyes out of the fish and my father eating them. So that was what they did and that's how we learned it. A lot of the upbringing was from that more strict nature and upbringing that they had. Story_ID: 638988 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] have any stories about growing up--now she grew up in Jamaica right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about growing up in Jamaica? Speaker 2: None that she shared with me. I think some of them she may have shared more with my sisters [Norma Clarke Mays and Karen Clarke] from the girl tip and piece but none that she really shared with me. Speaker 1: Were they town people or did they live out in rural areas? Speaker 2: No they were pretty much--they were town people but you have to understand in Jamaica is when you're town people--I mean I've been to, in my older years, I'd go back more often okay and I would visit at times my [maternal] grandmother [Lucille White (ph.)] 'til her death. There was a period of time when I didn't go and I remember I went back in I want to say it would have been '82 [1982] when she died. I went back to bury her. Her sister, my mother's aunt, still lived in that house at 15 Nightingale Avenue in Kingston [Jamaica]. Vineyard Town they called it. I remember right there in the yard they had trees that grows so many things that you could just reach up pick and eat you know. There's the mango trees in the yard which is a fruit and you just--when it was time for--when they ripe you just pick them from the tree and eat it. An ackee tree in the backyard, breadfruit trees okay and that was like right there in the quote city. So they would have considered themselves city people. People that lived up in the hills or are in the more interior part of the island mountainous areas at times they would just call them the country people which was somewhat--it was somewhat amusing that they would refer to them as the country folk or in the country. So if you went up to Trelawney [Jamaica] or places like that they'll tell you you're in the country which absent paved roads and some of the more stucco housing which was pretty much the same to me. Speaker 1: Okay what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 12th and she would have been born in Kingston. Speaker 1: Okay what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-four [1924]. Speaker 1: So she grew up in Kingston itself. Did she have a chance to finish school in Kingston? Speaker 2: She did some secretarial technical training school work there and then she at some point met my father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] and they had a child and he was a postman as they called it, we call it mailman here, he was a postman. Not sure if he rang twice when he went there but they subsequently married and at some point you know I want to say it might have been '43 [1943] or '45 [1945] somewhere in there 1944 or '45 [1945] he came to the United States and she would have come a year later. I may be off by a year it could have been sooner. Actually he sent for my mother and their daughter my oldest sister Norma [Norma Clarke Mays] and that was interesting because they things set up where there was a man who lived in the Detroit [Michigan] area his name was Mr. Orr, Ivan Orr [ph.] and he seemed to be the man amongst the West Indians at that time. If you got in touch with him or knew somebody who could get in touch with him once you got here he would help arrange for you to get here, get to Detroit, find you work, housing and that type of thing. He was just the man okay. Very nice elderly gentleman as I can recall, I can still see him in mind's eye coming to the house. He had a car, a Buick, something in the '50s [1950s] and blue and green color combinations were hot back then. Every time--let me tell you that car was so clean the outside of it you could eat off of it and he kept it shined--polished they didn't call it waxing. They polished the car. Every time he got out of it he wiped it down. When I tell you you could eat off of that car, you could eat off of that car. They were very--that's how they took care of possessions and things that they had. It was with great respect and reverence, okay. They didn't worship it but they believed in taking care of those things. Story_ID: 638989 Speaker 1: Now, was there any--what were some of the factors that drew Jamaicans to Detroit [Michigan]? We always hear people--West Indians and Jamaicans going to the East Coast in the United States and settling in. What drew them to Detroit? Speaker 2: Oh I think some people were drawn certainly by the automobile industry. The fact Detroit was a booming town--industrial town and there were jobs to be had. I think one of my father's [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] first jobs I believe was with Greyhound [The Greyhound Corporation; Greyhound Lines, Inc.] working in the station as a janitor. He worked as a bus driver for a period of time also then there came a time of course where he changed jobs. But jobs were plentiful here you had a large West Indian community and I think they blended well with the African American community at that time as well. So now when they first came he lived over on what had been called the north end of town. I really never understood why they called it the north end of town because it was actually on the east side of Detroit and it was going toward downtown. It wasn't in the northern part of the city as I knew and understood maybe at some point in time it may have been. But it was generally over there on Josephine [Street], Philadelphia [Street], Brush [Street], John R [Street], Oakland [Avenue] you know over in that area where 75 [Interstate 75] started to come through back in I want to say probably the '60s [1960s] and displaced some folk. But that's what was drawing them here and that was just a way to come here and like you said a lot of people stayed in the Florida area. A lot of people went to the East Coast, some went even further north into Canada into Toronto. The migration pattern or immigration patterns of people from the islands of Jamaica is just very interesting because it allowed that it was along the eastern seacoast or seaboard and up into Canada or it was Florida or they moved over into the Detroit area. I just thought that was just always interesting. You would think coming from that climate that they would seek a warmer climate. Speaker 1: I guess the political situation down south would probably be intolerable, I guess to someone from Jamaica. Speaker 2: Well I think Jamaicans were treated differently. They weren't seen as black people. I can remember in the late '60s [1960s] probably more so into the '70s [1970s], a clothing store I worked at, my father worked there also and got me a job there as a salesman and I remember the owner one day and they had a chain of these finer gentlemen stores. I remember a guy came in one day, a customer and he was looking around and the owner asked him if he could help him. He says, "I'm looking for that black salesman with the red hair, Tony [HistoryMaker Hugh Barrington Clarke, Jr.]." That's my nickname. Mr. Vanhorn [ph.] said to him, "Black? He's not black; he's Jamaican." So there was that distinction of course that was made. People--Africans or African Americans, black at the time, coloreds, Negroes whatever they were called back in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] were seen as, I think, different than the Jamaicans. People from Jamaica would come here, they were looking to make a start and they would make two and three jobs to start their life here to do things. Then the thought was that the American blacks would not do that and they were more interested in other cultural things that they were doing. So there was just always--it was a distinction and it was a different one and I always just thought it was odd. I just thought it was different okay that they could look and my father is brown skinned, he's a darker skinned man and they could look at him and he was okay because he was Jamaican. But someone who wasn't and didn't have the accent put them right there together who was an American black was seen as someone different. Speaker 1: Yeah it was the confusion around nationality, race and language and all kinds of things happened over here. Speaker 2: Well it is and you know this country to a certain extent I guess you could say it's built on that. It seems if it is not built on it there is always those divisions within ethnic groups as they look at people but it's no different I think than in other countries particularly over in Southeast Asia and those countries. The Chinese are looked upon one way, the Japanese and the Koreans another way. Generally the Koreans were thought to be beneath the Japanese and/or the Chinese. So it's I guess just set up everywhere even within the Arabic community. Different factions of religious groups are thought to be different and we see the wars that have gone on there. Speaker 1: Right, right we've got like the Shiites versus the Sunnis and Druze versus the Kurds, lots of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they all come from the same--you know so to speak but that's--I just thought it was always different; it was just a little different to me. Story_ID: 638990 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay same as yours. Speaker 2: Correct. November 18, 1912, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, 1912. Do you know anything about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: I know his father's name was Luther [Luther Clarke] but I knew--he had a brother named Oswald [Oswald Clarke (ph.)] but Oswald died early on, I think he had some liver disorder. There was my father. He had a brother named Allen [Allen Clarke (ph.)]. He had a sister named Vivian [Vivian Clarke (ph.)] and another sister named Idabelle [Idabelle Clarke Pickersgill (ph.)]. Idabelle actually came to the United States and lived with us for a period of time. Those are some of his family members that I remember--that I can recall. His brother Allen settled in New York. He and my father actually didn't speak and I would have been--I bet it was probably fifteen years ago maybe a little more twenty that I was visiting my sister in New York and she knew where he lived and we called him and I went and looked him up. It was so shocking to look at him and sit there and talk to him knowing that this man was my uncle. I think the thing that was more shocking about it is he and my father could have been twins with the exception of their skin color. Allen was my complexion and I'm sitting there looking at him. His facial features, his mannerisms everything it was just like my father and the only difference was their complexion. So it was just so strange sitting there looking at him. He was basically a light skinned version of my dad okay and it was just--I mean it was just so strange just sitting there. It's like you sit down and you're talking to yourself and that person is sitting over there in the chair. My Aunt Vivian I had met a few times when I was in Jamaica but I have more fonder memories of my Aunt Idabelle. Ms. Pickersgill [ph.] was her maiden [sic.] name. She was born in Panama, lived in Jamaica. She came and lived with us for a while and she would watch us when we'd come home from school, my sister Karen [Karen Clarke] and I, and sometime we were just so rude to her. I mean we were just sometimes little hellions and she would not discipline us but she would tell us, "I'll tell your dad." And we pretty much knew what that meant. But she was a wonderful woman and she would always tell me stories as I got older about my father and it was somewhat interesting because it just seems I was almost just like him and maybe it's from the way that I was raised. Like both my wives, my first wife and my current wife [Judith Brown Clarke] and even girlfriends you date they were always--you go to a restaurant and--, "How's your linguine?" "It's fine. Would you like to try some?" "Sure," and they want to go and give it to you after they've been eating on the fork, give it to you to take off the fork and eat. I would never do that, I would have them just put it on the plate and to this day I think it drives my wife mad. You know the (unclear) you kiss someone and you exchange orally fluids you know and that kind of thing as you're kissing someone but I won't drink after you. You know, "Here try this wine." "No I'll pour it in a glass," and they used to tell me my father was just like that. Barrington would set his cup way up on the top shelf so no one would touch it. If you drink out of Barrington's cup it doesn't matter how much you clean it, he won't drink out of it again. He had an aunt that they would give the kids the hard candy and she would--sometimes you see grandparents do it they would suck it down a little bit so it's a little smaller for you they said Barrington wouldn't take it. He would tell them, "No I don't want it with your one tooth on it." He just was particular like that, he was fussy like that but he was a very--he was just a neat and orderly person and that was it and I see a lot of that in me that I am the same way so I am my father's child there is no question about it. Some of those stories would just make me laugh and just drive me crazy and I would tell him some of those stories. He would get so upset. "Why she tell you those things?" I said, "Because I asked her and I wanted to know." But she was the one that had the jokes even in later years again as I was older and would go there and visit with her and spend some time with her and sit out on the veranda. We call it a front porch here, there it was a veranda and we would have our beverages out there and at that time obviously when I was old enough to drink we would have a little Jamaican rum. She had diabetes and her eyesight was failing but she would come out in British style and she would have the little tray with the glasses and the ice in it and the bottle of Appleton rum and you'd expect you'd have a bottle of Coke [Coca-Cola] or Pepsi but she may have pulled out a bottle of orange Nehi or grape soda. So you'd sit there and have your rum and grape soda which is an acquired taste but it was about not wanting to offend her or call it to her attention. We had at good times, good people. When I was there a lot of times it was to kind of take care of some business and look after her and get people to come in and clean and help her as her eyesight continued to fail. Probably the one good thing that would help her is the mongoose that would run across the house at night and the mongoose would chase away the snakes and the mice and the rats, okay. So, you--hey it's Jamaica, man; you do those things. Story_ID: 638991 Speaker 1: And her house where she [Clarke's paternal aunt, Idabelle Clarke Pickersgill (ph.)] lived was in Mountain View. It was the area of Kingston [Jamaica] they called it. Because the house and the neighborhood was near the base of the Blue Mountain so you could sit there and you could look off into the distance not too long a distance or too far a distance and look up into the mountains so they called it Mountain View. That was an area of town and I'd leave there and drive down to Vineyard Town [Kingston, Jamaica] where my Aunt Gat [ph.] lived or I would drive up to there was another part of town Forest View [Kingston, Jamaica] where I had cousins that lived and I met some cousins when I went in '82 [1982] for my grandmother's [Lucille White (ph.)] funeral that I had never met before. I had met his brother because his brother, Horace [ph.], lived in Toronto [Canada] and kept in touch pretty much with my mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] and my grandmother had raised them. So I was introduced to him and his wife and some of her sisters and it was a great experience. Again you get to meet people that you don't know and because they meet you and you're an American they just have this automatic impression of you and they just almost treat you like royalty such to the extent that you know what, you really don't need to do that. But it was great to go to their house. I loved staying at my grandmother's house 'cause you get up in the morning and you go outside to take your shower. There was no hot water but she would go right outside the door around there is a little makeshift place for you to take your shower right out there on the outside. You come in and have your breakfast and my grandmother and later my aunt they would make these massive breakfasts that you just go out somewhere and sit down afterwards. But we do a lot of walking there. I've met relatives one guy, Senior, to this day I don't know what his first and last name is, we just called him Senior. We would go out and go places and just have a good time and these again were people I met after my grandmother died once I was there to take care of it. That's my grandmother on my mother's side. Those are some of the things that I remember and just people treat you great, go places. They had a bar at a hotel--Sheraton it was on Knutsford, K-N-U-T-S-ford Boulevard in the New Kingston area [Kingston, Jamaica] and we went in one evening, it was like the happy hour and we ordered a drink and all you could eat they had a little buffet. We were in there so long that when we were done I paid for the bill and it was like twenty eight dollars. I thought it wasn't much, I was kind of surprised. I was somehow able to do the calculations because the drinks were fifty cents apiece. We were pretty much blown away that night and we left the next day to go to Montego Bay [Jamaica] to drive up and we checked into the hotel and the hotel had a sundeck on the roof and a pool. So I fell asleep in a chair from the night before and that was a horrible two days because I had sunburn on the front of my legs. I burned the hair off the front of my--I couldn't walk for two days because I was in such pain and we put the aloe butter on it and we would just watch it just melt, literally melt that's how bad I got burned. Okay, so, I learned after that you have one or two and you are done. Story_ID: 638992 Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about your father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] actually hearing Marcus Garvey speak in person. Speaker 2: One of the few times I was actually able to get him to do some talking and to speak about some things. I don't recall how the conversation started but I know I said something about Marcus Garvey and UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] and he started chuckling and he would tell me how as a boy--a young man in Jamaica that they would go to the park on Sunday afternoons and listen as Marcus Garvey would come and would speak and preach to them. Not preach in the church in a biblical sense but kind of preach to them about his beliefs and his stories and how inspiring at times that was and how uplifting it was. He would talk about how he would come and all of his regalia and his hats and his medals and the uniforms that he used to wear and sitting there and talking about it. As I had learned some things about Garvey in college, I mean it was just kind of like wow I wonder what would it would have been like to have been there. Whereas today we may wonder at some point if you sat and you talked to say Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] twenty years ago or Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] even better that was just so great and that was the feeling they had from listening to Marcus Garvey come on Sundays and talk. Speaker 1: Yeah he certainly was electrifying; I mean, he must have been to organize millions of people based on oratory primarily. Speaker 2: And I think getting them to understand their own social and economic power that they held within themselves that even to this day is more talk than it is action. You can up with any number of reasons why we don't and I tell people I try not to dwell on why we don't do things, I'd rather focus on doing them and working within your own and having people really understand the economic power that African Americans in this country and actually worldwide have. We are a billion dollar industry so to speak, billions of dollars and we don't--I think part of the things Garvey talked about is how you have to demand your own when you're looking and doing it and we don't. We just willy nilly give our money to companies and people and we don't demand anything back which is unfortunate. Speaker 1: Now was your father ever a member of the UNIA? Speaker 2: No he was never a member of that. He generally worked. I mean, with those numbers of kids you worked. You picked bananas, you worked the plantations. In Jamaica you had your machete and you chopped sugarcane or you picked bananas. I used to always listen to the song by [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, the 'Banana Boat Song' ['Day-O']. Speaker 1: Yeah now that was at its height during 1957 or so. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You were about three or four years old. Speaker 2: But even as I was older they had these songs and records and they would play them where you would hear them. I remember one day he explained it to me 'cause I didn't know they meant six and seven and eight hand bunch. Speaker 1: (Singing) "Six foot, seven foot, eight hand bunch," (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it's like a hand they grow like a hand you break them off right here at the wrist and your fingers are like the banana and how they would break that. The United Fruit Company [Chiquita Brands International, Inc.] was a big company in Jamaica and he would tell me how they would take the boat to Cuba. They picked bananas for the company and come back. Speaker 1: Yep, Garvey was a timekeeper for United Fruit early in his days, you know. Story_ID: 638993 Speaker 1: It's a fascinating history but over the years and a period of time it was very difficult to get my father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] to go back to Jamaica. For my sisters [Norma Clarke Mays and Karen Clarke] and I probably more so for me 'cause I traveled there more often. It was great it was a wonderful thing. That was my motherland okay; I knew that's where my family came from. So to step off the plane I would always bend over and I'd pat the ground and say it's good to be back home back on my rock and my island. But it was difficult to get him to go because the country was changing so much and it wasn't the way he remembered it and just wasn't going to go. Each time his sisters died--I remember when his sister Vivian [Vivian Clarke (ph.)] died he wasn't going to go 'cause he didn't want to go back to Jamaica. My mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] literally just went out and bought his airline ticket, packed his bag and told him, "You're going." Speaker 2: Did he have issues with the Manley [Michael Manley] government or-- Speaker 1: It wasn't so much that as much as the country was changing. It was production columns and it wasn't as pretty as he remembered it, it wasn't as lush as he remembered it. A lot of the strip mining for bauxite and aluminum products, it just robbed the land and it just wasn't as he recalled it and to him it was just--the people in general didn't matter whether it was a Labour Party [Jamaica Labour Party] or People's National Party who were in power. His view was it ran better when the British ran it and he would probably tell you that to this day. Story_ID: 638994 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Did they tell a story? Speaker 2: Nothing they were going to tell. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: (Laughter)I'm telling you man, a lot of times it's hard getting information out of them from back in those times. My mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] opens up a little more I think with my sister [Norma Clarke Mays] and I. I just think that's probably just not a conversation mother and son at times will have. But it's interesting because they have some friends that lived near them in the Detroit [Michigan] area the Andersons and one of the stories that I do know is that my father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] had taken Mrs. Anderson, her name was Vera [Vera Anderson (ph.)] I don't know what her maiden name was, and dated her at one time before he met my mother and they went out to a dance or something together which I just thought was so strange that my father actually went to a dance. I'm trying to figure out what it was exactly he did once he was there. He's not the party animal. My father was just one of those people he was the financial foundation of the family. It was his obligation to care for his family, it was his obligation to work and provide for his wife and his children and that was it. His only outside activities that I recall were church related as he was a Jehovah Witness so it would have been with Jehovah's Witnesses and that was it. There was work or he was doing things with the church. Occasionally he went to a baseball game or a football game. He was a big sports fan he even liked hockey but that was it that's what he did. A lot of times football games the Lions [Detroit Lions] or Tiger Stadium [Detroit, Michigan] or seeing the Tigers [Detroit Tigers]. Growing up I went with quote uncles who were actually like your godparents and so this is your uncle so and so and he would take me and we would go. Story_ID: 638995 Speaker 1: Well, when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their gifts, their dispositions who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] (laughter). Speaker 1: It's not surprising. Speaker 2: I just--his mannerisms, his personality, temperament at times, thoughts, just the way we do things. If we tell you we're not going to do it, we're not going to do it. You might as well stop, you're not going to change our minds, you're really going to irritate us if you try to, and once we make up our mind that's it. We're not closed minded but we've made our decision and that's that. Whereas my mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] at times was a little more open. I think I probably get a little more compassion from her but I think personality wise it's definitely my father no question about it. Speaker 1: Okay now how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have two sisters [Norma Clarke Mays and Karen Clarke]. Speaker 1: Two sisters okay. Speaker 2: Both older. Speaker 1: Both older all right. Story_ID: 638996 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Gosh you know it's interesting because my wife [Clarke's second wife, Judi Brown Clarke] asked my mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] and father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] that a couple months ago. If I think of some childhood memories they reflect around I can remember maybe being four or five and they used to have these West Indian parades in Detroit [Michigan]. Man that was just a great time. We used to march in them, my sister and I. My mother has also sent some old photographs of us with our little flags we'd carry. My oldest sister Norma [Norma Clarke Mays] was in the parade on the float as one of the pageant contestants. You would have these things then you'd be out at Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan] and you'd have picnics and what not so those things I can-- Speaker 1: There's still a big one I know I was here one year and there was a gentleman over on the east side that has a big warehouse full of costumes and things where they'd wear the junkanoo, the tall feathers that women would wear. Speaker 2: But wasn't anything like that. I mean you would dress, we had on a shirt and shorts and a little hat or whatever and you had your little flag that you would march in the parade. I think as I recall you were not only honoring your history and your ancestry but also the pride of being an American also. So I can remember being in those parades; I can remember cruises--trips on the Boblo boat. Story_ID: 638997 Speaker 1: As I started getting a little older a lot of memories revolve around neighborhood, playing baseball in the street okay just loved the Tigers [Detroit Tigers]. Man, it was great. There were people two houses away I think they ran the numbers at times. I can remember times seeing some of the Tigers over there. I remember seeing Gates Brown over there at times. Some of my better memories are what I call my hustling days growing up in Detroit [Michigan]. We didn't want for anything but as a kid you get a little mischievous and sometimes you're just a hustler. Those days I had to go to the barbershop, I'd walk around the corner two blocks away, Crawford's Barbershop [Detroit, Michigan]. It was on Hillsboro [Street] and Northfield [Street] and you'd pass Pugh's drugstore, P-U-G-H which is where guys would hang out at times and they would as we'd say would be trying to sing up on wine. They'd be out there crooning and trying to get a quarter or fifty cents or a dollar or something so they could get their bottle of wine. You'd pass by them and the little market that was there going to Crawford's Barbershop he had three chairs. Now I'd get there they opened at 8:00, I was there at 8:01. It took my parents [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] a long time--they couldn't figure out why I'd be gone three or four hours at the barbershop 'til they found out one day that I was selling my chair. Older guys would come in hey kid give you a dime or give you a quarter to go ahead of you. So you just sit there and just rake in quarters and dimes for a while, you might make a couple of dollars doing that. The only thing was they had three barbers but Graham [ph.] who was the younger barber was at the window his chair and he was my barber. Crawford who owned the place couldn't cut my hair; I had to go to Graham. So if you wanted Graham to cut your hair and you didn't want to wait you kind of had to go by me. So those were just always fun days and you could go to the store and buy you a penny candy, potato chips, pop whatever you did with that. Not for any particular purpose but just 'cause sometimes we could do it. My father would always come home from work at times and he was always good for ice cream and milk or excuse me ice cream and cookies and he would buy this box of sandwich cookies and there would be three rows of sandwich cookies in there--sandwich creme cookies and we would sell them. He couldn't figure out why at times he was buying two packs a week but we would sell them three for a nickel. That's just what my sister Karen [Karen Clarke] and I would do so we were just the early entrepreneurs or we would use them as payment for people to do our chores. We had to alternate weeks doing dishes so if we didn't want to do the dishes Carl [ph.] lived across the street, he'd be over, "Hey we'll give you some cookies man if you go wash the dishes for us." Carl would go bust the suds, he'd wash those dishes for you and you know we'd pay it back we'd give him a handful of cookies heck he was happy. I don't know that they didn't have cookies at their house but that's just how we would do things. So I'd just say we were little hustlers at the time. Story_ID: 638998 Speaker 1: A lot of it revolved around sports and mostly playing baseball because there were a number of us that lived in the neighborhood, right there on the street, within a few houses of each other. In those days when you went to a ballgame a lot of times you got all your equipment by going to special days at Tiger Stadium [Detroit, Michigan]. They had bat day, they had ball day, they had hat day so usually by sometime in July you had a baseball bat, you had a ball and I don't mean a softball you had an official hardball and you had your hat and we'd play baseball on the street or in the alley behind the house but a lot of times it was right there in the street. We didn't have any parks or schools nearby and during the day you'd play. I know the street had a bend in it at one point and if you hit it down there that far that was just automatically a homerun but if you hit it towards somebody house, man, it was funny you'd watch all the kids scatter and everybody's yelling and hollering no chips on windows and if you didn't want to hit the ball you're the one left standing there. So somebody generally paid your parents a visit to get their window fixed. Speaker 2: You were playing with a hardball in the street. Speaker 1: Absolutely but we were good players we could catch, we could throw. I think the difference between kids nowadays we didn't have all those video games but we learned how to take things, make things and play for our self. So if you didn't have a hardball you'd play baseball and if you didn't have anybody to play with that day you played catch. You took a tennis ball and you throw it against the stairs. Well the ball is going to go in a different direction so you learn good lateral movement and you'd watch the Tigers [Detroit Tigers], you wanted to be like Dick McAuliffe and make some of those dives of backhand pickup. Shortstops knew those things and we would immolate those guys when we played. In the '60s [1960s] when Willie Horton who was a big hero in Detroit [Michigan], product of Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan] would play number twenty-three and that big bat. I used to love when I got the Willie Horton bat. I didn't like the LK line bats because they were small and a little skinnier but when it was bat day and you got that Willie Horton bat man you had a bat because that was a bigger bat--big fat head on that bat 'cause Willie used to swat them out the ballpark and it was just great when you had one of those. I think some of my fondest memories are bat day at Tiger Stadium because when you'd start to rally, you got maybe ten, twelve however many thousand kids in the stands with a baseball bat pounded that bat up and down the concrete and you would just hear that whole ballpark reverberate, man. I swear sometimes you could see the stadium moving, we just had it rocking and going in there. When you go there in the winter Thanksgiving games I would get to go to as the women in the house were cooking dinner--Thanksgiving dinner and I would go my Uncle Al [Allen Clarke (ph.)] would take me. I remember we'd sit there and it's cold out there and you'd have on your--I don't know how I could even move there 'cause I was so stuffed up with clothes and sitting there kind of like this but it was great to be there. So those are some of the better memories and some of the more fond memories I have. Story_ID: 638999 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you just had so many visuals, so many images; so many things went on there that I just have so many fond memories of Detroit [Michigan] from going to the baseball games, going to the football games to the neighborhood entrepreneur. You'd see people come and go to a particular house where you knew they were picking up the numbers there as they call it. Or you'd see the other ones in their loud colors the pimps that lived in the neighborhood. Pimping was the thing back then and you name a color in the rainbow they'd wear it. I remember these shirts; I couldn't wait until I was old enough to get a gab shirt. They were gabardine material shirts and they had two pockets with flaps that were stitched down but they had them in every color in a rainbow and that's what they wore. Speaker 2: This is something--I grew up in Dayton [Ohio] and Detroit was seen as the source for many of our--the black male fashions that were largely Italian made items sold by Jewish merchants in stores in Dayton and in Detroit as well. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: What's your store downtown here, the one that's famous for the-- Speaker 1: In Detroit? Speaker 2: Yeah well you're in Lansing [Michigan] here but there's one in Detroit that they-- Speaker 1: But the shoe store was Cancellation Shoes, Hughes Hatcher [Hughes and Hatcher] you had downtown. You really had so many different stores but even the Cancellation shoe store because not only would you get your gab shirt and your good knit material pants but the shoes. We used to call them gypsy splits and it was a black leather slip on but it had a seam that ran up the side of the shoe that was stitched down. I tell you what man, those cats were sharp then and in their Electra 225 [Buick Electra] or deuce and a quarter cars they'd call it with the convertible top or even the Cadillacs at that time which looked more like boats as we look at cars today. Speaker 2: Landau roofs and all that stuff. Speaker 1: Well you had those images and you would see those people where we lived on the west side go up and down. Story_ID: 639000 Speaker 1: You didn't have to walk far where you would see the kids from the suburbs with their green hair or blue hair and crazy fashions going into the Riviera Theater [Grand Riviera Theater, Detroit, Michigan] on I think Saturday nights were their nights to go in there for their rock 'n' roll or whatever their culture was that they did. Ed Sullivan was big back then because a lot of the Motown [Motown Records] acts were on there. I was a huge Temptations fan. You'd get the TV Guide and you'd look and if you saw The Temptations were going to be on 'Ed Sullivan' ['The Ed Sullivan Show'], I'd be good that week, I didn't get into any trouble that week because I got to stay up extra late. Instead of being in bed at 8:30 I'd stay up until 9:00 because The Temptations were going to be on, I had earned it. Just watching them and their routines and sometimes you would see them on the street. You walk up to the five and ten cent store on Grand River [Avenue], Jupiters, Kresges [S.S. Kresge Company]. You might see one of them in there. So growing up in Detroit [Michigan] and even as I began to get older it wasn't uncommon that you could be somewhere and look over and there was a person of some notoriety. Speaker 2: Did the ball players live in the black community then? Speaker 1: Yeah they did, I mean Gates Brown played for the Tigers [Detroit Tigers] number twenty-six, left hand hitter. Speaker 2: Another big man like Horton [Willie Horton] yeah. Speaker 1: The Gator used to go two doors down and visit the family there Branch--Beatrice and Marvin Branch [ph.] was their name and they had three boys--four boys Marvin, Michael [Michael Branch (ph.)], Milton [Milton Branch (ph.)] and Derek [Derek Branch (ph.)]. Derek was more of my age group and Derek was one of the ones that we would play baseball with in the street. The Allens [ph.] next door didn't have--they had a daughter, the Montgomerys who were on the other side of me had a son, Steven [Steven Montgomery (ph.)], across the street in a two family flat there was the Gorey family and Obie [Obie Gorey (ph.)] was his name. Floyd [ph.] they had two boys, Carl [ph.] and I were good friends growing up. So you just had a bunch of kids in the neighborhood and you got together and you did things. Speaker 2: Now when you were coming along I guess you all had the biggest basketball player in the NBA [National Basketball Association] in those days. I guess the Shaq [Shaquille O'Neal] of those days Bob Lanier (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He came on maybe a little bit later. Speaker 2: Did he? Story_ID: 639001 Speaker 1: I'm talking now maybe '64 [1964] so I'm now ten, '65 [1965], '66 [1966] right in that era. Motown [Motown Records] was going you know for forty-nine cents you could go to Jupiters [Detroit, Michigan] and you'd get your little 45 rpm record of the latest Temptations [The Temptations] cut on it, deep purple label that said Gordy Records. That was just it with your little record player that you would play it on and you play the devil out of it that you'd wear the record out. Again there is just so many images, so many things and even in a school or even culturally my mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] and father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] were big believers in exposing us to a lot of things. So you know you might go to the Institute of Art [Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan], you might go to the Detroit Historical Museum [Detroit, Michigan] but to me there was nothing like going to Tiger Stadium [Detroit, Michigan] watching a baseball game. Then of course we had the riots and a lot of the sniping. Speaker 2: A lot is happening around the same time because you've got riots in '67 [1967]. That was the Algiers Motel incident and in '68 [1968] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. Speaker 1: Yep and the riots in '67 [1967], I can remember because the area of town we lived in was the Joy Road, Grand River [Avenue] area and you had a lot of looting of buildings going on over there and some of the businesses along Grand River. You had a lot of sniping going on. I remember times at night when my parents would have us, particularly my father, we had to sleep on the floor because of sniping. I can remember buildings being set ablaze because we'd be in the back room upstairs and you can look out and just see this massive amount of fire and that's what my father's true British language would come through. He looked out one day and saw it and suggested that somebody needed to call the fire brigade as of course they called it in Jamaica. I remember turning around looking at him, I didn't dare say anything. But you saw those things but during the daytime probably about the second day, third day we could sit on the porch maybe but you couldn't leave the porch. But we could watch people who had been looting coming up and down the street with items they had stolen. You could look across the street and see people coming and they'd been over on Hillsboro [Street] and Joy Road coming between houses with clothing or with a basket full of food that they had looted out of a store. I remember one incident in the rear down the alley--driving down the alley was Rip [ph.] was his name. He was another quote pimp in the area and he had this like powder blue Electra 225 deuce [Buick Electra] and a quarter and he'd been looting, he wasn't above looting. I remember he had a bolt of carpeting that was almost the same color of his car sticking out the backseat and of course one of the old wooden console combination radio, record player, TV sticking out the back. Maybe an hour later you saw him come and he had a backseat full of clothes. Of course a lot of times after things calmed down you might be someplace and these guys were walking down the street and they might have had ten, fifteen watches on their arm they were trying to sell you or clothing they were trying to sell people. So they quickly made it entrepreneurial but those images I remember, those are things I recall. Story_ID: 639002 Speaker 1: What happened after that is people started to leave that area. I know our friends the Floyds [ph.] across the street moved to the northwest side of Detroit [Michigan] on Outer Drive. They moved I think later that year in '67 [1967], we moved the following spring, summer in '68 [1968] out to the northwest side of Detroit and this is what you had. People who could move were moving out to the northwest side of Detroit where whites and Jewish people lived and they were moving further out to the north and west into the northern suburbs. They'd move across the eight mile [Eight Mile Road] and Jewish people would enter Oak Park [Michigan], Royal Oak [Michigan], Pleasant Ridge [Michigan] those places. They were always trying to move and it became apparent to me and I'm talking now '68 [1968] when we're out there that they're moving further and further away to those suburban communities running from black folk. I can remember seeing that neighborhood and that area. The street we moved to on Tracey [Street] just west of Vassar Drive started to populate over the years with African Americans. Many of whom still live there today the block that my parents [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] live in, we moved there in '68 [1968]. The next family to move in may have been in '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] next door to us Wilson Christian [ph.] and his wife. They had one child maybe at the time another one to come. She has since passed away but he still lives next door. So he's been a neighbor for forty some years. One house over across the street Billy [Billy Robinson (ph.)] and Carol Robinson [ph.] a younger couple moved in they still live there today, still friends. Wilson and Billy played an important part in my development as I started to grow now that I'm in my preteen or teenage years and getting older. They talk about it takes a village to raise a child, we kind of lived through it and basically because you had somebody in the neighborhood that watched out. We had it on Martindale [Street] when we lived on the west side and that was Ms. Maddox [ph.]. Ms. Maddox lived across the street. Story_ID: 639004 Speaker 1: Those-- What you just gave us were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up for the most part. Off camera we just talked about the Tigers [Detroit Tigers] won the World Series in '68 [1968] and that's a year after the riot. So there is a lot of activity going on in Detroit [Michigan], right? Speaker 2: And that was the year we had moved so I remember running up on Seven Mile [Road] jumping up and down cheering that the Tigers had won for any car that may have been passing by, I was just so happy. But before we moved and even living on the west side of Detroit and pre riot none of the people I knew had air conditioning in the house. So if it was hot out generally you had a fan, one of those little box fans you put in the window. But we would sleep downstairs in the living room on the floor. My father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] would bring the mattresses down and my sister and I would sleep like that with a fan going and the front door was open you would have a screen door and that screen door was locked but the door was open and we'd sleep there all night. You didn't worry about--there was a time you didn't have to worry about somebody breaking in your house like that, doing harm to you or your kids. Speaker 1: Did you feel there was a greater unity in the black community in those days? Speaker 2: Oh there was, people looked out for people. Like I said Ms. Maddox [ph.] did it over there. She had a son Jimmy [Jimmy Maddox (ph.)] who was in the [U.S.] Air Force so she shopped at Selfridge at the [U.S.] Air Force base [Selfridge Air Force Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan]. So when she came back we had to--Carl [ph.] and I had to help her unload her station wagon and we'd get a whole quarter for our trouble. But those were just things you did. We'd run around and we'd buy Hostess Twinkies 'cause that was the only thing we could buy that added up to a quarter so we wouldn't argue over the penny. But you just had so much community there, people watched out for the other people's kids. You knew who the neighborhood kids were, you knew who did and didn't belong so to speak and people were easy to reach out and to help people and to do things. There would be a group of us that would walk to school our elementary school Pattengill [Pattengill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan]. Story_ID: 639005 Speaker 1: What was your first school? Speaker 2: Pattengill Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Pattengill, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: P-A-T-T-E-N-G-I-L-L Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: And we'd walk to school it probably was maybe seven, eight, nine blocks to school. Go down the street on Martindale [Street], turn left go up Northfield [Street] 'til we got to Maplewood [Avenue]. It gets harder as I went to junior high as we called it then Webber [Webber Middle School; Sampson - Webber Leadership Academy, Detroit, Michigan] 'cause that was several blocks past Pattengill. Speaker 1: Now did you like school? Speaker 2: School was okay with me. I think when you are in elementary school you're probably too young to notice and for it to make a difference and you're doing things in this grade. You're getting your little A's and Bs, your parents are happy, everybody talks about how smart you are. My family always had high expectations for all of us but being the only boy the expectations were higher for me. Speaker 1: Okay now was there any special teachers or community figures that you admired in those days or who helped you out? Speaker 2: No not really. I can't think of any, I mean I can think of two off the top of my head at Pattengill. One was my third grade teacher Ms. Stanton [ph.]. Ms. Stanton had a chair in the front of the room and a belt okay. It was a thin belt about so wide a strap and if you act up she would bend you over the chair and you'd get your licking there and my mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] would bring us to school every year and she'd tell the teacher, "If they act up you've got my permission to whip their behind and then call me." So Ms. Stanton I remember, I always was good in Ms. Stanton's room. I remember Ms. Red [ph.], she was the library teacher and she really encouraged reading and children to read and to be interested in books and that was always something and I always admired her for that. We had a little penny candy store across the street you could get your licorice or your gum, she hated that and she would always walk around and she knew if she heard that wrapper coming and she would just call out, "Who's eating refreshments in my room?" And if she found you, you were in trouble or if you were talking it was, "Who's that gossiper in my room?" But they were able back then to keep more order in the class. I think children came from families that respect was more taught. It's demanded now, it was taught then and you understood that. You didn't back talk; you didn't dare back talk the teacher. That was a person that you respected at that time. Story_ID: 639006 Speaker 1: After Pattengill [Pattengill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] and I think for the sixth or seventh grade I went to a different school and I took a bus along with two kids from the Floyd [ph.] family out to the north side of Detroit [Michigan] to an all-white community to attend Dixon Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan]. That was an eye opening experience. We weren't wanted in that neighborhood or in that school by the students and I think at times maybe some of the staff. We would take a regular Detroit city bus straight out Joy Road to that area and we'd get off the bus and there was a group of kids there waiting to taunt and harass us from the time we got off the bus 'til the two blocks 'til we got to the school. Speaker 2: About how old were you? Speaker 1: Oh I'm probably twelve, eleven, twelve. Speaker 2: Okay so that's before you went to Webber [Webber Middle School; Sampson - Webber Leadership Academy, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 1: Yes and it was just to go that one year for that one grade and if it was the seventh grade it was because Webber didn't have the seventh grade of if it was for the sixth grade it's because Pattengill only went to the fifth grade, I can't remember. But those kids greeted us as we would get off the bus with a little dance routine as they said--and it was really ironic 'cause the dance routine was more like The Temptations walk they were doing but it was, "Ah ha the niggers, the niggers, ah ha the niggers." And that's what we would hear from the time we walked off the bus until we got to the school. Speaker 2: There was no teachers monitoring any of this, no officials of the school? It would seem like the situation it wouldn't take a genius to figure out that would be a sensitive situation but nobody stepped forward? Speaker 1: No, nobody. Speaker 2: 'Cause you were catching the hell actually. Do you think that the school administrators-- Speaker 1: I'm sure they knew. Speaker 2: --really were complicit with that kind of behavior that was going on (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think they you could say they were complicit to the extent I don't recall any of them being there to walk us and to stop any of that. Speaker 2: I mean it wouldn't take a genius to figure out that was going to happen. Speaker 1: But you know our parents [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarkes and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] told us, 'cause we would tell them about it, "Don't say anything to him. Just ignore them." This is all in this Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] age of peaceful nonviolence and we would do that. We would endure it now make no mistake had to be mad as hell but I was also smart enough to know that there are three or four of us kids and there are eight or nine of them. So there wasn't any illusion if we start anything they could probably kick our butt if anything there were more of them and we weren't really violent street type kids anyway. But we would just ignore them and somewhere along--and you know we would at times get taunted in class if the teacher wasn't in there. Story_ID: 639007 Speaker 1: Ms. Newton [ph.] was maybe the assistant principal or principal of the building [Dixon Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] at that time. She was a real tall kind of big white woman and she had on those old white women schoolmarm shoes, I remember she would lace up and wear. I remember we were doing something in class one day, it was some kind game we were playing, I remember she came in and told them to sit two whites down and put two other blacks up here or something like that. All this little racial stuff about what kids were in there doing. We didn't let it bother us and somewhere along that semester, at least halfway through, the kids who were taunting us I guess began to accept us because it stopped. A couple of them I can remember one kid's name was Kenny Rogers [ph.], the other one's name was Jimmy Ii [ph.] his last name was spelled capital I small I. I don't know he was kind of a big goofy guy. But they would actually protect us and if a white boy came up to me and tried to call me a name or start something they would fend him off and would threaten to beat him. They were I guess what you would call back then the greasers, the leather jackets and chains even back then sixth, seventh grade or whatever it was. Speaker 2: Like the Fonzie in 'Happy Days.' Speaker 1: Yeah and it stopped. People thought if they didn't say anything we became accepted and we were able to get through the rest of the school year. So there was my first real encounter with racism at its worst and learning how to deal with. Not letting my emotions get carried away, listening to what my mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] and father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] had told me because I know they would have been very disappointed if I'd gotten into a fight with one of them. They would have been upset. Because they sent you to school to learn; bad grades weren't tolerated. Speaker 2: So this is about 1966? Speaker 1: Yes '66 [1966]. Well you know it was probably actually--it would have to have been maybe before then. It was prior to-- Speaker 2: I just added twelve to fifty-four (laughter). Speaker 1: Well it could have been '65 [1965], '66 [1966] right in there. I'm trying to keep it right--and that could be because then that means I was probably in junior high at Webber [Webber Middle School; Sampson - Webber Leadership Academy, Detroit, Michigan] for two years because I know once we had moved I would have started Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] that fall taking a bus from the new place where we had moved downtown. So it was probably around '65 [1965], '66 [1966] right in that area. Speaker 2: Okay Speaker 1: But it was you know at the end of the semester and we were walking and half running and laughing to get to the bus stop. It wasn't only because school was out for the summer but we knew that was the last day that we had to get on that bus and go out there and be involved with those idiot ass racists. We knew that's what they were even at that young age. You grew up quick then. Speaker 2: Now did your grades suffer any from that situation? Speaker 1: Not that I can recall. Mom and dad wouldn't let that happen. If they thought it was because of that they would have been up to the school. My father didn't drive, my mother drove so my father generally was on the bus going to work but my mother was the one. She would have been up there and she would have raised cane and people look at her and they couldn't tell at first, my mother was fair skinned, and they couldn't tell but they didn't dare fool with her. She wasn't going to put up with it. So after that I went to Webber junior high school. Story_ID: 639008 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now where is Webber [Webber Middle School; Sampson - Webber Leadership Academy, Detroit, Michigan]? Is that in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, you gotta understand, neighborhood in Detroit could be fifteen blocks away. It was a walk there 'cause we walked from Martindale [Street] and Northfield [Street] to Tireman [Avenue] and Northfield and that was a good walk, that was a good piece. We didn't take no school bus, there was no bus to take we walked heat, cold, snow, put your boots on, put your hat on, put your scarf on you got out and you walked. We've been where one year had eight inches or six inches of snow nobody closed school you walked, you went to school. Junior high was probably an awkward time for me 'cause I was probably trying to learn myself, who I was and trying to be quote cool or grow up but knowing that wasn't going to really pass. So it was kind of--you know things just kind of go by kind of quickly in a fog. I remember my science teacher Mr. Cook [ph.], I remember Mr. Russell [ph.] the gym teacher, I really remembered him. He was a short black guy kind of powerfully built and boy did he have a swing with that paddle that had the holes drilled through it. When he got you, he got you. He gets you on that fleshy part of your rear end as you were bending over and I saw the big tough guys' eyes well up but they will fight those tears back and I would just always say, "Oh hell no, I'm not getting in no trouble here, oh no, no, no." I remember the boys gym and Webber was a newer building and it was like a little office and laundry room that separated the boys and girls gym and from time to time I'd see Mr. Russell and the girls gym teacher back there, I caught them once or twice. So he generally was okay with me. I think the big change for me was really when we moved and I started high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Now when you were at Webber though two things happened, there is a riot in '67 [1967], there is also the death of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '68 [1968]. How did your family react to the death of Dr. King? Speaker 2: Well there was--people understood what he was trying to do. My folks [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] weren't going to really show a whole lot of anger toward us but I remember sitting at the kitchen table when that news flash came on. We had paneling in the kitchen--the kitchen was paneled and I remember I had--I can't remember if we were eating dinner but I know I had a knife in my hand and I remember sticking it at the wall 'cause I was just so angry about that and why. Why? A lot of things I just internalized or in watching some of the news programs were programs you kind of get your way through it. Speaker 1: I know why. Speaker 2: You'd see your way through some things but you still just always carried it with you. Because we saw great things that he was trying to do, we understood what he was trying to do. As we would see those images on that little oval screen on that wooden TV in black and white and you would watch and hear those things and they're just images. I at times would flashback to the experience that going to school at Dixon [Dixon Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] being taunted like that. But you know things--I don't know maybe it made me a better person I'm not sure I can't say. But I know to this day I've only had two fights. I always sought ways to try to work out conflict. Story_ID: 639009 Speaker 1: But the big thing was for me was after we moved we were in a new house and then going to high school. I was a little scared at first 'cause Cass was a big school but it was one of the elite schools in the city--in the county. Speaker 2: Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] is like one of the, I guess, the most--there's a lot of significant alumni. Speaker 1: See and it used to be Cass and Commerce [High School of Commerce, Detroit, Michigan] but I'm pretty sure the time I was there, it was simply Cass Tech. Speaker 2: It would have been the fall that you started Cass Tech that the Tigers [Detroit Tigers] won the World Series, right? Speaker 1: Yeah Speaker 2: We talked about that off camera a little bit but that meant a lot to you. Speaker 1: It sure did. But Cass was fun and I had it two to eight, I mean this was great. My first class was at probably around nine something but I wasn't getting out of school until 3:45, I hated it. It was like we were the last ones there. No it would have been the two to ten okay, as they called it, second hour to tenth hour and that long bus ride going on to four o'clock. But Cass was just great. I grew, I matured there. I learned things that my folks [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] probably would be pissed off to know I did learn there. But Cass was so--I mean the school was so cosmopolitan I mean you had inner city blacks there, you had well to do blacks there, you had white students from the city there, you had white students from the suburbs there. Everybody was about learning, making the best that you could be. My tenth grade teacher Mr. Lowery [ph.] was great but I remember three teachers really well. Ms. Smith [ph.] who was our history teacher; I think she was probably a radical in her day. Man could she teach history, did she make it interesting, did I just want to do well in there and that same year I had-- Speaker 2: Was she a black teacher? Speaker 1: No she was white. Speaker 2: White okay Speaker 1: And I had Ms. Abrams [ph.] for civics. Speaker 2: A Jewish teacher? Speaker 1: She probably was you know I was probably ignorant toward that at that time. I remember I had an office--I was in a business program at Cass. At Cass you settled into a program which may have been your major. I was in business administration, you had a program: chemistry, biology, science and arts. Those people generally became your doctors. You had one, home economics or aerospace technology, I mean just a whole--graphic arts, air cooling and refrigeration, performing arts it was like a little college. I remember I had this office machines class and typing, I didn't care much about typing and I just couldn't get it. I just couldn't stop looking at my hands but if something broke I would fix it and I think that's probably why I got as high a grade in the class as I did. Ms. Snyder [ph.] always recognized me for that and she wrote a little something in my yearbook about it. I remember Ms. Malone [ph.] my accounting teacher she was rough--she was hard but you were going to learn accounting Cass was that kind of school. My counselor Mr. White [Ken White (ph.)], we kind of had a love/hate relationship going. He was a black male but he wouldn't let you get away with anything. As I said my mother was fair skinned. Now you've got to understand this time now '68 [1968], '69 [1969] or did I start high school in '69 [1969] okay you have a lot of the protests going on. You're into the black power age, the Panthers [Black Panther Party], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] all of these groups going on and in my little half behind militant days so I thought--I remember every time my mother came up to school I would never walk with her. She was too fair skinned; she wasn't black. Plus it's your mother coming up to the school you know you don't want to be caught with your mother. Story_ID: 639010 Speaker 1: But I remember one instance where I skipped school one day. I probably was in eleventh grade or I could have been in the twelfth grade can't remember. Speaker 2: Do you know why you skipped? Speaker 1: Oh yeah shoot my sister [Norma Clarke Mays] was at Henry Ford [Henry Ford High School, Detroit, Michigan]. They had some cuties that went to Henry Ford. We used to have some skip parties at the house man. If Henry Ford didn't have school and we did but Henry Ford didn't have school that day so I knew what that meant the party was on. My folks [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] were gone to work by nine and at 9:02 the party was getting ready to start. So I would skip and stay home and party with them I mean that's what that was about. My sister had good hand writing and she would write the notes for me to get back in the class. I remember one day I got called up to the office--to my counselor's office. So I kind of go diddy bopping up there and through a big study hall was his office and I remember I'm getting ready to say, "Yeah what's up Mr. White?" And I stuck one foot in and as I leaned forward I could catch this image that there was somebody else in the room 'cause Mr. White was right here. I could catch there was somebody there then my eyes fixed on his desk of which there was a desk pad and one other item: a half folded piece of paper. I knew then I was busted okay 'cause as I got in I saw there was my mother and I knew that was the note my sister wrote. Busted (laughter). But what they did is they determined and this is where people like Ken White [ph.] earned his stripes as a counselor. Not like some counselors you have nowadays in schools, he earned his stripes as a counselor because he and my mother figured out I had too much time on my hands and that they needed to do something about it. Speaker 2: So in other words you were bored maybe in school, you needed to focus? Speaker 1: So what they did is they changed my schedule. Now I had a one to four, first class at eight I was done by 11:45 and they got me a job so I worked a co-op program at an insurance company Mutual Benefit Life [Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company], 28 West Adams Street just off Woodward Avenue downtown Detroit [Michigan] a few blocks from Cass [Cass Technical High School] and I'd work there from one to five as a code office boy. I did the mail and that kind of thing. The insurance company was probably on two or three floors so you collect the mail just general office work is what I did man that was great. I was going to school in the morning, I was getting out for lunch, I was working a job, sometimes I could study there, I could go home and get my homework done and at the end of the week I got a paycheck. Life was good, life was good back then. I had come out of my militant--I was out of my militant period. This insurance company was all whites that worked there. There were no blacks that worked there, they had no black insurance agents and there was a contrast between two of them there that I became friendly with. One was Bill Walton [ph.], he was like the number two guy there. A very nice guy, very business like but he was okay. Then there was Frank Zoline [ph.] who had changed his name 'cause his name was actually--his birth name was Francesco Luigi Zolini [ph.]. Frank was just a party animal and we just hit it off real well. But like I said I had gotten out of that militant period and you've got to remember I'm not too far removed from these episodes at Dixon [Dixon Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] but the people there were very nice to me. They treated me as an equal and when I grieved about something they grieved. I think one of the only things we probably disagreed on Mr. Walton and I was on Muhammad Ali. I thought he was just the best boxer around he thought he was a loud mouth and I would just say yeah but he knocked them out. You began to, I think, develop relationships and I began to learn the importance of having relationships outside of your own community with people who may be in a position to assist you somewhere down the road. Story_ID: 639011 Speaker 1: Now, anything else about--now did you run for class office at Cass [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] or anything like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was too busy partying. I didn't know what class president meant; I didn't have time for that. We would come in the building now this is now eleventh grade now you've got to think guys that I'm running with are older than me I'm young, I'm fifteen in the eleventh grade. But these were nice guys who lived out in the area not far from us and my parents [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] knew them and had met their parents 'cause that what you did back then. I couldn't tell mama I'm going out with Keith [ph.]. Well Keith who? Kids nowadays they don't even know their buddy's last name. You didn't do that back then. But you know on Fridays you come in the front of the building and go to the third floor that's kind of where people hung out. You find out where all the parties were and they had these groups then in college you had fraternities these were like pre fraternities. So you were either a pre Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], a pre Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] or a pre Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and you had your sweater and this stuff. I wasn't in any of those groups 'cause I could never make up my mind which one but I was buddies with all of them. So I ran with everybody okay. One guy, Keith, would come and pick me up he was very nice polite my mother was okay with me going out with him and we'd get another guy. You get in the car and the first thing you do you ante up. You put in your two dollars for gas, for your beer okay. We'd drive by--and usually parties were held at hotels in ballrooms that's where kids had parties then. Again these pre fraternity groups as they called themselves and those would be in the downtown area and so we'd go by Cass, you'd find a wino and he'd go get you--you give the wino the money they'd go in and get you a six pack of Colt 45, you give him a can of beer, life was good and that's how you partied and did it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean sometimes you get a bottle of wine. I got introduced to all the rock gut wine I wanted to back then, you know. Speaker 1: Ripple and-- Speaker 2: The Ripple, the Richards Wild Irish Rose, Boone's Farm, and Akadama Plum. When you want to be upscale you got the Akadama Plum. Then if you were just hardcore and you'd just have to break down and get the MD 20/20. Speaker 1: Mad Dog. Speaker 2: Okay that was it; I was a Mad Dog man. Ladies sometimes it was a little too strong for them so I would buy a can of Tahitian Treat and they cut it with that. So I was more into party animal atmosphere and at times at Cass some of the walkouts that we would stage for various reasons the war or militancy. It's a good day let's have a walkout 'cause it's too much pepper in the food and we don't want to be here today anyway. But we did a lot of those things. Story_ID: 639012 Speaker 1: I have a note here that you were impressed by the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] as well. Speaker 2: Well back during that time of the militancy period. I thought I was--I was kind of quote down with it and I understood what they were and trying to again find myself, carve out my own little niche. So I thought I was like a Black Panther. I had the little newspapers, Huey Speaks [ph.]; I'd get off at the bus stop in the morning and trying to sell those. Speaker 1: Okay so you actually were selling the papers. Were you like attached to one of the Panther organizations? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: How'd you get your papers? Speaker 2: I wasn't, I'd get them from somebody man I mean that was just you'd be out there doing it like you were doing something. Sometimes I didn't have but a couple of them, you might say I was perpetrating. But what was so--I have to laugh now and I guess at some point my folks may well find out but they always wanted me to wear a hat on my head. I used to get nose bleeds so I had to have a hat on all the time. So what I would do, I started wearing a black tam and I'd have it pulled to the side. They just thought it was great, I was wearing a hat every day, had something on my head. Well as a gift they went out and bought me a black leather coat and you had your black gloves for the winter. So here I am with the black tam and the black leather coat playing the role. Speaker 1: That made you a Panther (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah see and they knew no different about it. I don't think it ever occurred to them. My mother [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke] and father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] were not dumb people but I just don't think that it ever occurred to them. I don't think it ever came--they ever put that part of it together. Now my mother would you tell you she did but I don't think they ever did because she would have snatched that hat off of me quicker than you could shake a stick. Story_ID: 639013 Speaker 1: When you were a senior, what then were your prospects? What did you see your future career as being and where were you going to go to college? Had you thought all that out? Speaker 2: Oh I knew then, I knew apparently from middle school [Webber Middle School; Sampson - Webber Leadership Academy, Detroit, Michigan] I was going to be lawyer. There was never any question about it; I was going to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: Now did you have-- Were there role models that you admired during this period (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had my godmother Kathleen Copeland [ph.] who was an attorney. She wasn't one of the flamboyant attorneys that you read about with tough cases. She did probate real estate, trust and wills kind of work but she made a damn great living at it. She had an office in Highland Park [Michigan]. Her husband, my godfather Alphonso Copeland [ph.], had a real estate license and they had real estate office that worked there. I would go to the office on Saturdays and clean up to make a little extra money that's what I did. And I just started watching 'Perry Mason' all of the time and it was just like, man look at Perry do this and with the influence from my godmother and people she knew and the respect that she had that was just a career path that I was going down. Now you've got to also remember going on at this time and actually as I was younger you could watch me do something, you could watch me break a window but by the time you finished talking to me I had you convinced it wasn't me. So because you could talk good and/or quote lie good, people said, "Man, you'd make a great lawyer; he'd be a great lawyer." So it was just funny but they also had the war going on and before we had moved, I remember Mr. Orr [Ivan Orr (ph.)] being over one evening and I could hear them in the house as I sat on the porch coming with ways, we're still a few years off, on how they're going to make sure I don't get drafted and go to the war. Mr. Orr sure had some strange ideas. He talked about them dying a little blond patch in my hair, I've got red hair right, put a patch in it and carry some garlic and chicken bones so that they would think I was voodoo just all kinds of things. It was such an unpopular war that I think my father [Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] finally just came down and said, "Well you know it doesn't matter. We'll send him off to his [maternal] grandmother [Lucille White (ph.)] and take him up in the countryside in the hills [in Jamaica] and they'll never find him." Well I'm proud to say I wasn't a draft dodger. By the time I registered for the draft and went down they weren't drafting anymore. I had a 4-H or a 4-F; I think it was 4-F applicant not ready for processing. So as the wars came along and went I was too young for one, which would have been Vietnam [Vietnam War], and then anything after that I became too old for or you got a deferment. Speaker 1: So you graduated from Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] in what? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: In 1971 and you had to register when you turned eighteen so that would have been like a couple of years later? Speaker 2: That would have been two years later, '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Yeah the war was winding down. Speaker 2: They were winding down which was just fantastic at that time. But no I knew from Cass that I was going to be a lawyer one way or another didn't quite know how I was going to do it but I knew I was going to do that. Story_ID: 639014 Speaker 1: Now you went to Oakland Community College [Oakland Community College - Orchard Ridge Campus, Farmington Hills, Michigan]. Speaker 2: I went to community college instead of straight to a four year institution because my parents [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] had decided that at sixteen I was too young to go away to school. Now never mind that I was going to turn seventeen in another month and a half but they ended up it was like that was it so I ended up going to Oakland Community College for two years. A great experience, you got to go to college, do college level work and still got to live at home. Responsibilities were just real simple, you've got to take care of chores and stuff at the house. Basically I took care of the house, something I broke I fixed it. I worked a part-time job. I studied. I had encouragement from people in the neighborhood from Wilson Christian [ph.] that lived over here on our left to Billy Robinson [ph.] who--and Wilson was a metallurgist that was his line of work. Billy Rob lived across the street. He was a mailman. He worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. His wife worked for hospital. We had another family, Betty [ph.] and Al [ph.]. Betty was a teacher, Al was a convicted felon who drove a truck, threw some great parties at their house, great parties, great group of friends that came over. Al taught me how to barbeque using a birch log and a tub. They didn't use no charcoal and I would get to come over and spin records for their people when they had their parties. So it was just great but they all kept me grounded and focused and I was like, I can't do this anymore, they were there to prop me up, they were there to tell me--Billy Rob would take me into his basement and tell me, "Boy I'll kick your behind if you think you're dropping out and you're stopping now," and then he'd get up in my face. Or Wilson had a more subtle approach about it but they made sure I stayed focused because they knew I had a goal that I was trying to do and they were going to make sure I made it. Speaker 1: Now what did you take at Oakland? Speaker 2: I stuck with the business program there and for those requirements wasn't--it wasn't real hard. I didn't have to take a lot of chemistry and biology and I shied away from it. I took what I needed to complete the program, not to say the work wasn't hard, and I made sure I took a lot of courses that would transfer to a four year institution. Again an exposure--the campus I went to was out in Farmington Hills [Michigan] an affluent suburb east north of Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Are there different campuses for Oakland Community College? Speaker 2: Yes they had Auburn Hills Campus [Oakland Community College - Auburn Hills Campus, Auburn Hills, Michigan], they had Orchard Ridge Campus where I was at and there was a third campus and I can't quite remember what it was. But I did such good work there that my counselor unbeknownst to me entered me in some scholarship competition. So as I'm completing my second year and ready to graduate I kept getting these letters from colleges all over the country. Every college in Michigan I got a letter from except one and they were offering scholarships. They all said oh congratulations honorable mention in the upper division scholarship competition; I had no idea what the hell they were talking about. I just heard from schools everywhere: William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], schools in Utah. I'd laugh because the letters would come to [HistoryMaker] Hugh Barrington Clarke, Jr. I'm laughing 'cause I'm like, "Yeah, I bet they don't know what I look like." It's not a typical name for a brother back then okay in '73 [1973]. So I asked my counselor one day I just went on and asked him, "Man what is this? What is this you did?" Well he told me he entered my name in this contest which you only have a winner everybody else got honorable mention. The student that won had a 3.9 GPA [grade point average], I came in second I guess basically but I got honorable mention, I had a 3.89 GPA. The only school I didn't hear from was Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]. Now I was getting kind of arrogant back then. Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] wants me. I don't blame you, I would to, or the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida] wherever. But you get to a point you've got to make a decision and I was like "What the hell is Wayne State's problem? What have they got that they can't offer me anything for?" Plus you know I had it kind of good at home, had a girlfriend down the street, life was good. Story_ID: 639015 Speaker 1: Instead of accepting the scholarship offers of the major universities I went to another major university, I went to Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan]. I had two years to finish and I went to Wayne State. Another growth experience for me. Speaker 2: How so? Speaker 1: Well you go from the community college [Oakland Community College - Orchard Ridge Campus, Farmington Hills, Michigan], the work is challenging, but it's not that hard. So you go from spending your extra time in the rathskeller which is like the luncheon area playing bid whist you know a lot of times in the afternoon to now the expectations of more. Whereas for example you could have written an eight page paper in a class well now they may want eighty or eighteen so the stakes were higher and you had to just buckle down and get to it. Concepts became more difficult, professors really had less time. They couldn't spoon feed you this stuff. You had to keep up and you had to get through those books and they told you we may not cover chapter twenty-two to twenty-eight but it's on the syllabus. It's fair game for midterm or finals. That's when I went into--I majored then into the criminal justice program because that was more geared toward what I wanted to do and actually it was real interesting because some of the courses I took, criminal law, evidence were the same course that I would take in law school--subsequently take in law school and evidence used the same book. The first year I went I was in law school and I saw people with the book and it was the same book I had but it was those courses weren't like regular textbook courses where you'd read a chapter and you would talk about things. It had the casebook method of study where you read a case and you were expected to break the case down and figure why the court ruled the way they did. If it was a criminal law course were the elements for the crime here, what was missing, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera? It was through one of those courses that I met two attorneys. One of them was Lawrence Greene and I had him for a class but I'd gotten a traffic ticket coming up to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan]. One of the neighbor's--girl in the neighborhood and I brought her up to Michigan State. She needed a ride and I drove her up here and back--up to Michigan State and back. I got a traffic ticket on the way in Howell, Michigan. So when I got back I gave it to him 'cause he was an attorney to take care--thought he took care of it. Fine everything was good, I'm coming up on graduation, I'm interviewing for a job at Wayne State Public Safety or Police Department. I complete the interview, I'm now downstairs being finger printed and photographed for the background check and a lieutenant put a teletype in my face. Now the lieutenant's name was Dennis Reefer like the slang term for marijuana, Reefer was his name. But the teletype indicated there was a criminal bench warrant issued for my arrest. I had no idea and we had to wait there at Wayne State because they had to call the state police. They weren't going to take me--drive me forty-five minutes or whatever to Howell so I had to wait for the state police to come to go to the Livingston County Jail in Howell. Again Howell was the seat of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]. I got to make a phone call while I was there but what struck me is that in all of the Ku Klux Klan whatever you heard about this county and basically it was an all white county the deputy who was booking me in was African American. I was like, "What are you doing here?" But I was able to make a couple of phone calls and our state senator at the time Jack Faxon called the judge. So he called the jail and I got let out on a hundred dollar bond. My sister and my girlfriend finagled a way to get my spare set of keys to get my car and come get me. I had to go home and tell my parents [Gwendolyn Khouri Clarke and Hugh Barrington Clarke, Sr.] where I'd been all day 'cause they didn't know. They knew I had that job interview but they hadn't heard from me. I had to tell them I was in jail. Mind you it was because I didn't show up on a traffic ticket that just didn't go over well in my house. The disappointment for just something as simple as that was pretty evident and obvious and I always vowed from then and again I'd never do it again. My father drove me crazy if he saw I had a traffic ticket, a parking ticket he would worry me to death until I paid the ticket 'cause he thought I was going to go back to jail again. But the other attorney's name was William Wolfram [William G. Wolfram] and he was the one who told me about Cooley Law School [Thomas M. Cooley Law School; Western Michigan University Thomas M. Cooley Law School, Lansing, Michigan]. So after graduation I applied and came to Cooley. Actually I had a year off between. I was managing women's clothing stores, Winkelman's, a big large chain in Michigan at that time and I was in management there before I went to law school. Story_ID: 639016 Speaker 1: What was it about Cooley [Thomas M. Cooley Law School; Western Michigan University Thomas M. Cooley Law School, Lansing, Michigan] that appealed to you? Speaker 2: School I could get in well plus (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well your grades were still pretty good (unclear). Speaker 2: I had good grades. My test scores on the LSAT weren't that high and Cooley was a new school. They didn't accept me at first. The other reason I like Cooley is that it would have gotten me out of Detroit [Michigan]. If I was going to succeed I knew I had to be out of the City of Detroit 'cause there were just too many distractions; too much stuff going on to take my attention away from what I needed to focus on. Speaker 1: So by that time I guess having gone to high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] there, community college [Oakland Community College - Orchard Ridge Campus, Farmington Hills, Michigan] and college [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] it was time to leave. Speaker 2: Well really it was and being around town there were just too many distractions somebody call and there is a party, boom let's go. But Cooley presented an issue and it presented a challenge. Now my godmother Ms. Copeland [Kathleen Copeland (ph.)] knew a judge in Wayne County [Michigan], Myron Wahls [Myron Hastings Wahls] who knew the president of the law school [Thomas E. Brennan]. So a phone call got made and the next thing I know I've got a letter saying I was admitted and Labor Day '76 [1976] was the last load coming up here to Lansing [Michigan] to go to law school. It presented another just totally weird set of circumstances that tested my growth again. The first day that Friday was orientation, I'd come from a city that's majority African American, classroom one hundred fifty students, just one: me. I remember saying, "No, that's okay. Brothers ain't coming to no orientation. They'll be here Monday." I wasn't even worried about it. No those brothers will be here Monday, they're just late. I walked in the class Monday, looked around, sat down and I said from that old song, "If you hear any noise it's just me and the boys" ['Mothership Connection'], and we're just going to have to get it on right now. So this is just an environment I was not used to. It was an environment just never had been into, didn't know anything about this. Speaker 1: How did the professors treat you? Speaker 2: The professors were fine, I was getting, I think, somewhat preferential treatment at times. Work was still demanded of me and I think they saw the talent there. I would sometimes be a little late getting to class and rather than disrupt the class and go up and look for a seat I'd sit on the floor near the door until break and then go get a chair. I remember the president of the law school came in one day and he looked at me and he just stopped the class and he took attendance and did what he did and he looked at me and he said, "You of all people need to be up there." I was just never late again 'cause I didn't--I know what he had done to let me in and I didn't want to let him down. But it was just an environment--I didn't know anybody, I didn't have any friends, I didn't even know where there was a black barber at up here and I was just, "Shoot I won't be here long. As soon as I graduate I'm done, I'm back in Detroit." I think at that time there may have been four or five other blacks in the law school period 'cause I remember toward the end of that orientation seeing some faces crowded around the door looking but they weren't from Lansing either. One of them I made friends with subsequently was from the Flint [Michigan] area but he was like a year and a half ahead of me. But again I didn't know anybody here. It was like I'm in the wilderness, I'm cut off but I knew what I came to do and how I had to get it accomplished and that's what I said I had to do. Story_ID: 639017 Speaker 1: Now did you become friends with any of the Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] black students? Speaker 2: No I'm telling you the first couple of semesters here, I didn't do anything. I'd go to class, I'd go home, I studied all day. I finally found a little part-time job but it was a study job. I was a credit authorizer at night in a department store, nobody was calling in over their limit, I could sit there and read. But I knew that--I couldn't distract myself because I understood that I've got to make it the first couple of semesters. Now after that it's a different program because now you know what it takes. The first year is a learning year and it really is because the briefs you're writing are a long page like this (gesture). By the second end of that first semester or second semester you're really starting to do them up in the margin they've shrunk. You're starting to learn what it is but you still have to test yourself because you get your grades back and for example, criminal law I got a B. Well why didn't I get an A? You have to learn it's not answer the question you have to also tell them why it's not something else. So this is a learning process you go through and while there we had a number of African American students who would come but they couldn't make it long they'd flunk out. The president of the school Tom Brennan [Thomas E. Brennan] he was catching, I think, some flak from some of the black judges in Detroit [Michigan] and he asked me one day, I was working at the parking ramp next to the school, if I could organize the brothers. From that I founded at Cooley Law School [Thomas M. Cooley Law School; Western Michigan University Thomas M. Cooley Law School, Lansing, Michigan] the black law student association that operates through today. Speaker 1: BLSA [Black Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] they call it. Speaker 2: Right I don't know why 'cause there is no A after the B. I still 'til to this day work with them, try and help the students help the organization. They have last year honored me by among other things they have a mentorship program for incoming students that is the Hugh Barrington Clarke [HistoryMaker Hugh Barrington Clarke, Jr.] mentorship program. So they've been good to me and I've try to watch out and help them because I know what it's like. I mean they have a number--their numbers have grown and you have a large number of African American students there but it's still not like home. Cooley is a school that a former supreme court justice [on the Michigan Supreme Court] had an idea that he wanted to do and he went out and did it. When I came to Cooley they did not have full accreditation by the bar yet. So as they took a chance on me, I was taking a chance on them. Story_ID: 639018 Speaker 1: Now how was the school founded? Speaker 2: Thomas Brennan [Thomas E. Brennan] was a supreme court justice [on the Michigan Supreme Court] and just had this vision that he wanted to open a law school. He wanted to have a law school for working class folk and he had it set up in three different terms. You either took classes from eight to twelve--eight to ten or ten to twelve [o'clock] was the morning, one to three or three to five was the afternoon, six to eight, eight to ten. So you know what, if you worked during the day for say the State of Michigan, his view was if you want to go to law school why should you have to quit your job to do it. You could then enroll at Cooley [Thomas M. Cooley Law School; Western Michigan University Thomas M. Cooley Law School, Lansing, Michigan] and be in the evening division and take your classes six to eight, eight to ten and that was his vision and he worked at it and I must admire him for doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's see. Were there any special professors or mentors at Cooley that you remember that-- Speaker 2: We had one Peter Jason [Peter D. Jason]. He was our contracts professor and I remember there was a Halloween party that the school had or a student bar group had. I remember talking to him at that party and he was from Detroit [Michigan]. He actually worked in the law department I believe it was for the City of Detroit. So I felt cool there's somebody I can talk to. But he had a way about himself in class. You'd get up, you'd recite on the case and you think you just did something and he'd look at you, "Yeah so what, what does that mean?" So we were just standing there checking him out and I said, "Why do you do that? Why do you just tell people so what, what does that mean?" He said, "I want you to think." He said, "I want you to look beyond what's written in the case and think." I said, "You know that makes sense." And he took me aside and he told me, he says, "The key to getting through here is you cannot be on academic probation more than two consecutive terms 'cause then you flunk out." He says, "If you get on the first term or one term you better get off the second," and that always stuck with me, always stuck with me. I won't say he picked on me in class but he made me work. Elliot Glicksman was my evidence professor and he was just a guru and expert in evidence and he made you work. To this day, almost thirty years later, if I have an evidentiary issue that I'm not sure about in a case with a trial coming up to this day I still call him to get his advice and to make sure I'm on the right track and he loves it too. I know he does. But he's my guru, he is a person I reach out and call. So there's a relationship that was made from law school that had endured almost thirty years. There is any number of other ones. There were no black professors that I recall; I don't recall having any when I was there. They have black professors there now, they've had over the years but all that happened after pretty much after I left--after I graduated. But it was an opportunity that had been extended to me that I wanted to make sure that I was able to do and to complete. Story_ID: 639019 Speaker 1: Now there is a note here, I guess, and I don't know if this is in the right place but after you graduated--was it after you graduated that you represented Willie Horton? Speaker 2: I never represented Willie Horton. What that is is back in the day when I was living in Detroit [Michigan] and then college and working Willie Horton--I worked at his clothing store, I was still at the clothing store, Van Horn's menswear [Van Horn, Inc.], and Willie Horton's wife [Gloria Horton] used to come in and I used to wait on her and then Willie would come into town and I'd wait on him. Hell of a customer to wait on man, she was great. She'd come in, they're on a road trip, "I need eight white shirts and four ties." Willie would come in and buy a suit and you had to actually take two suits and do it. He had a thirty-four inch waist but he had these huge thighs that you had to put him in a thirty-eight waist pants to fit the thighs and then bring the pockets together with a back seam like that. But Willie had a club it was called Club 23 [Willie Horton Club 23]. It was on Livernois [Avenue] and Chalfonte [Street] Detroit and he gave me a VIP card. So I would go out and that's where at times I would go. If I went to a movie or wherever with a girlfriend or whoever I was out with and we'd stop and have a drink we'd go there and I'd go sit in the back in the VIP room where other ballplayers would be. Be they from the Tigers [Detroit Tigers] or from one of the visiting teams. I mean I remember being there one evening and just having this long conversation with Earl Wilson who used to pitch for the Tigers that was in there. But Willie was a great guy and that's why I said you it's the one thing about growing up in Detroit as opposed to other places, you would run into these people so much you were never awestruck. It wasn't any big deal to see--many times I'd go back to Detroit and I'd be in a record store at Green Eight Shopping Center [Oak Park, Michigan] and there was Joe Dumars, okay. So, that's how that went. Story_ID: 639020 Speaker 1: What happened after you graduated from law school [Thomas M. Cooley Law School; Western Michigan University Thomas M. Cooley Law School, Lansing, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I was working with the legislature [Michigan Legislature] at that time. I worked as a special consultant to the Senate Judiciary Committee during my last part of law school and then after I graduated I was promoted to associate general counsel. I had the privilege of working with some of the top legal minds of the state. The senator I worked closely with was Basil Brown [Basil W. Brown]. I learned a lot from Basil and legislation on how to try a case, what you look for and to just take control when you walk in that courtroom. I did that for a couple of years and decided I wanted to go in private practice because I wanted to try cases. I wanted to get my Perry Mason moment out, and one day I just decided well you know what that's it I'm leaving. I didn't have client one (laughter) but I latched on with a guy Paul Rosenbaum [Paul A. Rosenbaum]. Paul was a former chair of the House Judiciary Committee and he gave me some space to practice out of for six months that he wouldn't charge me for. Thought it was a good deal and then when I saw the space I knew he got me. We had to actually refinish it, redecorate it, carpet it, tape holes in the walls and whatnot, put in a ceiling but that was my practice and nobody in this town gave me anything, I worked for everything I got, had to. Hustling clients out of bars, you go to a bar you figure somebody there is going to drink too much, that's a drunk driving case waiting to happen. Getting on court appointed list and doing things. But you know I learned that a lot of times people get in trouble not by their own doing and that police at times take advantage of people they go over the line and that's where I cut my teeth at doing criminal defense work making sure people's rights were protected. For a number of years here, man police hated me. I mean literally I think I can say that. They got along with the other attorneys but I just wasn't their person and that's why I tell them I wasn't going to let them take advantage of people, particularly black folk, just any way they wanted. They were going to have to tangle with me in a courtroom. I tell them that, "First I'm going to destroy you as a witness then if you make me mad I'm going to destroy you as a person." And would just be on and just go after them. Every little way I could use the law to find to beat them I did. Speaker 1: Now one question up front, were you tempted to go back to Detroit [Michigan] after you got your degree? Speaker 2: You know initially I was, but things--contacts I had made again you know we're back to relationships you build, contacts I made at the legislature let me see that some of the judges who knew who I was treated me fair, and I thought well you know what I might as well start here where I have some input with some people and it just kind of grew from there. It was easier for them to do things or one or two lawyers I know might steer some cases my way but I just worked at it and worked at it. After a couple of years you get to know lawyers around town. Story_ID: 639021 Speaker 1: There were a group of black attorneys in town more of them worked for the state either as attorneys or hearing officers. Speaker 2: That's because it being the state capital. Speaker 1: Absolutely okay they had a group of us who worked in the private sector and I remember one attorney Clinton Canady [Clinton Canady III] and I, and the firm he was working with, Dunnings and Canady [Dunnings and Canady, P.C.], they had a Christmas every year and they invited all of the black court workers, attorneys they knew of--black attorneys in town and we all got together and we were just so amazed that how many black attorneys there were in town that it was from that that we founded and started the Lansing Black Lawyers Association [Davis - Dunnings Bar Association] which was the first association made up of all black attorneys in this county. Speaker 2: Now are you affiliated with the National Bar Association or-- Speaker 1: They're affiliated with the National Bar. I believe their affiliation continues to today the Wolverine Bar Association out of Detroit [Michigan]. But our makeup here is to try and mentor and bring along African American attorneys that are here and to work with students at Cooley [Thomas M. Cooley Law School; Western Michigan University Thomas M. Cooley Law School, Lansing, Michigan]. The association now does a mentoring program with them and preparing them to take the bar exam and they've been very successful at that. Speaker 2: That's something that didn't exist when you came along. Speaker 1: Oh absolutely not. It was just me. Speaker 2: So you've done something to make the way a little bit more plain for others. Speaker 1: You have to try and help those that come behind you, you have to and I understood what it was like not being from Lansing [Michigan], to come to a town that I don't know anybody. I don't even know where the dry cleaners is but to have people that can help you, can guide you through it and to get you through the law school process. Because what people have to understand is a whole new way of thinking when you're in law school. It's training you to think like a lawyer and you have to get to that level, you have to go through that process. So it's great now that the law school has the mentorship program to help the young students. I was just honored really that they chose me to name their program after and to continue to work with those students but we have to expand beyond that. We as African Americans attorneys have to look back and see if we can help these students in law school and sometimes you have to help them more than talking to them and mentoring them but by hiring them, bringing them into your practice to work. Speaker 2: Do you also encourage black students to become lawyers? Speaker 1: Oh absolutely I mean you have to do that and I'm so proud of the school up here because they actually have community service programs where they go out into the local high schools and mentor and work with some of the students there be it a group of girls who go out--women will go out and work with some of the girls or female students in our local schools there and I think it's so great they give back. My law clerk that's with me now is the vice president I believe of a BLSA organization [Black Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association]. So you know we're always looking and then there's the black lawyers and that association is looking. They have to--the early days we did it as a networking group at least to network amongst ourselves and then I remember we started having these receptions where we began to network with our white counterparts in the larger multi lawyer firms who were not hiring African American lawyers. One firm perhaps had. So it became a way to showcase them to let them--other firms know, look we're here so that the judges know we're here and the general public and that's continued. I think we've been going now here I want to say maybe twenty-five years with the black lawyers association. The law student association I believe we started--I started that in 1978 so they're up on thirty years. I'm just proud of the progress that they've made and the fact that you can look back and it's like a legacy, it's something that you had a hand in creating that is still going strong today and they still understand that concept of trying to help and bring those along that need their help. Speaker 2: Okay. So are you--would you consider yourself primarily a criminal defense lawyer? Speaker 1: I'm a general practitioner who does a lot of criminal defense work. That's my expertise, that's the area I cut my teeth on. Again there weren't a lot of people throwing cases my way. The larger firms weren't going to take me because I went to Cooley so somehow at that time people didn't think it was as good a law school as some of the others and that provided the extra umph for me when I went in a courtroom because now here's somebody looking down their nose at me 'cause I went to Cooley and I said, well I'm going to show you what I know. One way to do that is you beat them in the courtroom. If you beat people enough they start to know and hear about you and that's how you gain their respect. Some of us have to do it harder than others but it was a challenge I looked forward to and it is a challenge I tell young lawyers every day don't be afraid of. Because you've got to test your mettle against these people and once they know you're going to stand up to them and they respect you then you're accepted. And now you have to look back and you've got to bring that next person along. Story_ID: 639022 Speaker 1: Does Lansing [Michigan] have a--I know, Lansing is an interesting place because of Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan]. A lot of-- there's a black community here but there is also like a black community created by the university. Lots of athletes some of them get in the issues and things. It's a place where black entertainers come in and entertain quite often because of the black student population combining with the local population. Speaker 2: You have a lot of good things that go on here with the university being here and the Wharton Center for Performing Arts [Clifton and Dolores Wharton Center for the Performing Arts, East Lansing, Michigan]. You have a lot of Broadway shows that come here as well. It has created a venue not only for white entertainers but for some of your more prominent African American entertainers and Broadway shows as well to be here. The students on the campus have an opportunity to not only attend those but to work with them and they have a law school there on the campus now as well. Detroit College of Law that was in Detroit [Michigan] has now fully merged with Michigan State University and I think it's now the Detroit College of Law at Michigan State University or the Michigan State University Detroit College of Law [Michigan State University College of Law, East Lansing, Michigan]. I'm not sure which one. It is starting to get too many letters. They're moving them around. But that's just another booster shot in the arm for this community as well. Speaker 1: Now does Lansing have a history of police brutality against African Americans? Speaker 2: I don't think it's as widespread or prominent as we know it to exist in other places. The black community here is interesting. They are--what they did back in the day in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], they kind of have made progress and some will tell you that about the first black teacher, the first black firefighter or the first black police officer and they've moved forward but I think there seemed to have been a period of time where they were kind of stagnant at one and I used to say that if you've got one why can't you have two. People here--black people here actually used to call me a racist. Speaker 1: For wanting more than one? Speaker 2: Exactly Speaker 1: Too greedy. Speaker 2: Well you know again I'm coming from Detroit. It's not uncommon to see for example a city council made up of nine members and five of them might be African American or a Recorder's Court in the City of Detroit might have had for example twenty judges of which fifteen may have been black whereas you come to Lansing and you have a city council of eight and you see none at that time or maybe one had been and now isn't. You see a court system where you have no African Americans, to a point where in the early '90s [1990s] out of eighteen judges countywide, you have three black judges to now you only have one and may be in danger of having none. Yeah back then I didn't think it was too much to pad your numbers that they have more because African Americans certainly are qualified to sit in these positions. We're on the cusp right now of looking at potentially the first African American nominee from a major party to nationally run for president of the United States [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. I am so glad that I'm able to see it but I'm more glad that my eleven year old son [Hugh Barrington Clarke IV] can see that. That's history that again that is something that if you work your goals at you can accomplish. Story_ID: 639023 Speaker 1: I want to talk about some of your I guess--there are some noted, notable cases here some are notable because of the people involved more so but just walk us through maybe three cases of some significance (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have three clients that stand out. One of them was the late rapper Tupac Shakur; Tupac is a former client. Tupac was on the campus of Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] several years ago. He did a concert and an incident occurred-- Speaker 1: This is like back in the '90s [1990s] I guess right? Speaker 2: Yes and an incident occurred where he was arrested and charged with felonious assault which is a four year felony offense. The allegation was he threatened somebody with a baseball bat. I had a young African American woman working for me as my secretary. I remember I came in one day and she was calling me and she was--I came in and she was just so excited to tell me that Watani Tchyemba called from Atlanta, Georgia and wanted me to represent Tupac Shakur and I'm looking at her like who, to do what? I won't take the Fifth [Fifth Amendment], I didn't know who Tupac Shakur was and she was busy trying to explain to me who he was and some of the movies he had done and I said, "Well, okay we'll see." She really encouraged me to take the case. So I called this gentleman back in Atlanta who actually happened to be Mr. Shakur's agent or lawyer and he filled me in on some of the details and I went out to the police station in East Lansing [Michigan] lockup. I talked to him, got him through the arraignment, got him bailed out and we ended up resolving the case over the next few months. It took us a few months because of the notoriety to get the case resolved to where it should have been. It was right after he walked out of court here at a sentencing that he went to New York [New York] to face some criminal sexual conduct charges there that he got convicted in New York. Actually during the trial I believe at one point, he was shot several times but he ended up being convicted of criminal sexual assault in New York and was sentenced to prison. We exchanged a couple of letters during that time. Then there was of course the time he got out and he was in Las Vegas [Nevada] and was shot and killed which was I think unfortunate. It was always let's be on high alert when Tupac was coming 'cause once we got the call--he knew when he had to be here for court appearances. I'd pick him up at the airport and get him settled in the hotel, kind of keep an eye on him and make sure he wasn't getting into any trouble while he was here on my watch. Speaker 1: What was your impression of Tupac Shakur as a person basically? Speaker 2: You know if you stripped away that gangster rap persona mentality he was really kind of a quiet, thoughtful guy. We had times to discuss where he wanted his movie career to go, the roles he wanted to play. He wanted to play an attorney; he wanted to play a lawyer in a movie. He didn't mind some of the parts he had undertaken; obviously, it was rather lucrative for him. But he wanted to expand his horizon and kind of get out of that on the acting piece and I just thought that was real interesting some of those kinds of conversations that we would have. But he would come in--he'd come to town, we'd get him checked in the hotel, he'd have a travelling partner with him his road manager I guess he was, and he caused me no trouble, no problems, nothing. I mean it was always fun when he came if he had a new something coming out he'd bring me some demo CDs to listen to and we'd talk--we'd chat about the industry, his life and his music. I think he wanted to turn some things around. He'd expressed concern about his record and I mean his criminal record and we would have some talks and with Tupac you have to kind of leave some of this public nonsense alone. You don't have to emulate and do what you talk about in your music. So we unfortunately just never got a chance to see him fully develop and go in the direction he wanted to go from the film industry point of view. Speaker 1: Okay you were telling me before we rolled that sometimes when you're angry you play Tupac. Speaker 2: I do that and I have done that for years. I'll get a little angry and ticked off and if I want to blow off some steam of course a lot of times I make sure there is nobody home or I put my headphones on because obviously some of the language in his songs are kind of raw, misogynistic at times but I'll just put it on and crank it up and just get it out of my system that way. So somehow his music is therapeutic for me. Speaker 1: And you didn't know who he was in the beginning? Speaker 2: I had no idea so we went from being a stranger to, to this day he's still kind of my therapist. Speaker 1: It's interesting at one time you were perpetrating [sic.] being a Panther with the beret and black leather jacket and his mother Afeni Shakur who is a Black Panther [Black Panther Party] in New York (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 639024 Speaker 1: Who is the next person? Speaker 2: Well one of the other ones of notoriety--all my clients are have some notoriety one way or another but I had the opportunity to represent Muhsin Muhammad. Speaker 1: Now he's a wide receiver who played with the Carolina Panthers and the Bears (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well actually he played--he was standout receiver here at Michigan State University [East Lasing, Michigan] and then went--he was drafted in the NFL [National Football League] played for the Carolina Panthers. The last two seasons he played with the Chicago Bears and I learned today he just resigned with the Carolina Panthers. I represented him in a civil matter, paternity matter if you will. He had a son that he was led from his college days to believe was his and his parents had raised him to accept responsibility. He believed the child was his; he treated the child as his son, raised him as his son, and would bring him down to Carolina [North Carolina] with his new wife [Christa Muhammad]. He didn't marry this child's mother but brought him into the family and would take him into the locker room. People began, as the child got older, to look at him and just point out how he didn't bear a lot of resemblance. He was able to get some DNA testing done to determine the child wasn't his. That was heartbreaking for him. I want to say the child may have been eight, nine years old at the time so they had bonded. That part was the simple part the more difficult part became now trying to get the affidavit of parentage overturned and going through the legal aspect of it. Not quite an area I was real familiar with but again we get back to relationships and contacts. Mr. Muhammad's agent at that time Ajili Hodari was the brother of an old friend of mine that I used to work at the legislature [Michigan Legislature] with, Malik Hodari. So they called here and were shopping around looking for an attorney and he must have thought the way he obviously talked to his brother Malik who wasn't living in the area at any time and he said, "You need to call Hugh Clarke [HistoryMaker Hugh Barrington Clarke, Jr.]." I knew who Muhsin was from his playing days here in Michigan State and I tell you, what a delightful young man. Any rookie going into the NFL should have the opportunity to meet and spend a season with Muhsin Muhammad. He is not one of those players you're going to read about with an entourage of people. You're not going to read about him at the clubs or getting shot or getting into a fight or none of that nonsense. He is just--that's just not his makeup and he understands who he is, what he's doing and how lucky he is to be doing that and a lot of that is a credit to his mother [Marian Phillips] and father [Muhsin Muhammad I]. His parents raised him and he is just well grounded and he raised his kids that way. I understand he and his wife now also have adopted some children to bring kids who wouldn't have a chance to a situation where they can have a chance. We were, over a series of months and hearings and filing briefs, successful in convincing the court--the local court here--that based on the law and its interpretation and some other new case law had come out that the affidavit of parentage had to be set aside. It's unfortunate but it had to happen because you can't continue to live a lie in your life. That was difficult for him, it was difficult for his wife, but she accompanied him here on a lot of hearings. Speaker 1: Does he still maintain a relationship with the boy even though he is not really officially his son? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. So--but it's one of those things he had to come to grips with. Story_ID: 639025 Speaker 1: The third one I guess if we will is a more current one I'm working on. This client's name is Claude McCollum. Mr. McCollum--back in 2005 there was a rather brutal and sadistic homicide of a community college professor [Carolyn Kronenberg] here in Lansing [Michigan]. Mr. McCollum, a homeless African American male, about twenty-eight at the time, who was taking classes at that time at the college [Lansing Community College, Lansing, Michigan], was questioned; a weird interview process took place where people started talking about sleepwalking and he ends up being charged with the crime. He is incarcerated for most of 2005. The trial takes place early January 2006 after about a week and a half, two weeks of trial he's convicted of first degree murder, criminal sexual conduct first degree. He is subsequently sentenced to spend the rest of his life in prison. This is despite all his protestations that he didn't commit this crime. Surprisingly it's also a conviction, despite a lack of physical evidence. Fingerprints at the scene were not his. DNA found under the victim's nails, not his. They've got nothing to connect him except a single fiber which could have--could have come from the victim's sweater that they found on his clothing. They built the case--prosecution built the case around this statement which they call a confession. How a jury even convicts him by listening to this is beyond me because most of the stuff he got wrong. April 2006, he is sentenced to life in prison. Nobody thinks anything about it. Spring, summer 2007, you have a series of homicides committed in Lansing all white women--older white women who'd been home alone. One of the women was able to escape. Her dog was barking and the killer left. They were able to use that description from her to make an arrest in that case. Some point during that investigation--mind you, I was not representing Mr. McCollum during his trial--his appellate process is going on but now some strange things are starting to surface and happen. His family comes to me--his brother does. They hire me, I'm basically like the family spokesman trying to help them out. Somewhere with this person that's arrested for these series of homicides here I believe what happened is there were some statements made by him that led to some physical evidence that matched him in the killing of this college professor. The long and short of it is as determined that perhaps Mr. McCollum didn't commit this crime. The prosecutor joins the appellate attorney in asking the court of appeals to vacate the conviction and then send it back to the trial court. Once that's done I can now enter my appearance in this case. Despite kicking and screaming by the prosecutor's office here in the county we get Mr. McCollum brought from prison back to the county jail which was step one. Then I go on to step two and I get the judge to release him on bond. This all happens late October 2007. He spent thirty-four months in prison for a crime he didn't commit. Actually this is in September. In October, December the case is dismissed. We have filed a lawsuit against the county, the officers, the community college, everybody because one of the things we found out: Claude McCollum the time the crime was being committed in a building on the campus was in the building next door in the technology and learning center. They had him on video tape and a state police officer took the video tape, broke it down and wrote a report March 28, 2005 that said Claude McCollum, if the time on his swipe card in and out of the computer lab are correct, could not have committed the crime. The prosecutor's office claimed that they didn't get that report until the day the author of the report testified which would be ten months after he wrote the report. They claim they gave it to his trial attorney. His trial attorney says he never got it. We then start finding out more and more things that kept coming out to now we've found out there was a second report done in 2007 that's more detailed than the first report. That with new computer equipment and new software, this guy Sergeant Young [James Young] with the state police reaches the same conclusion not only that Claude couldn't have committed the crime but that Claude during the time the crime is committed, it's a tight little window of fifteen minutes somewhere between 8:30 and 8:45 on January 23, 2005, that this crime occurs, they have Claude on tape from 7:30 to 9:30 in the lobby of the technology building. Story_ID: 639026 Speaker 1: You know, get into--the more we get into this case and now that various defendants are filing answers to the complaint the prosecutor's office has always maintained that they got this report or somehow they didn't know about this until the trial. We've now found out during the--as people are filing answers to the complaint one of the defendants was the author of the report Detective Young [James Young]. His report indicates that on March 28, 2005 when he authored that report he called the lead investigator from the college [Lansing Community College, Lansing, Michigan], Randy Ball [ph.], over, went through the report with him, looked at the tape, his findings. We also find out that November 1, 2005 the assistant prosecutor who tried the case [Eric Matwiejczyk], according to Detective Young he got a subpoena for trial, called the prosecutor over and went over it with him. Nobody said anything. They let an innocent man go on trial. Speaker 2: Yeah this is an outrage. I don't know--it happens--you read about this stuff happening all the time. Did they ever give any excuse? Speaker 1: Sure they did according to Detective Young and his answer to the complaint the assistant prosecutor told him, well I'm not going to ask you any questions about that because your numbers have been discredited by a math professor at the community college who was never called to trial. Once they had it worked out it was him that was it they didn't care about anything else. They claimed they had a confession. It was no confession. The guy says things--Mr. McCollum [Claude McCollum] was a little challenged cognitively so they were able to lead and suggest things to him. I mean he maintained initially in the interview he wasn't there, didn't do it, but they would ask him questions. Part of this death was an object that had been inserted into the vagina of the victim [Carolyn Kronenberg]. Now they asked him--they somehow get around to that with him or what was the object. First he said a glass paperweight. That wasn't it. Then at some point he says a computer mouse. Well that wasn't it. So now they somehow get him--could it have been a remote control, well yeah, and that's how this stuff goes. When asked the color of underwear, he got that wrong. He said white; they were purple. They were able to get a judge to issue the charges by saying he knew things about the crime and the crime scene that only the killer would know: position of the body, head wounds. If that's true--if he did tell them those things now that we know that he was in another building and wasn't there how would he have known? Can you say police? Can you say suggestion? And that's where we are on that case and consumes a lot of my time but that's okay. Speaker 2: It's still going on? Speaker 1: It's still--well the civil end of it is ongoing. We're in the--we filed civil suit. Speaker 2: But he is a free man? Speaker 1: He's free; he's out, but it's so difficult for him to find work. He's still having trouble finding work. Speaker 2: So he needs a settlement. Speaker 1: And we've been successful getting his record expunged. He was on a criminal sex registry. Once you get on those things you're done but we've gotten him cleaned up off of all of those things. We were able to get him a new driver's license, get him registered to vote which was important to him to be able to try and go back and participate and do things. So we're still working through this. Those are the three cases and they represent three different I think areas and stages in my development and growth as an attorney. This one will be--this one will probably be the one I'll remember most 'cause it was just such an egregious action that took place to anybody, particularly an African American. The other guy's got family here but he's homeless. Like I said he was challenged cognitively to be locked up like that and to not care. Story_ID: 639027 Speaker 1: I have a note here that in 1989 you founded Hugh Clarke and Associates [Hugh B. Clarke and Associates]. That's your firm that you currently (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a law firm. Yeah I practiced with other attorneys from time to time but from '89 [1989] forward it's pretty much just been me. I've had other attorneys in and out at times but sometimes things don't work out. So I'm just kind of just a one horse shop here. Speaker 1: Now you currently are embroiled in a hot issue with the Lansing Board of Education. You're the-- Speaker 2: I see you're reading the newspaper here. Speaker 1: Yes I mean the back of your head is in the newspaper today (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah and I gave them grief about that. Speaker 1: The president of the school board is wiping his glasses off and looking very concerned. Speaker 2: We have--I was appointed to the board of education here in Lansing [Michigan] I'll say back in 2003. I've been--I was honored by the public once the term I was appointed to expired. The community here in Lansing honored me by reelecting me or electing me for that position for a full six year term. That election--also was election time for the mayor of our city [Virgil Bernero]. So it's always good to tell him that's kind of fun because actually I got more votes than the mayor. I outed the mayor--I bested the mayor by about two thousand or so votes and two thousand or so votes from my nearest competitor in this race. We elected three people that year. I served as vice president two years and this year, 2008, the board honored me again by electing me as their president. And as public school districts go, you go from one battle to the other. The first roughly two months of my presidency went rather smoothly. I was like I can do this. But we have three high schools that are not making adequate yearly progress under the No Child Left Behind Act [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001]. They haven't for five years they are now in phase five. Our current superintendent Dr. Wallace [T.C. Wallace] was just hired a few months ago, seven months ago, so part of his challenge from the board was to develop a plan for these high schools to improve. There are only so many things you can do. They have recently--his administration developed a plan which was recently presented a couple of days ago to the No Child Left Behind committee and it calls for the high schools--two of the three high schools to be reconstituted which under the contract with the teachers that they voted for effectively means there is a closure of the building but you reopen it and you interview staff. Nobody is guaranteed a right to go back to that building to teach that course. So, as you can imagine, there is a lot of uproar about it. I think some of it is being stoked unnecessarily. People that have talked to me about it I simply say to them, "Well, if you have a plan why haven't you presented it in five years, why have you not done anything, why are you criticizing one from the administration because we finally have something here to work with?" And then that's kind of where we are right now in the beginning stages there. It may look different by the time we make a decision, we may do something different but you have to have a point you start talking from. The third high school rather than reconstitute it, they're looking to do a pilot program which would extend the hours or day of the school and the students seeing if they can do things. That school is being done at Sexton [J.W. Sexton High School, Lansing, Michigan] because they're closer to making AYP [adequate yearly progress] than the other two. But people and teachers and staff, students and parents have to understand that we cannot continue to operate three high schools that are not making adequate yearly progress that that just isn't going to happen. Story_ID: 639028 Speaker 1: How many high schools are in Lansing [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Lansing only has three high schools. Speaker 1: Okay and all three of them are? Speaker 2: All three of them. Sexton [J.W. Sexton High School, Lansing, Michigan] is the smaller of them at about eight hundred students, Eastern [Eastern High School, Lansing, Michigan] has about twelve hundred or thirteen hundred students, Everett [Everett High School, Lansing, Michigan] has about fifteen hundred to sixteen hundred students. So we're talking about roughly thirty-four hundred to thirty-five hundred students. Now that doesn't mean that students aren't learning. I know some people may watch and this and say what's he talking about? There are so many ways your school can't make adequate yearly progress [under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001] but what we're seeing with ours is the graduation rate at one of the schools is not where it should be. They are not in the 80th percentile, they are not graduating 80 percent of their students. And the test scores are not where they should be in math and English language arts. These students come and deserve quality education. Now that is not to say and let me make this clear we have students who graduate from Lansing high schools that do very well that are 4. and 4.6 students on the AP [advanced placement] scale. We have students who have been accepted to the United States Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland], West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan]. We have a number of students that go on to college, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and a lot of the historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs] see our students. But we have to deal with the fact that some of them aren't making it and when you're not making adequate yearly progress once you enter phase five the state can actually take over your school. The state expects us to submit a plan so the superintendent and his staff have developed a plan and as I said it is a draft, it is a living document. By the time any final approval is made it may look different but the problem is that when you start talking change people just get crazy, it's something that they can't handle and I always tell people well remember particularly those of us old enough to remember how many of you wouldn't--didn't want to give up that IBM Selectric typewriter when computers came out. You'd have heck on your hands trying to get that computer away from them now. But we have to make some changes. It's not going to be easy, but you know that's what we have to do. The train has left the station and you can either get on the train or you can get off. It is just that simple. These are the challenges though that we face in public education in our urban centers. So it's not only whether or not your buildings are making adequate yearly progress but you also have budget issues you have to worry about. The State of Michigan several years ago under a former governor passed legislation which is school's a choice so people can opt out of their own district and go to the suburban districts so we see flight of a lot of students. You look at a lot of the suburban high schools around us and it's so funny 'cause you look at their sports teams, basketball teams and I know those are Lansing kids. But you know my own son [Hugh Barrington Clarke IV] is a product of and currently enrolled in a public middle school in Lansing and I'm proud to say he's doing very well, he's at 3.8. So I don't want anybody to think that you can't get a good education in Lansing because you can but we've got some challenges we have to face and people just have to step up to the plate. We cannot continue to do business as usual with young people's lives at stake. Story_ID: 639029 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well how much tape you got left? Speaker 1: We have another half case in the car. I don't know. Speaker 2: Well one hope and concern is that we as a community have to understand it's okay to remember your history and your past and how you came here, but you've got to put that aside and have to understand ain't nobody going to give you anything. We have to work hard; we have to start developing expectations for our young people. We have to as parents stop thinking, well my child is going to be a basketball player. Not everybody is the next Magic Johnson. These professional sports teams don't take many 'cause first of all your kid's got to get into college. We have to get out of the gang mentality; we have to get out of the hip hop dress mentality. Nobody is going to hire you and nobody wants to see you walking down the street with your underwear hanging out. I tell my son [Hugh Barrington Clarke IV] he used to talk about things and I keep trying to guide him toward being an orthopedic surgeon 'cause if you look at how these people walk with their pants like that they're all going to need back surgery there's a lucrative thing for him there now. But we see girls dressing that way and I think the problem is a loss of hope within the African American community particularly with those in the middle class and the lower middle class there's no hope anymore they don't see it. The closure of automobile manufacturing plants in Michigan, jobs under this NAFTA agreement [North American Free Trade Agreement] are leaving this country. So people that are marginally getting by, their hope is seen by selling drugs, poisoning--killing their own community. Black folk are being carted off to prison in record numbers. Here in Lansing [Michigan] they turn them over to federal and where they may have gotten a three or four year prison sentence here they're getting thirty year sentences in the federal system. I want to see black folk wake up and understand you are the descendant of kings and queens and if you work hard you can get what you want. Get off this ignorant stuff of ten thousand dollar spinner wheels on your car. What good does that do, what does that mean? That it's all right to go to school. It's great to get an education because we're moving right by now that train has left the station too. Parents have to take hold of their kids, grandparents if you can do it that's fine. You cannot continue to have young people getting pregnant. Thirteen year old girls, fifteen year old girls pregnant, guess what they're never going to finish their education therefore it really doesn't become important to them which means more than likely they're not going to pass on the importance to their child because they didn't do it, they didn't see it. And where they have one and they fall between the cracks, they will have two and three more. Black men are in prison. They are not here to take care of the kids they make. There is no role model left for their child. I tell people your child's role model should be the person you see in the mirror. So those are things we need to do. We need to get out and participate and vote. The silliest thing I heard is some of the talk--black talk show host--when Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] started running for president suggesting that he wasn't black enough or letting people call in and say that see if that's my show I'm going to hang up on them because you sound like an idiot particularly when out the other side of their mouth they say Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was the first black president. Whoever came up with that, you know, it's just ridiculous. So we have to see hope, we have to get on board, participate in the process if we're going to see any gains. If you don't see it or can't get it for yourself you should at least want it to happen for your kids and that generation coming up. Story_ID: 639030 Speaker 1: Now for you in the--what do you see for yourself in the future? Do you think you might want to be elected to another position or would you like to be a judge or would you like to continue in practice as a lawyer? Speaker 2: I'd like to go on the pro golf tour and play next to Tiger Woods for the next few years is what I'd love to do. If I could do anything in the world, I want to retire and be able to just sit from April to October at Comerica Park [Detroit, Michigan] and just take in every Tiger [Detroit Tigers] game just to watch the Tigers play baseball all day. Speaker 1: This is your year you know. Speaker 2: Okay well absolutely I'd love to be able to do that and then in the fall sit and watch the Pistons [Detroit Pistons]. I think and there is a movement for it and talk of perhaps taking the position with the judiciary on the bench at our circuit or trial court level. I think that would give me another opportunity to yet grow, still learn, and challenge myself intellectually in the area of law. But it also gives me an opportunity to work and do things that are going to impact the lives of people coming before the court. People spend more time worrying about who their local representatives on the council or state legislature might be and that's fine, but they have to understand the distinction. If you serve in the state legislature you may pass law that may never affect someone but if you go to court whatever happens whatever that judge does to you is real, immediate and right now and people need to spend a little more time looking at people we're putting on the bench. A lot of times people are getting elected not because of what they know but because of who they are and I take that real seriously. Speaker 1: Are there any black judges on the bench now in Lansing [Michigan]? Speaker 2: In this county we have one. We have one out of I believe eighteen judges. So there is room for growth. I hate when people say well I'm qualified and I happen to be black. Well I'm black and I am qualified. I can't go against what I am. I think there is room for that; I wouldn't want someone to vote for me just because I'm an African American. I'm an African American but I'm qualified; I'm more than qualified for that position. Story_ID: 639031 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: I might have probably had children at an earlier age. I'm a late father. I'm fifty-three; my son [Hugh Barrington Clarke IV] is eleven. I might have done that or probably I think maybe I should have done it sooner but there's just a lot of joy I have with him in helping him grow and trying to mold and develop him into being a man; having him understand the challenges each day that face African American men and wanting to make sure that he doesn't fall in those pitfalls and helping him chart his own course. That's probably my big challenge and that's one that I enjoy. I tell people it's so funny at times because and I tell people this, I don't care how old you are, when you start having kids, I always tell them, one day, you're going to stop what you're doing and you're going to start laughing, and you're going to start laughing because you would have said something to your child that you're going to remember your folks said to you, whether it's close a door, stay in or stay out, whatever it's just going to hit you one day and that's when you know you're there as a parent and that you're enjoying what you're doing and that you're doing the right thing. Story_ID: 639032 Speaker 1: If you look at your life again up to this point what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think my legacy both socially--from a social and a family standpoint, I'm certainly proud of my legacy with what I've done to try and help black law students at Cooley Law School [Thomas M. Cooley Law School; Western Michigan University Thomas M. Cooley Law School, Lansing, Michigan] and the Lansing bar of African American attorneys [Lansing Black Lawyers Association; Davis - Dunnings Bar Association] but I think I've lived my life in such a way that my family can be proud of me, that I wasn't another statistic of an African American male gone bad, gone to prison. We see so many of our leaders falling today and that I have hopefully charted a path or started to chart one for my son [Hugh Barrington Clarke IV] and for his friends to see what it's like to be a man. That you don't--you just don't want to get out of bed today and go to work, it's so easy to call in and say I'm not coming but you know what you get up and go 'cause you know you've got to take care of your family and understand you know you've got to do that. You know that you've got to take the time and sit and talk with them, help them understand right from wrong. I enjoy coaching kids. For the past five or six years, I've coached kids in baseball. I work at times or volunteer times with coaching or assistant coaching basketball during the colder months as I'm doing now. But I just enjoy doing it and that's just another way for people to see that because you reach a certain level of position in your life doesn't mean you still can't go back out and help kids, teach them, show them the difference, show them what teamwork is. How you've got to depend on each other to be one and help each other and that while you might not always win you gave it your best and you come back the next time and you try even harder. I tell kids if you make a mistake that's fine but try to learn from it and not make the same mistake twice. Those are just kind of some of my philosophies and things I look back on. I don't want anybody to live their life like me or for me, I want them to do what they feel is good for them. As long as they are doing something that's good, legal, honest and hard work and they're taking care of their family and to be happy in what you're doing. Story_ID: 639033 Speaker 1: You've got a son that's eleven [Hugh Barrington Clarke IV]. You're also married. Tell us a little bit about your family. Speaker 2: My wife is Judi Brown Clarke she likes the hyphenation now but she is--I'm very proud of her I didn't know her at the time but she is the 1984 silver medal winner from the Los Angeles Olympics [1984 Summer Olympics, Los Angeles, California]. Her event was the 400 meter hurdles. She ran track for a number of years that was her profession. She's won a number of gold medals around the world and Pan Am Games [Pan American Games]. People ask how did you catch her and I tell them well you've got it wrong I didn't she ran me down, I couldn't out run her. She just recently gone back to school and over a period of time, we never thought the day would come, but she just recently received her doctorate in philosophy so she is now Dr. Judith Brown Clarke and she is professor out of Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan]. So, I and sort of our family are extremely proud of her to work full time and still go back to school and work to get her Ph.D. as we watched her over the years work to get her master's degree as well. Again it shows our son and she has two children--two boys who are adults who live in Arizona but it just shows how you can do what you do if you put your mind to it. Story_ID: 639034 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that we need to ask before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Wow. I don't think so. Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Somebody that did it his way. Whatever I did, I did it my way. That's how I want to be remembered. I didn't try following anybody, I did it my way. Story_ID: 639035 Speaker 1: That would have been in, I believe in 1975 as we talked about the event where I was applying for a job and was arrested because there was a warrant outstanding for me on a traffic violation that an attorney didn't take care of as he said he would. That photo would have been taken upon my being booked at the Livingston County Jail [Howell, Michigan]. That is, of course, that is the companion photograph a different view of the mug shot taken at Livingston County Jail. I'm pleased to say that we went to court on the matter and the judge threw out all the charges and directed that they return my mug shot and fingerprints which is why I'm able-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Well, that's young mister Hugh B. Clarke, Jr [HistoryMaker Hugh Barrington Clarke, Jr.]. That picture was taken December 1956, so I would have been about two and a half years old; I just had my second birthday in July so I was two and a half in that photo. A typical family home back then plastic on the furniture and the kids wore the Stride Rite shoes. Speaker 2: One of the happier moments that would have been April 1979. That is lining up at my law school graduation from Thomas M. Cooley Law School [Western Michigan University Thomas M. Cooley Law School, Lansing, Michigan]. Speaker 1: That's a family photograph taken--actually that was taken for my school board campaign literature in 2006 and it's my wife Judith or Judi [Judi Brown Clarke] as she prefers and our son Antonio [Hugh Barrington Clarke IV] both loves of my life...