 Story_ID: 127932 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: Clive Orville Callender, C-L-I-V-E, Orville, O-R-V-I-L-L-E, and Callender, C-A-L-L-E-N-D-E-R. Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: The date of birth is November 16th, 1936. I was born in New York City, New York state. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a transplant surgeon, professor of surgery as well at Howard University, College of Medicine [Washington, D.C.] and Howard University Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is June 25, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: (Laughter) In Washington, D.C.-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --in the offices of some attorneys I can't name. Story_ID: 127933 Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), Skadden, Arps, and some others [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP]. But before we go into depth, there are five light-weight questions we ask as sort of a warm-up, and they only--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I guess my--I like, I love chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Chicken and I love bananas, I love corn. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I like purple, lavender, blue, those two favorite colors. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: Okay, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, "To God be the glory" is my favorite statement. Story_ID: 127934 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and then we'll put them together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Ida, I-D-A, Burke, B-U-R-K-E, Callender, C-A-L-L-E-N-D-E-R. Speaker 1: All right, and what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know. Interestingly enough, when I was born, she died within forty-eight hours of our delivery. So I never really got to meet her, and I don't know her birthdate. Speaker 1: Okay, so is--do you know where your mother was born? Speaker 2: She was born in Barbados British West Indies. Speaker 1: Okay, how much do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and-- Speaker 2: Well, I met her--I met Niecey [ph.], I met her, I guess it's her aunt. I went to Barbados and met her about ten years ago. She gave me a little bit of the history, but I don't remember much of it, just that her sister who raised me, Ella Waterman, and she were very close in Barbados. And they both joined together in New York City [New York] after they took the boat over here. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story about why they left Barbados? Speaker 2: I don't know the story about why they left. I just know that the two sisters left, and I met my father [Joseph Callender] who also--who was born in Barbados, British West Indies. He also came to New York City, and the two of them joined, and they were married. And my twin brother [Orville Callender] and my sisters [Gloria and Paula Callender] were the result. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So do you know what your ancestors on your mother's side did in Barbados? Speaker 2: No, I don't, and I don't know much about the ancestors on my father's side either. Story_ID: 127935 Speaker 1: Okay, well, we're gonna have to go over them anyway. So (laughter), we can't rush right past them. So I'm just telling you now so you don't, you know, we have to ask about 'em. So, so you don't know what they were doing. What did your mother [Ida Burke Callender] do for a living when she got here? Speaker 2: I have no idea what she did for a living. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know if she worked or not? Speaker 2: I really don't know. No, I really don't--I think she spent most of her time raising her children. Speaker 1: Okay, so you have older brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I--well, actually, I think I had two brothers before my twin brother [Orville Callender] was born with me and two sisters [Gloria and Paula Callender]. But my two brothers died very young. And so my twin brother and I were the only boys who actually survived. Speaker 1: Okay, what about your sister, the oldest--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My two older sisters, they--my oldest sister [Gloria Callender] is still living. She's eighty-eight years old now, eighty-seven. She'll be eighty-eight in August. And my other sister died about fifteen years ago. She was sixty-five when she died. Story_ID: 127936 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Joseph Callender, J-O-S-E-P-H, Callender, C-A-L-L-E-N-D-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I know it's in December, but I don't know the year he was born. I know he died at the age of seventy-nine and that was about twenty years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, that's like 1992, I guess, and so, so well, he was born, I guess, in the first, early part of the century. Speaker 2: Since I was born in '36 [1936], and we were--so he's probably around 1900 or thereabouts. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your father's side of the family? How much do you know about--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't know anything about--I met his sister. He had a sister who was in New York for a little while. We were there together. I met her after he died. I know he was a railroad chef. He was--but I don't know--he also was a boxer when he was younger. And he was also in the military, was younger. But-- Speaker 1: Was he in the U.S. Army? Speaker 2: Hum? Speaker 1: Was he in the United States Army? Speaker 2: I don't know. I, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: I know Barbados was part of the British Commonwealth, I think, or something like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right, and I, I have the sense that he was with the United States Army, but I really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, was this--it would be like World War I or-- Speaker 2: It would seem to me it would be in that vicinity. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But he talked about his boxing. He liked--he really liked boxing. He was a boxer and he was in the service. In his occupation as a railroad chef, he took great pride in that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He used to run the line from New York [New York] to Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But they have no--they didn't talk about the history of the people, of his ancestors in Barbados or any of his relatives there or--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't know anything about his side of the family except that I met his sister some time after his death, and knew her briefly. But I really don't know anything about his, his side of the family at all. I know more about my mother's [Ida Burke Callender's] side, and I don't know much about her side. But I know even less about his side of the family. Story_ID: 127937 Speaker 1: Did your parents [Ida Burke Callender and Joseph Callender] have a chance to go to school at all? I mean did they go to grade school or high school or college or-- Speaker 2: I really don't know. I know they didn't have any college, but I don't know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --how far they went in elementary and junior high school and high school. I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know that they could read and write. I know he could read and write too, but I don't know much more than that. Speaker 1: So they didn't talk about growing up, going to school or what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, except that he was a very religious person, and he was very busy in the church. He was a very spiritual-minded person. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Read the Bible a lot and prayed a lot. Speaker 1: What denomination was your father? Speaker 2: He was Protestant. It was the Church of Illumination. It was Protestant, but no (unclear)--other than that. I have been to his church, small church. Speaker 1: It as the Church of Illumination? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Church of Illumination. Speaker 1: In New York City [New York]? Speaker 2: New York City. Yeah, as a matter of fact, it was on--I think it's 120th and, between Lenox and Seventh Avenue because he took me there a couple of times. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: No, I don't know the story. My aunt [Ella Waterman] never talked about it, and my oldest sister [Gloria Callender], who actually--after my mother died, she named my twin brother [Orville Callender] and I, and, but she never talked about how they met. I don't know if she knew. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have any idea what your mother's personality was like? Did people talk about what she was like? Speaker 2: I understand that she was a very gregarious person, and that she was pretty well liked. I know my daddy was sort of a lady's man, and they had some skirmishes about his relationships with other women. That's all I know because I think she had a fight with somebody, and she got her face cut. And so that was one of the things that they did talk about. Speaker 1: Okay, so she, she passed away in 1936, you know, as you and your twin brother were born. Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: She passed away in 1936 when you and your twin brother were born? Speaker 2: She died within forty-eight hours of our birth. Story_ID: 127938 Speaker 1: And you said your father [Joseph Callender] worked on the--when you were growing up, your father worked on the railroad as a-- Speaker 2: Right, so, because he couldn't raise us [Callender and his twin brother Orville Callender]. We were in a foster home for the first two years of our lives. Speaker 1: Okay, so did he reclaim you later on? Speaker 2: After two or three years, he then married again, and we had a stepmother. Her name was Mary Anne Ogara. M-A-R-Y, Anne, A-N-N-E, and Ogara, O-G-A-R-A. was our stepmother for about three years. And then she became mentally ill. And she had to be institutionalized. It was then that we went to live with our aunt, Ella Waterman, who's the one who actually raised us, most of our lives. Speaker 1: About how old were you then? Speaker 2: Oh, for example, the first years of my life, we were in a foster home. And during that period of time, I think--I'm told that I developed pneumonia and almost died. And the second year, I got sick again with pneumonia. But I survived, and--but because of my health, my foster parents had enough of us. And so my dad remarried, Mary Anne, who we called Emily, and--that was her nickname given by us. And after she became institutionalized, we then went to live with my aunt [Ella Waterman] at the age of seven, between six and seven,-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --thereabouts, we went to live with my aunt. And her lifestyle was very different. She was a very religious person, and-- Speaker 1: Now, this is Aunt Ella Waterman? Speaker 2: Yes, Aunt Ella Waterman. Story_ID: 127939 Speaker 1: So she [aunt Ella Waterman] was very religious, you say? Speaker 2: Very much so because we went to church at least six days a week. We were in church most days, Sunday starting at nine o'clock until about six o'clock at night. And then Monday, we went to the praying band at various people's homes. Tuesday, we prayer and testimony. Thursday, we had Bible study. Friday, we had choir rehearsal and off and on, Saturdays, we'd go out in the street and have service in the street. So about six days of the week, we were--we spent time in church. Speaker 1: Now, this is in Harlem? Speaker 2: It's in Harlem [New York, New York], streets in Harlem. We grew up on--first, my dad [Joseph Callender] lived on 309 West 113th Street, between Eighth and Manhattan. And then my aunt [Ella Waterman] lived 271 Lenox Avenue, right on Lenox Avenue between 123rd, 124th Street. And so for, for the time when my stepmother was there, we lived at 309, and then when we went to live with my aunt, we moved to Lenox Avenue. Still, both sites in Harlem. Speaker 1: Right, that's in the heart of Harlem there, 271 Lenox Avenue, you-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You're right in the heart of Harlem. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely, in heart of Harlem. Speaker 1: 123rd and Lenox, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, what denomination was your church? Speaker 2: It was a holiness church, and it was Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle, was the name of it, Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle is on 227 Lenox Avenue, between 121st and 22nd Street on Lenox Avenue. Speaker 1: So the church was right down the street, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, two block-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --walk down two blocks, there we were. But this church was actually founded from the West Indies, and most of the people who were in the church were West Indians, from the British West Indies and a lot from Barbados, some from Panama. Story_ID: 127940 Speaker 1: Now, when you--for what you know about--so did your father [Joseph Callender]--well, did your father come around very often? Speaker 2: Rarely. I think we saw dad maybe after we moved to, with my aunt [Ella Waterman], maybe once a year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So until we got much older, when my aunt died, that's about it, once a year, we see him, hi. And that was about it. Speaker 1: All right, did he support you financially at all? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, when we were little kids, we thought he was supporting because we--he gave about a hundred dollars. And to us, that was a big amount (laughter). As I got older, I learned (laughter) that really wasn't very much. But anyway, that's, that's what, that's my understanding of it anyway. So my aunt, who lived with--she was married and had a husband. And he later died while we were growing up with them. And so they had a home which they were renting. And so we lived with them at 271 on Lenox Avenue until we were about eighteen. And it was then that she died of ovarian cancer. Story_ID: 127941 Speaker 1: But so from the time we were seven until we were about eighteen, we lived with my aunt [Ella Waterman] who gave us the rich foundation that became the cornerstone for the rest of my life. I learned how to read reading the Bible. I learned public speaking in the church, learning singing, which is my favorite hobby, music and singing, and we did public speaking and singing in the church. So that, that really prepared me for the rest of my life, so that--and at the age of seven I remember accepting Jesus Christ as my personal savior and also hearing a sermon that changed the rest of my life because I decided at the age of seven I wanted to become a medical missionary, to minister to the souls of mankind as well as to the bodies of mankind because it seemed like that'd be a wonderful profession. You could work in both sides, the souls and the body at the same time. So I, I had purpose to do that when I was seven years of age. Speaker 2: Okay, we have a note--I know on my outline, it says that you heard a particular sermon that made you want to be a missionary. Speaker 1: That's correct. Speaker 2: Was that the one? Was that the sermon? Speaker 1: That was, Eustace Pharnum [ph.] who was the pastor there, and who gave a sermon, putting into perspective the fact that being a missionary was good because you could minister to both the souls of mankind as well as the bodies of mankind. And so from that point on in my life, I had decided that I was gonna be a medical missionary. And that guided me for the rest of my young life. Speaker 2: So you were--you aimed to be a medical missionary? Speaker 1: Medical missionary. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was my goal and to go to Africa. That was my desire from the time I was seven. Story_ID: 127942 Speaker 1: Okay, let me go back a little bit and, can you--when you were growing up as a child in New York City [New York], what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, actually, it was (laughter) interesting growing up. First, I grew up at 113th Street, and I kinda was an outsider because I spent so much time in church. And the rest of the, you know, in that day, you were really together if you had a "J.D." [juvenile delinquency] card. That's a juvenile delinquency card. Well, I wasn't--I didn't have time for that stuff. I was too busy. And the statement that I heard often was that, "Satan finds work for idol hands." Well, I wasn't idol. So I never got a "J.D." card, and I wasn't one of the, one of the guys. I was kind of on the outside looking in, and was content to be that way, 'cause I spent so much time in church, reading the Bible, doing those kind of things that it kind of kept me out of the trouble that many of the other people I grew up with. The era though when I grew up, was one in which--I always, I love music. And it was a time of, when Rock-and-Roll and all those things were just coming into play. But I, I never really liked that stuff. I like--always liked the easy listening styles and Johnny Mathis, the--Nat King Cole and Frank Sinatra, Perry Como and Jerry Vale and--so those were kind of my musical heroes when I came up. So I always wanted to be, I wanted to sing like them, and I wanted--one of the--other thing I wanted to do, I wanted to become a professional singer. That was my, one of my other goals in life, to be a singer and to make a record and to, to do those kind of things. While I wanted, to be a music--medical missionary, I also wanted to, to sing 'cause I always felt I, I had a, a gift to sing. And so I--that was one of the things that I wanted to do. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite song from that era. Speaker 2: Well, I, I guess I liked "Nature Boy" by Nat Cole, "Chances Are" by Johnny Mathis. Perry Como was probably, of all the singers I liked, I guess it was Perry Como and Johnny Mathis and Nat Cole, my, my three favorites. And so I kind of patterned my styles after them And my twin brother and I and some others, we sang in a little Christian group, "The Calletones" [ph.], Callender and Thomas, Terry Thomas, the guy we grew up with. And so we spent a lot of time singing and then one of my boyhood friends, Luther Alman [ph.] was a tremendous, gifted musician who could play the piano and the organ. And so I would go across to all the churches, singing solos, and he'd play for me. And so, that, that, that's what made up the early part of my life, singing, reading the Bible. I was a very, I was a excellent Bible student, and so I won many Bible quizzes and was on the radio winning Bible contests. Speaker 1: What radio show were you on? Do you remember? Speaker 2: WLIB used to have a Bible quiz, and I'd be on that, and actually, I'd, got to sing on that on occa--on a few occasions. Speaker 1: WLRB? Speaker 2: Everybody thought I was very good, but I didn't. Speaker 1: Yeah, WLRB? Speaker 2: LIB, yeah. Speaker 1: L-I-B, L-I-B. Speaker 2: Yeah, WLIB. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Way back in the day. And V. Simpson Turner was the person would have those programs, and as a matter of fact, I recall being featured in one of those--in those days, when you go to movies, they'd have news stories. And I would win the Bible contest, and I remember one time I was one of those news, news stories because I won a Bible contest. But then I, I pretty much knew the Bible from cover-to-cover, the thirty-nine and twenty-seven books in the Old and New Testament, and so that, that was pretty much--my hobbies in those days was really, know the Bible, do prayer and fasting and waiting on the Lord, and then all-night church services we'd go to so that my whole passion during that period of time was to serve the Lord, so to speak, and to know his word and, and then, of course, the other thing I liked to do was to sing. So, that's what I, spent most of my time. In school, I was a very poor student. Story_ID: 127943 Speaker 1: Now, when did you start school? Speaker 2: I went to P.S. 113 [New York, New York] which is down the street from where I live on, 113th and Lenox Avenue. And I, so from kindergarten up until about grade four, or thereabouts, we were at P.S. 113. Then when my stepmother was institutionalized, and I went to live with my aunt, and then went to P.S. 127 [New York, New York], which is about 127th and Lenox Avenue. And so in school I wasn't a very good student. Well, let's put it this way. I didn't, I didn't get good grades, but I always would have the highest score in the school almost on all of the aptitude tests. And so they said I never really lived up to my potential and, and that--and, and the truth of the matter is as a student, I was, I just played games all the time. I'd play with the girls here in front, I put in the inkwell, and those kind of childish, adolescent things I did. I, I took advantage of my childhood and did a lot of, lot of childish things. And so I was kind of a pest in school, and, as a matter of fact, as I grew up and as I got older, I was forced to put on a dunce cap. You wouldn't know this, but in the old days, if you were a problematic student, they would put a dunce cap on you and sit you in the back of the room. And so I had to do that on a number occasions, so much so that because I had a twin brother, they thought that maybe he might have a good influence on me. So they, they--I was in a special class 'cause I had a very high aptitude test. So they brought him in the--he didn't have, his aptitude wasn't as high as mine, so--even though we were twins. And so they brought him in the class, hoping that maybe he could stabilize me and make me "behave myself" so to speak. So they brought him in the class. I don't think it made much of a difference, but anyway. Those are some of the memories of, of, of my childhood. I, I recall being jealous of those people who played basketball 'cause I would, they, they had all the, all the girls. That's why I was jealous of them. They had all the girls. And so I wanted to learn how to play basketball. And those people who sang better than I did, I always wanted to be a singer. I was not so confident though. And so I--my fear very often kept me from trying to join the Glee Club and those kinds of things because I thought I'd be rejected. So, so I just watched and, and watched, played a little basketball. I wasn't that good. But I could sing pretty good, but I just was, didn't have any confidence. So I just sat back and listened to others and did a lot of (unclear) in my mind, and always in my, my mind, I, I decided I was gonna, I was gonna make a recording one way or the other. And I was gonna become a professional singer. That was one of the other goals I had in my life, as a young, as a youngster. And I recall going to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, you-- Speaker 2: --some of those shops where you can make a little recording for about two or three minutes. And I'd do, would go and sing on that and do that, and make recordings, records and that kind of thing. So that, that--those were some of the--you asked me about the sights and sounds and those are some of the sights and sounds as I was coming up in Harlem [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 127944 Speaker 1: Okay, so any other specific sights or sounds or smells? Now, you're, you're growing up in Harlem [New York, New York]. This is one of the, the most vibrant communities, black communities in the country. So, what did you see, what did you smell, what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What'd you hear? Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you. As I grew up, I kind of--as I told you what I was doing. What I didn't tell you was what my twin brother [Orville Callender] was doing (laughter). And my twin brother doesn't like for me to talk about his lifestyle, but he was a, he was a lady killer. He had a lot of girlfriends, and he was out dancing and all that, things that most other people in Harlem were doing. I wasn't doing those things. He was getting locked out of the house at night because he was out with the girls, wouldn't come back in time, and so, so in many ways, I was the, kind of religious twin or the good twin, and he was the other twin who was out having a ball with the girls and he--and doing all those things that most other people were doing, except, of course, he wasn't into any, any "J.D." [juvenile delinquency] stuff or juvenile delinquent stuff. But he, he was--we would call him a lady killer in those days. Speaker 1: Now, how--I got a question 'cause you were saying earlier that you were the person that caused trouble in class-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and they thought your brother would be a good influence on you. Speaker 2: That's true, in school. Now, after school (laughter) was another story, it was another story 'cause after school, he was the one. I was the one that was going to church. Now, I will admit that I, I tried to run away a couple of times. But let me tell you how I would run away. My aunt [Ella Waterman] would be coming after me, and I'd walk slow so she could catch me (laughter) 'cause, 'cause I, I mean I'd be talking about running away, but I mean, I had sense enough to know I didn't have any money or anything. So how was I gonna survive? So I mean it was kind of a play run-away thing where if I didn't get my way, I would run away. I was the one who got all the beatings though. My, my twin brother, even though he would get locked out of the house and those kinds of things, he didn't get that many beatings. I got a lot of beating because I was quotation marks, "stubborn". And an "own-way" child is the term they used to call it in those days. And so, so while all of the stuff was going on in Harlem, I wasn't really aware of it. I was really aware of the, the church and those things that went along with it. And that kept me pretty much occupied. My twin brother, on the other hand, he got a chance to sample the lifestyle of Harlem. Story_ID: 127945 Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there a distinction made in your neighborhood, made between the black people in terms of those who were from West Indies and those who were from the South, the southern United States or from New York? Speaker 2: I was not aware of it. The church I went to was predominantly West Indian, and in school, I never--it was never--the only issue that I was aware of was that if you were very dark skinned, that there was a discrimination there. As a matter of fact, if you wanted to get in a fight with somebody, you call 'em black. And if you called 'em black, there was a automatic fight. So, but that's the only thing I knew about was there was a, that complexion thing. But I didn't--never knew that there was a distinction between people from the West Indies and people who were not from the West Indies. That never was a factor for me in my life. But then again, I was, for the most part, most of the time, was surrounded by people of West Indian heritage. Story_ID: 127946 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, in light of the fact that you grew up to become a surgeon, were you interested in the sciences when you were--and math when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I was pretty terrible in math. English, I, I knew enough English--I learned English and I wrote poorly, but I knew my English pretty good. And History, I detested, and, but I--I wasn't that great a student at all in elementary, junior high school or high school. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject or any subject that-- Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Except I knew that you needed to know reading, writing and arithmetic. So I, I, I tried to master those, but I didn't have any--I didn't have any favorite subjects--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in, at any time, elementary or high school or college. That's--college is another story, but I, I probably was a better student in high school than I was in junior high school or college, but I wasn't a great student there. You know, I actually--as we talk about going to school-- Speaker 1: I don't wanna get to the college yet. So don't go to college-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --yet. But-- Speaker 2: But as we talk about going to school, when I finished elementary school, I went to junior high school and went to Stitt Junior High School [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Edward W. Stitt, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Stitt, S-T-I-T-T Junior High School, which is on S-T-I-T-T, which is on 168th and Amsterdam Avenue. And, and I, I--there again, I was not a model student. Now, my aunt [Ella Waterman] had frequent visits to the principal's office because of my perceived misbehavior and because I--in class I wasn't paying attention to the teacher. And I was doing things that weren't appropriate. And so because of that, even though I did well on other tests--I, I, for example, wanted to go to Bronx High School of Science [New York, New York]. But I, my grades were not good enough. I wanted to go to Stuyvesant [High School, New York, New York] and my grades weren't good enough. Then I really wanted to go to Music and Art [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art High School, New York, New York], but I didn't have the nerve to go and sing for the, an audition for music and art. But that's, that was the third school I wanted to go to. I never discussed that with anybody anyway, by the way. But I, I actually always wanted to sing, and I really did wanna go to Music and Art, but I didn't have the nerve to audition for that. So, so anyway, so I wound up going to, in high school, to--after I finished junior high school at Stitt, to Commerce High School [New York, New York] which was a step below Bronx High School or Stuyvesant--Bronx High School of Science and Stuyvesant. And they had a part of Commerce which I went to, which was called Lincoln Park. Now, most people didn't know about Lincoln Park. And I never would let anybody know that I was in Lincoln Park, but that was the honors school of Commerce. And I, and I, in many ways, was a closet intellectual because I was very, I was perceived to be very smart, and I got good grade in the courses, but I would never let anybody know that I actually went to Lincoln Park. So everybody knew I went to Commerce, but they didn't know that I was actually on the Lincoln Park side of it. In those days, it wasn't so cool to be that smart. It was, it was much cooler to be an athlete, and so I liked to basketball. And I played basketball, and I played baseball and did all those kind of things. And, but I didn't let people know that I was perceived as smart or that I was in Lincoln Park. Story_ID: 127947 Speaker 1: Now, now, did you--was there a lot of reading material that came into your home? I mean did you--I mean how--did you--I mean, I guess, what literature like stimulated you, that you liked to, you know, come in contact with and read? Speaker 2: Well, I guess I had gotten so, so obsessed with the Bible and that, that I don't think that I was particularly a reader, and I don't think I was, I was particularly a good student. I think that I was smart, and I remember things. And so I got good grades, but I never really thought I was a good student. And one-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm just talking about your intellectual interests. You said you were, you said you were a closet intellectual, someone who--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But only in the sense--I said that only in the sense that I considered myself a closet intellectual because I had good grades. I really wasn't an intellectual, but I think that if people--I always thought if people knew I had such good grades, they would, they would not categorize me as the average guy. And so I just, as I reflected upon myself, I thought of myself as a closet intellectual, but I never thought I was an intellectual. But I thought I might be perceived as that. In high school, one of the things that happened is, when I got to the age of fifteen, I contracted pulmonary tuberculosis. Speaker 1: So this is nineteen--what? What is it? Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951]. Speaker 1: Fifty-one [1951], okay. Speaker 2: I contracted pulmonary tuberculosis. Speaker 1: This is pulmonary tuberculosis? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, that's-- Speaker 2: And I was hospitalized. And it was at--that was a, a very singular experience because I was in the hospital with other patients and people were dying to the right of me and people dying to the left of me. And I had this communicable disease, which was like the A.I.D.S. [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] of today, except worse because you had to wear masks. You had to be--whenever you left the hospital, you had to wear a mask. And you were contagious. And so for eighteen months, I was in the hospital. Now, the first six months--because they didn't have any treatment for tuberculosis then. For the six, first six months, they tried different medications on me, and they used experimental medications because they didn't have any of the things that were effective. And some of the medication had various side effects on me. I remember that one of the things that happened is that one of the medications made me become very muscular. And-- Speaker 1: A steroid? Speaker 2: I, I don't think--I don't think so. It was, I think now--later on, I think it was Isoniazid. But I do know--in those days, I didn't know what steroids was 'cause I'm only fifteen. But I do know that I did become very muscular for a short period of time. Also, because I had fever and chills and coughing up blood and all that kind of stuff, I was--the first month or so, I was very sick. And then as time went on, it became clear that I was gonna be in the hospital for a while. And so my Uncle Vernal [Dr. Vernal Cave] they gave me a 'Merck Manual [of Diagnosis and Therapy]' and the 'American College Dictionary.' And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What's a 'Merck manual,' what's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Hum? Speaker 1: What's the 'Merck Manual?' Speaker 2: 'Merck Manual' is like the Bible to doctors. It's, it's the book that they learn all about the medications used to treat diseases, and so he gave me that to read. He also gave me the 'America College Dictionary.' And I read both from cover-to-cover, 'cause that was my reading material. I didn't have anything else to do. So I did that, and so I developed a tremendous vocabulary. And I learned a lot about medicine I wouldn't otherwise have learned. Story_ID: 127948 Speaker 1: But the one thing about that experience that I'll never forget is that I was away from my parents for eighteen months. And can you imagine that you're in the hospital for eighteen months when you're fifteen years of age. You don't have your parents or anything like that. So the people in the hospital become your quasi-parents so to speak. And I remember I had one friend--I think his name was Miller [ph.], who was older than, than I was. And he was actually kind of my mentor, like a father figure to me. And he would protect me and help me to stay away from a lot of different people who had bad influence--potentially could have been bad influences on me. And he, he was really helpful to keep me out of trouble in the hospital-- Story_ID: 127949 Speaker 1: In those days, there was no treatment for tuberculosis. So the expectation was that you have a very short lifespan, maybe you live six months to a year or two years if so. But anyway after six months, I didn't get better. I didn't get better fast enough. So I had to have a right-upper lobectomy. So they took out a third of my lung, and they wanted to take out more, but they said that my body wouldn't tolerate it. So they--'cause it seemed as though I had so much spread of the illness on the right side of my lung that they wanted to take out the whole lung. But my body wouldn't tolerate it so they wound up only taking out the right upper lobe of my lung. So what happens, I went to Harlem Hospital for the first six months. Then after they finished treating me at the Harlem Hospital, they sent me to Metropolitan Hospital. After I had the surgery at Metropolitan Hospital, they sent me to Welfare Island where I spent the next six months recuperating from the surgery on my lung. And then for the last six months, I went to Otisville Sanitarium. So I had eighteen months of being in the hospital, and trying to keep up. Story_ID: 127950 Speaker 1: But one of the best things that ever happened to me in the hospital--the hospitals, actually, was that I had a aptitude test. And the aptitude test demonstrated that I could be successful in whatever I wanted to do, if I wanted to become a lawyer, doctor or whatever, I had what it took to do that. And that became very important later on in my life, as time will tell. But, of course, the bottom line was, hey, you had a, what was thought to be a terminal disease. And so, but what was interesting about the background that I'd gotten from my Aunt Ella Waterman, from Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle [Church] was that I never really had any fears. I always felt that God would deliver me, and so I just persisted, and it never occurred to me that I was gonna die nor did it occur to me that I wasn't gonna get well. But, and I, and I--and because of my belief system that was developed at Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle and my fundamental belief in the Bible and the scripture, that I just took it as it came and had faith and believed. And then, of course, I had in the back of my mind that I wanted--I was gonna become a medical missionary. And those things were the undergirding and the foundation of, of that phase in my life and protected me. It helped me so that I had no serious fears. I believed that God was gonna heal me and that I was gonna be okay, and I was gonna become a medical missionary, which later became of interest as I grew and developed. Story_ID: 127951 Speaker 1: Did you have any role models, I mean that you--I mean in the media or in, that you knew that were medical missionaries or doctors? Speaker 2: Well, my Vernal Cave and Herbert Cave were actually cousins, but we called 'em uncles, and they were, they were the ones who gave me the 'Merck Manual [of Diagnosis and Therapy]' and the 'American College Dictionary.' And so then they, they, they were good role models and examples of what I could become. Speaker 1: Now, they were doctors? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Herbie [Herbert Cave] was an anesthesiologist at Harlem Hospital where I was a patient. And Vernal was a dermatologist and so I knew them. And they came to see me and visited me. And they were inspirations to me as I was growing and developing. Story_ID: 127952 Speaker 1: So, well, when you went back to--you went back to high school, I guess, at some point, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, after I, after I recovered from my lobectomy, after I spent six months in the Otisville Sanitarium, then I went back to high school. And in high school, I did well--one of the interesting things is that I had a--my, my childhood friend, Donald, Donald Lewis, Donnie Lewis--it's interesting because he got sick. He got rheumatic, rheumatoid arthritis and became very ill and was hospitalized. And after I got to college, he actually died. But anyway, I finished high school and here again, I took the test, and-- Speaker 1: So that's not what--so you came out of high school--when was it? Nineteen fifty, what? Speaker 2: I finished in 1955 because '51 [1951]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to '53 [1953], I was pretty much in the hospital. Then I came out in '53 [1953], and then '53 [1953] to '55 [1955], I finished high school. And I took the test and was able to get into the City Colleges, and the City College I got into was Hunter College [New York, New York], which was formerly a women's college, but after the War [World War II], they started taking men, and I guess I was in the second or third year of classes of men. So I went to Hunter College, which was a fascinating school because it was probably 97 percent Jewish at the time I went there. And so I went to, the first year, I went to the, into the Christian Var--Varsity Group and also into the pre-med group. And I didn't do so well the first year. The first year in medical school, I got "D's" in histories, in history and English and government and did okay in the sciences though. But the bottom line was at the end of the first year, I had about a 1.8 out of four average, which is not very good. And so my counselor suggested that I get out of the pre-med course and go into something that was, more likely be suitable for my intellect. Well, I, I empathized with her and understood that she didn't know any better. But I, I had to tell her that I was gonna become a medical missionary, and that's what I was gonna do. And so I, I wasn't gonna change. But I did realize that I was very immature, and I needed to stop being so ignorant. What was I ignorant of? I was ignorant of the fact that you gotta know English. I mean you gotta learn English. You gotta learn history. You gotta learn government. You gotta learn all those things. And just because I wanted to be a doctor didn't mean I just go and learn science, you know, but I, as I was, as I was growing up, I wasn't mature enough to appreciate that. Story_ID: 127953 Speaker 1: Well, let me go back a little bit, and were there any teachers in high school that were special to you? Speaker 2: I remember no single teacher in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the dominant thing in--to me, in high school was basketball. I tried out for the basketball team and didn't make it. And I took the course and did everything I was supposed to do, and I had fairly good grades 'cause I stayed in Lincoln Park [honors section of Commerce High School, New York, New York], which is the honor part. So, and I, and I graduated, and I didn't have grade good enough and I scored enough, high enough on the aptitude test to get into Hunter College [New York, New York], which is a free college. I mean it cost me twenty-two dollars a year for books. Speaker 1: When you graduated from high school, you didn't graduate with any distinctions or anything (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I just graduated, right (laughter), no distinctions (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --except that I survived to graduate. Story_ID: 127954 Speaker 1: Now, at Hunter [College, New York, New York], were there any teachers, special teachers at Hunter or any--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, actually, my physiology teacher and what happened is the first year, I did so poorly that, that my teacher suggested I, I get out of the sciences. But the second year--actually, I was majoring in chemistry. And actually, I flunked chemistry. I flunked the second chemistry, the advanced chemistry course. And so came a crossroads and the question is, what should I do. So I decided to major in physiology and chemistry. And therefore, I met a professor who was the reason that I, I survived in Hunter College. And-- Speaker 1: Who was that? Do you remember his name? Speaker 2: I can't--no. Is it--for some reason, I have a block on his name. I think it's Norma Johansen, but--I can't think of her name now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she was my physiology teacher. She had faith in me, and in physiology, I got all A's. I took--I, I had a double major, physiology and chemistry. And she was the turning point in my career in college. Speaker 1: Okay. What made the difference? Speaker 2: Hum? Speaker 1: What made the difference? Speaker 2: I don't know what made the difference. I, I really don't know. All I know is that she paid attention to me. She listened to me, and she had faith in me, and she suggested that I--I took one of her courses. I did well in that course, and from that point on--and I also knew, okay, I also knew that I couldn't get into medical school with a 1.8 out of four average (laughter). So I had to do things better, so I think between, between her and growing up, facing the realities, that if I didn't turn things around, in spite of my belief that I was going to be a medical missionary, I wouldn't be. So, so from that point on, from the sophomore year--after the sophomore year on, I, I was a different student. The first two years, I had less than a 2.0 average, and I had an "F" in my major. So nobody--and nobody--did I say nobody? I guess nobody but me believed that I was ever gonna be a doctor. And they always--they told me that. Junior year, I did better though. As I say, I got all "A's" in physiology, I got "A's" in psychology, and I did better in my chemistry grades and my science grades. But there were other, other obstacles along the, along the road. When I became a--finished my junior year, I did better. But still, when I got to my senior year, I had 2.5 out of four, and applying to medical school with a 2.5 out of four, is kind of a joke to most people. And everybody, accept me recognized that I had as much chance of getting into medical school as a snowball surviving in hell, but I never, it never occurred to me that I wouldn't get in medical school. I--this is what I had to--this, this is what was gonna happen to me, and this is what I was gonna do. So I persisted and persisted, and in my junior year, I, I worked in the summers, worked to get money so I could try to help save to get into medical school because my dad [Joseph Callender] said he didn't have the finances that were necessary for me to get into medical school. Fortunately, at Hunter College, it only costs about twenty-two dollars a year, and then by the time I was a senior, it was all the way up to a hundred dollars a semester. So I could work and save some money but if I--taking sandwiches (unclear) eat. There's a store I worked at, Ace Sandwich Shop, where I'd go to take sandwiches to businesses and get tips and those kind of things. So that's how I did during the summer. Then in the winter and the fa--rest of the year, I studied as hard as I could so I can do better. Story_ID: 127955 Speaker 1: And then to the amazement of everyone, especially my twin brother [Orville Callender] and my sister, Gloria [Callender], and my oldest sister, Gloria, in November of my senior year, to everyone's amazement, even to mine, I was the first person in my class accepted into medical school. And how this miracle occurred, I, I do not know to this day. But because certain I had, I had--with a 2.5 out of four, that's at best mediocre. And so nobody expected me to be accepted into medical school at all, not to speak of. Being the first person accepted--I was accepted into Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] in November of my senior year while others were waiting for acceptance. I was the first one to get accepted. Speaker 2: This is 1959, right? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: This is '59 [1959]? Speaker 1: This was '58 [1958] actually, I went to-- Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958]. Speaker 1: --I went to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I graduated in '59 [1959]. A lot of it I think had to do with, one of my guys I worked at the hospital with later on, a guy named Charles Melvin Innis [ph.] who was a year ahead of me. He was a good student. And he went to Meharry and did well, and I'll always believe that because he, he paved the way and he did so well that, that they were willing to accept another student from Hunter College [New York, New York]. That's my belief because I, I realized that I didn't have, with a 2.5 out of four--although I did know that I tended to do well on the aptitude test. Speaker 2: So that there was a test you took--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: You took a test--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Everybody had to take an aptitude test. Speaker 2: Okay, test, yeah. Speaker 1: M-M.C.A.T. [Medical College Admission Test] is what they called it. Speaker 2: You're right. Speaker 1: Medical College Admission Test. But they look at your grades and your, your aptitude test, and so be that as it may, when I told people that I was accepted, very few believed me. And my, InterVarsity Christian Fellowship teacher, she said that I was a liar. So, but the rest of the students, the white students, they didn't pay any attention to me anyway. So it didn't matter. But for the black students, they were--it was an inspiration to them 'cause they figured, if I could do it, anybody could do it. And as a matter of fact, at least six or seven people in my class who were black, subsequently got accepted into medical school. And so I felt in many ways that I was an inspiration to them, to show that it could be done, even if you weren't a brilliant student. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, the next hurdle for me was getting the funds. After I got accepted to medical, Meharry Medical School, interesting enough, I never heard from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I applied to Howard and Meharry, and I think Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And, but I never heard from Howard, and I don't think I ever heard from Temple either. But it didn't matter 'cause I got accepted-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at Meharry. So that this was a phase of my career that was a little short of miraculous but more miracles were yet to come. Story_ID: 127956 Speaker 1: So of the teachers at Hunter College [New York, New York], before you left there, your physiology teacher was your favorite teacher or-- Speaker 2: Without question my physiology teacher was the one who helped turn things around for me. She was the catalyst so to speak, that helped me go from a student who was less than two, a 1.8 out of four, to a 2.5 out of four, which may not seem like a great leap for some. But it was enough for me to get into medical school. And I've always cherished her memory, and thought that she was the inspiration that helped me turn things around at Hunter College. Speaker 1: Okay, and her name was, again, Dr.--this is Dr.-- Speaker 2: I can't think of her name. I have it written down somewhere in my papers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Is it Hanson? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Is it Hanson? Speaker 2: Well, I think--I'm trying to remember. Norma Johansen might have been the, the one who was my, the one who said I was a liar. I'm trying to think. There was another,-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --another one who was, I think his name was--it starts with a "k". I have it written down somewhere. I'll have to--(unclear) I block on it when it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But she was the one that made a tremendous difference in my Hunter College experience, and so it was interesting to me--as I finished my junior year, and I got into the senior because I got accepted into medical school, but still I had to graduate from college. And some of the things I did as a first and second year student came back to plague me. For example, I (unclear) said public speaking, and I was immature enough to just go to class and give my speeches and then never go back again. And so, as a consequence, I think I got a "D" or an "F" in one of those courses or maybe--all I know is that I really didn't have enough credits to graduate. And so I took organic chemistry, which is part of my major, and the professor gave me a "D" in organic chemistry. So I had to repeat that course just in order to graduate. And as a matter of fact, to be honest with you, I'm not sure that professor ever passed me. I think that they did what they could to help me get out, but I think even when I repeated the course, I think he gave me another "D" or an "F". And so in many ways, it seemed to me that I really didn't have enough credit to graduate, and although you didn't need to graduate to get into medical school, but, so that I wasn't a stellar student by any means. And even just graduating from Hunter College was a chore for me. Story_ID: 127957 Speaker 1: So, now, this was another phase of my life. But the other step that remained was how was I going to get the funds necessary to go to Nashville [Tennessee] and go to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] in August [1959]. And finished school in May, didn't have the funds; did my delivery job as a, in the summer, but it didn't get enough money. And so the question was that my twin brother [Orville Callender] asked me and my oldest sister [Gloria Callender], is, they said, "Clive, when are you gonna face the reality of life, face the fact that you don't have enough funds to go to medical school. Your-dad [Joseph Callender] told you early on that he doesn't have what it takes to put you through medical school. And why don't you face reality. You can't--all right, so we didn't expect you to get accepted to medical school. You got accepted. But when are you gonna face reality, we don't have the funds it takes to get to medical school." So I told them that, I serve a God who created the universe who has infinite riches and wealth, and therefore, I didn't have any, any issue in that I was gonna get the funds necessary, get into medical school and that they shouldn't worry, that the fact that I got into medical school was the biggest hurdle. The next step would be a hurdle that would be overcome as well. So, actually, May became June, June became July and it was getting closer and closer to August when I needed to be in Nashville. Then one of the amazing things that happened was that Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle, this church I went to, knew about my plight. And so they had a special service to raise funds for me to go to medical school. And it's not a big church and it's not a wealthy church, but low and behold they were able to come up with the money that was necessary so that I could go to medical school. So that was-- Speaker 2: That's extraordinary. Speaker 1: Yeah, extraordinary-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and something I [emotional] treasure to this day. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. So, what was your pastor's name? I don't think I even asked you. Speaker 1: What's that? Speaker 2: I didn't ask you your pastor's name? Speaker 1: Oh, Ustes Farnham [ph.] was one and then Luther Allman [ph.] was the one who actually, Reverend Farnham was the pastor, died when I was still in elementary school. And then Luther Benjamin Allman, Sr. was the pastor who was with me for the rest of my, my career. Story_ID: 127958 Speaker 1: Now, so you're going to Nashville, Tennessee. Had you ever been out of New York [New York] at that point? Speaker 2: At that point, the only place I'd been out of New York City was Otisville Sanitarium, which is upstate New York. But, so, we got the funds miraculously to take the train to Nashville and to pay for my tuition at Meharry. And when I got to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], one of the most fascinating experiences was when I got there, there were seven people in my class who had been in the same class, freshman class, the year before. So here I was as a student who barely finished college, who even when I left the--some of the professors didn't believe I'd made it out of there and got into medical school. And here I encounter seven people from the former freshman class that were still there. And so that frightened me, and inspired me to work as hard as possible to ensure that I wouldn't fall into that category. And so I recognized that it's time for me to stop, to put away my childish things, so to speak, and to mature and to grow and study. So I used every waking hour to study so I would not fall into that category, of those people who had to repeat. And so the first semester--and then actually, I made the dean's List to my surprise. And the second semester I again made the dean's List, and this was remarkable for somebody who was such a, felt to be such a mediocre student as I was perceived as. So I went back to Hunter College to tell my professor who didn't believe that I had finished--that I had got accepted into medical school in the first place. So I went to her, and her laboratory to meet with her and to show her my grades, to show her that I actually had made the dean's List. And she--when I went in there, she didn't greet me, and so I waited for five minutes and then ten minutes and then fifteen minutes and then twenty minutes, and then thirty minutes. And it was then that I realized that she actually wasn't going to meet with me. So as I got, got out and got prepared to leave, she said, "Don't come back here, and you're a liar and always have been, and I know you did not get into medical school. So don't come back here again." And so I never did for her. And so I, I was distressed by that, that I came to show her that, "Hey, look, I made good. I made the dean's List, though you had doubts about me, I've proven that I, I can do it." But that didn't come to pass. So I went back to school and then at the end of the second year, I, I was number one in the class, in sophomore year. And so I got a lot of honors and prizes and awards and then in, in 1963, after I finished medical school, I finished as the number one student in my class, which no--I mean I, I would never have believed anything like that. That's, that's a miracle, it's miraculous that I could come from being--having such a mediocre beginning and wind up as the ranking student in my class, to finish number one in medical school. Story_ID: 127959 Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the teachers that you had in school, that you remember that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We had very inspirational teachers. We had Dr., Dr. Ralph, who was the physiology and my background in physiology from Hunter College [New York, New York], I was by far, the number one student in the class in physiology. I set all the curves in medical school because of what I had gotten from my physiology teacher at Hunter College. Hunter College, by the way, I was one of the few students that actually had physiology as a major. And physiology is this important course in medical school. And so I led, led the class in, in that and then in bacteriology we had William Bennett and C.W. Johnson and Wallace, Dr. Wallace, those were people who were the pacesetters in microbiology. And I will tell you this that, for the rest of my career in, in medical biology and physiology, I was far above all of the other students I encountered because of this tremendous background that I got at Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee]. And so, then in the sophomore, (unclear) pathology and medicine and pediatrics, all of those people were inspirational. Story_ID: 127960 Speaker 1: Then I, I did an externship that was in many ways life changing because I, I did an externship in the summer of my junior year at Dayton, Ohio. And in Dayton, Ohio, I--I'd always decided I was going to go into tropical medicine 'cause I wanted to be a medical missionary. And while on the medicine rotation, I encountered a patient who had upper gastro-intestinal bleeding that was close to killing him. And then they called in the surgical team. The surgical came in--team came in and they operated on this patient. And he went home three later as good as new. And this inspired me to wanna go from internal medicine to becoming a surgeon. And this was an epiphany for me because I had always figured I was gonna go into internal medicine and have tropical medicine as my specialty as I went to Africa as a medical missionary. But this turned me around, and from that point on I decided I wanted to become a surgeon. Speaker 2: Now, what hospital were you at in Dayton? Speaker 1: I was at, I think it was Good Samaritan Hospital at Dayton, Ohio, and Miami View [sic] Hospital. I went through both of those hospitals. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Miami Valley, yeah. Speaker 1: Miami Valley, that's right, yeah. Speaker 2: I'm from Dayton, so (laughter) know the--(laughter)-- Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Small world, isn't it? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I did an externship there, and that, that was a, really an epiphany for me, and from that point on, for the rest of the senior year, I wanted to go into surgery. And so I applied for an internship in surgery, and I did my--I applied for internships at a number of hospitals, but I got accepted at Cincinnati General Hospital. Now, Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] is in the South, and I was there at the time of the Civil Rights Movement and there were sit-in's and participated in them and thought that going to Cincinnati [Ohio] was moving north, and that I was going to a different climate. Little did I realize that, however, that was just the opposite in that the climate in Cincinnati when I was there as an intern was, to me, even worse than it was in Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 2: You mean in terms of the way they treated--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: In terms of race relations. Speaker 2: Really, race relations, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: This is 19600-- Speaker 1: This was 1963. Speaker 2: Three [1963] and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], '64 [1964]. Yeah, and, but I did my internship there. When I did my internship there, they'd never had a black person as a surgery resident, and they turned me down. And I remember the Jewish--there was a Jewish guy. He was the first Jewish resident, Dr. Fagelman [ph.], and I remember he fought for me. But Dr. Altmeyer [ph.] who was the chairman wouldn't have it at that time. Interesting enough, the first place to accept me in Cincinnati, Ohio was obstetrics and gynecology which is a field of women, medicine and I wasn't interested in that. I was interested in surgery. So I got a position at Harlem Hospital where I had been a patient for six months when I had my pulmonary tuberculosis. Story_ID: 127961 Speaker 1: And it was amazing that from the time I had tuberculosis when I was fifteen till the point I was in medical school, I had no illnesses and I was, for all intents and purposes, cured because prior to that time, there were no cures from T.B. [tuberculosis]. You were arrested. And so you did the best you could, but from that point on until I was in--during my residency, I had absolutely no health concerns. Speaker 2: Okay, well, when was TB concurred? What year was tuberculosis concurred? Speaker 1: When was that--I think one of the medications that I--the medication that I took when I was a patient was Streptomycin and PAS, and Isoniazid was a drug that was just coming out. I think that was the drug that made a difference, Isoniazid and that, that drug then resulted in patients with TB proceeding from being arrested to actually being cured. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, that while--when I was there in '53 [1953], they would only talk about arresting and not cured. The way that those of us who did after that, indicated that this new drug was making a difference. Story_ID: 127962 Speaker 1: So I went to Harlem Hospital [New York, New York], did my internship there and, and was a surgery resident there, intern and resident there. But I didn't like it because I, I perceived that there was a stepfather mentality or stepchild mentality in that the Columbian [Columbia University Hospital] people treated the Harlem [Hospital] surgery residents as second-class citizens. And I didn't like that atmosphere. And I'd heard a lot of positive things about Freedman's Hospital and Howard University Hospital. And so my roommate who had been my roommate at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], Leroy Joseph Amar [ph.] suggested that if I wanted to, to go to Harlem--to go to Howard University Hospital. So I applied and actually transferred to Howard--to Freedman's Hospital and Howard University Hospital in 1964. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so, from 1964 to 1969, I finished my surgery residency at Freedman's Hospital, Howard University Hospital. Speaker 2: Of course, race was not an issue at Freedman's? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Race was not a issue at Freedman's Hospital. Speaker 1: No, it was--and actually, it wasn't at Harlem Hospital because it was all black, but Columbia [University, New York, New York] which was the father hospital or mother hospital actually was very paternalistic. And I was not comfortable with the way they treated us. So I--(simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 127963 Speaker 1: Now, you were-were you paying attention to the Civil Rights Movement when you were in college--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)--Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 1: Yeah, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I sat at tables and, as a matter of fact, had one of my classmates come down from Hunter College [New York, New York] to come and, and help integrate the restaurant, the--down there. So, yes, there--the Civil Rights Movement was very active in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Yes, right, with Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Meharry [College]. Speaker 2: And I participated in it as much as I could. Speaker 1: Tennessee State [University], yeah. Speaker 2: There wasn't much in Cincinnati [Ohio] though. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, they had--do you remember the Freedom Rides in '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: I do. I remember that. I didn't participate in those. But I--because I, I had as my priority, based upon those seven students being in my class to finish school and not to be left back and to--because of my mediocre record as a Hunter College student that barely graduated, and I decided that would be my priority. Story_ID: 127964 Speaker 1: So I went to Freedman's Hospital and was, met Jack [E.] White, the, [HM Dr.] LaSalle [D.] Leffall [Jr.] and [Burke] Mickey Syphax, and I was thrilled to be in that environment which was very inspiring and challenging. Speaker 2: Now, these--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, while there, I, I met Fern Irene [ph.] Marshall who was the only nurse--she says, that was willing to work with me when I was doing my surgery work because they said I was too focused and was not easy to work with. She worked with me, and we got along well, and we later married, and, and when I finished-- Speaker 2: Now, what was her name? Now, let's not skip-- Speaker 1: Fern Irene Marshall. Speaker 2: Fern, okay, Fern Irene-- Speaker 1: Middle name is Irene. Her maiden name was Marshall. She was a practical nurse who worked with me on Ward Four and Ward Six, the surgical wards at Freedman's Hospital. Speaker 2: Now, what made you difficult to work with? Was that true or, that you were difficult to work with? Speaker 1: When I talk to everybody else, it seems that that is the case. I was very focused, and intolerant of mediocrity, was then and always have been. And my patients came first, and if they didn't go what was essential to getting my patients well, then I was intolerant. And so, so I guess a million Frenchmen can't be wrong. Everybody else says I was difficult to work with, so I guess I must have been. But it was because of my preoccupation to put patients first in spite of everything and demanding that things be done the best way it can be. Speaker 2: Okay, now, you were married in, what year was it? Speaker 1: I finished in 1969. I got married in 1968, to Fern in my chief residency year. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She wanted to be a medical missionary as well. And so we had a common goal, and as I got to my chief year of residency in surgery, I encountered a Nigerian medical student who indicated to me that there was a civil war in Nigeria and it was coming to an end. And they needed a medical team to get Port Harcourt General Hospital up and running again. So he introduced me to the Kaiser Foundation International, which was operated out of San Francisco [California]. And Fern and I interviewed there, and were fortunate so that we both, at the end of my chief residency year, and after passing my boards, could go straight to Nigeria to work and have our missionary dream come true. Speaker 2: Now, this is the end of the Biafran War, right? Speaker 1: Absolutely, Biafran Civil War-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --crisis, and we went there at the end to restore Port Harcourt General Hospital. So it was, it was a opportunity for both of us to have our lifelong dream come true to become medical missionaries. Story_ID: 127965 Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So in March of 1970, we both went to Port Harcourt, Nigeria and worked there for nine months. At the end of nine months, I had lost forty pounds. And actually, she [Callender's wife, Irene Marshall Callender] actually was in a coma for a month, probably from some sort of aseptic meningitis or viral meningitis. But at the end of nine, nine months, we had had the opportunity to go all over Nigeria and to meet the medical needs and some of the spiritual needs of, of Nigeria because what we did, during the week we spent our time in the hospital. On weekends, we'd go into the village and, and be missionaries to the areas, to bring the medical needs as well as spiritual needs, meet those needs of the Nigerians. So, and as a matter of fact, I had thought that I was going to try to spend another five years in Africa as a missionary. But the fact that I lost forty pounds, and I wasn't huge to start off with, dissuaded me, and helped me believe that I needed to spend more time back with people who look like me in the United States. So after my nine-month tour in Nigeria, even though I went to Dembidolo in Ethiopia, along with my wife to size it up and to see if I would do five more years in Ethiopia. I decided to go back to the United States and to take advantage of a N.I.H. [National Institutes of Health] fellowship to go into transplantation. However, I did wanna try it again just to see if that first nine months was a freak accident, and if I just lost forty pounds because of circumstances that were extraordinary. Well, I went back in early 1970 [sic, 1971], around January. And I stayed for three months, and I lost twenty pounds and got malaria this time. So it seemed to me that the message I was receiving from the Lord was that I needed to come back to take a work with people that looked like me here in the United States of America. So I decided to come back and took a fellowship in transplantation at the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 1: This is 1971. Story_ID: 127966 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about those days in Africa that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Many stories. Speaker 1: --you can tell us? Can you tell us one? Speaker 2: Many stories. I guess the most interesting (laughter), the most interesting one has to do with the fact that I was the leader of the team, American team, in Nigeria. And I had an Australian who was my vice leader. And he, he hadn't worked with blacks before, and he and I didn't get along too well. As a matter of fact, one of the things that happened was that there was kind of a, a little civil war in our team. And he didn't get along with me, and so it seemed to be an issue that was interfering with relationships with the Nigerian population. He was white, and I was black, and it seemed for a while that they were siding with him. But I, I made a contact from the United States with the Secretary--permanent Secretary, Military Governor of Nigeria, and so when push came to shove, this Australian had to leave, and I stayed. And so that was one of the interesting issues that came up. But the bottom line was, it was a very exciting opportunity to--and it was my first administrative experience. So it, it really prepared me for the rest of my career because I, I thought I was returning home to Africa, and I, I actually was having a wonderful experience that was preparing me for the rest of my career, and for my administrative career, working with people who just come out of a civil war, who were grateful to us who'd come there to help them restore the hospital. And I learned many things. First, the surgical illnesses were very rudimentary. For example, more people were dying of tetanus, which is a preventable disease, than for anything else, did many operations on hernias and cancer and, and really had many successful, satisfying surgical experiences. My wife [Fern Marshall Callender] worked with me as my operating room nurse. And so it was a very thrilling experience to be in Nigeria, and having my life's dream come true because this is what I decided I wanted to do at the age of seven. And so, right after my surgical residency, to be able to go and do that was very thrilling and very satisfying to me to have a dream, an impossible dream, fulfilled. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I felt that I had come full circle. I wanted to become a medical missionary at seven, and here I was at thirty-five, and I had accomplished my dream. Story_ID: 128680 Speaker 1: Did you ever encounter some of the traditional medical practices in Nigeria and what did you think of them, and, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, that was one of the experiences that was kind of astonishing. It wasn't only that there was traditional medicine that was practiced because I under--I recognized and understood that. And we just tried to do the best we could recognizing that traditional medicine was there long before us. But their culture was such--so different in the way they accepted life and death and other things, you know. I recall the first time I had one of my patients die. And I was not prepared for the cultural demonstration that I witnessed. First place, they started pounding on the wall, screaming and hollering and this was just beyond my imagination. And, and later on I realized that whenever a person dies, that's how they're going to respond. But the first time it occurred, I was taken back and thought it was personal. But it actually isn't personal. It's just how they respond to death. So that, that was one of their cultural behaviors and traditions that I was totally unprepared for. I actually also--and that was in the practice of medicine. But I think, other than that, I didn't really have any situations in which our practice of medicine, the Westernized practice of medicine and the traditional practice of medicine really interfered with one another because, to me, traditional medicine was a given. And the Western brand of it and their acceptance of it, it was up to them to accept it. And we really didn't have any interactions that were problematic because of it. The real problem was the lack of supplies and the lack of medications, but we did the best we could with that. Story_ID: 128681 Speaker 1: What I did experience out of the hospital, though, was something that I also, also found equally surprising because when I left the United States, I thought that when I went to Africa, that the race relations issue was a thing of the past. And so when I went to the beach the first time and saw the people who were white putting on cream so they could turn darker, and the people who were black putting on bleaching cream so they could turn white, was particularly surprising to me, and I won't ever forget that as long as I live. That was as astonishing to me as was the cultural reaction to death to me, when they really beat on the walls and pounded and hollered and screamed because I think one of the things we don't realize is that when we go to other countries, and they have different cultures and, that, that's something that we have to learn to adjust to. And so when people go to Africa, one of the important things that I think every, every person of color who has an origin in Africa, should get a chance to go there so you can really learn what Africa is really all about because it's not what you think about, think it is. And so I learned what was really going on in Africa. Some of the things were frightening and some were not so frightening. I guess the, the other thing that was surprising to me was that, when I recognized that the, Africa, the things that were sent from the United States to be given free were often sold by the people who were in positions, in official positions, were sold to them, the people who were supposed to be getting it for free, in addition to which dash was something that was a common practice in Africa in which things were used--that were not supposed to be charged for, were charged for, so that dash was a common term and something that you became familiar with or you didn't get anything done. So those are some of the issues that were part of that culture that were not part of the culture of United States of America. And that's why I think it's so important for all people of color who of African origin to go to Africa, learn about it firsthand, not necessarily from those who are in the sophisticated and the rich aspect of it, those people who are in the villages. Those are the people where you go to help and they appreciate what you bring to them. The other people in the other higher levels may not be as appreciative, but those people need you and if you can go and help them, it's good. But you also need to learn and understand what you're getting into. Story_ID: 128682 Speaker 1: Did, did the Nigerians seem receptive to the religious message? Speaker 2: Now, it's interesting because when I went to go to the mission field and went to talk about Christianity there, it was very well received, at least the place I went to because the missionaries who were bringing things--and they weren't charging anything, the places where it was charged was when people went outside of the church. But the church would bring things that were free, and so, because they brought things that were free, they were accepting of their religious practices and beliefs. So that that was very welcome-- welcomed in the places where we went to minister. Story_ID: 128683 Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the names of any of your Nigerian colleagues or associates over there? Speaker 2: I think Graham-Douglas was one of the ministers of health. He was the one. Then there's--he was the one that I remember the most 'cause he was one of the most powerful politicians in Nigeria at the time, at Port Harcourt, Nigeria, was Graham-Douglas, and they had a big family of Graham-Douglas's. Speaker 1: That's a surprising name for a Nigerian? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: That's a surprising name for a Nigerian, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, Graham-Douglas, you're right. Speaker 1: Graham-Douglas. Speaker 2: But that was, that was the name, and that was the family that had the power and the minister of health there. Speaker 1: Did people have any memory of, or the consciousness about the slave trade or how African Americans got to America? Speaker 2: Actually, didn't have much encounters with that. I did encounter the fact that people who worked there worked for minimum wages, so to speak. And, that in many ways, what, what we would consider working for nothing, is what they were doing. And they were almost like slaves. They were paid, but the wages were so small that it was almost like they were slaves. The goat that they ate, and the other things that they ate were of interest, but I guess the thing that also was not expected was the fact that they also had just gotten through a civil war. There were bombs that were close by and all of the soldiers were there, had their guns in arm so that this was an aspect of it that was unexpected. It was real, nonetheless, and on occasion, some of the bombs would go off, and so that was even more frightening. Speaker 1: It was likes mines--(unclear), (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Bombs, yeah, bombs (unclear), (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: But very few people were hurt, but just frightening, nonetheless. Story_ID: 128684 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so you came back to accept a position with National Institute of Health [N.I.H.] in '91 [sic, 1971], right? Speaker 2: Right, and, and the--I never really understood why I lost forty pounds the first time and twenty pounds the second time because all of the tests that I got when I came back did not demonstrate any infection or infestation or anything like that. So I, I really don't know. All I know is that, it wasn't compatible with, with my living there. And so I decided to come back and, and deal with the, in the ministry of health that God gave me and transplantation. And so I went to the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] and worked with John Najarian and [Richard] Rich Simmons who ran the transplant program there. They--that was one of the most outstanding transplant programs in the country. And I was led there because one of my classmates, Bob Allen, had told me that Big John Najarian was a great teacher and trainer, and, and when I got to Minnesota, it turned out that he was absolutely right. It was a great training program. John Najarian was--he had no concern about complexion or race or anything like that. He wanted you to excel, if you excel, then you did well. If you didn't excel, and you didn't do well, it had nothing to do with your complexion or anything else. It had to do with the fact that you didn't do, you didn't excel. But he was a guy who color was not a barrier, excellence [clearing throat] was the only issue. And so it was a pleasure to work with him, and I learned so much from him in the two years that I worked. I learned research, and I learned the art and science of transplantation and transplant surgery. And I learned it--and I also had the opportunity to meet the first African American transplant surgeon in the world, Dr. Samuel Kountz who actually came to visit Minnesota while I was there. He was the first, he was a trailblazer, "the" first African American transplant surgeon in the world-- Story_ID: 128685 Speaker 1: Now, Dr. [Samuel] Kountz, he, he's an African American? Speaker 2: Yes, he was actually from Arkansas and wound up in Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], and then after exceling in Stanford, was, he was appointed as the Chairman of Surgery at [State University of New York] Downstate Medical College [New York, New York]. And so shortly after I finished my training at University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] [clearing throat], I found the opportunity to work with him on weekends and often so that while I did my transplant training at University of Minnesota, and you might read some places that (laughter), that I trained under [Dr. Samul] Sam Kountz, it's not actually true. I did my training with John Najarian, but when I returned as a fully-trained surgeon, I spent a lot of time with Sam Kountz, learning from him, the arts and science of transplant surgery as he had learned them. And he was one of the pioneers, it was an opportunity to learn a lot from him. It was interesting as well to work with him and Khalid Butts who is, who was his right hand there because in 1980, he actually died of complications of high blood pressure. You'll actually read in the literature that he died of something he contracted in Africa, but the truth of the matter is that he actually died of complications of high blood pressure. We, as doctors, aren't always good patients. We don't always take our medication as we should. And he developed complications of high blood pressure, which resulted in him being in the hospital and one of the medications he took resulted in him getting a seizure and convulsions and because of the fact that he had some anatomical differences in his neck, they had difficulty intubating him. As a consequence, he had brain damage that resulted in his later death and him never being able to practice surgery again. So he died at around the age of fifty in the prime of his career, the prime of his life. But in spite of what you read in the books, he actually died of complications of high blood pressure. But he was a great friend and a great surgeon and great human being who has a legacy of his own that will live on. As a consequence of my interaction with him, shortly after his death, I put on at least six Samuel Kountz International Symposia which would honor, honor his legacy and, and try to get people to recognize the minority dilemma in transplantation that existed yesterday and today and we hope will be eliminated tomorrow. But it, it's something that is important to acknowledge and be aware of. Speaker 1: Okay, well--so he was, Kountz, Dr. [Samuel] Kountz was involved in kidney transplantation, right? Speaker 2: He was a pioneer in kidney transplantation. He came along shortly after John Najarian and [Richard] Rich Simmons and [Thomas] Tom Starzl and those blacks who were the pioneers of kidney transplantation. He did some things in transplantation that hadn't, hadn't been done before. He did a lot with live donor transplantation, was one of the first to use intravenous steroids to reverse rejection episodes and was one of the first to do live transplantation on television, which was televised across the United States. He was quite a, a surgeon and was internationally renowned, had gone to Egypt and other places to do transplants, to take transplantation outside of the United States of America. He was quite a pioneer and quite a surgeon who became the first African American president of the Society of University Surgeons. Story_ID: 128686 Speaker 1: So you were at N.I.H. [National Institutes of Health]--now, did you serve, did you serve this fellowship in Minnesota or were you-- Speaker 2: I did an N.I.H. fellowship at University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota]-- Speaker 1: You did, okay. Speaker 2: --so National Institutes of Health funded me to go to Minnesota to do my research training and clinical training in kidney transplantation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so after finishing two years there, I came back to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], Freedman's Hospital, to start the transplant program in 1973. We then performed our first kidney transplant in January of 1974. We did two kidney transplants and one of the patients, Scotty Leffridge [ph.] lived for eighteen years after that kidney transplantation and had a very lively and productive life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I had the joy of starting things. Now, [HM] Senator Edward Brooke was the congressman who helped us as we, we and the community, battled to make Howard University Hospital and Freedman's Hospital a site for kidney transplantation that could receive reimbursement. And with the community's help and Senator Brooke's help, we were able to make that dream become a reality. And in 1975, we were--because of the community and Senator Brooke's help, we were able to be, get reimbursement for all the transplants we did, retroactive to January of 1973. Speaker 1: Tell me this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I'm sorry January, 1974. Story_ID: 128687 Speaker 1: Are there any specific issues that affect the, attendant to kidney transplants in the African American community in terms of getting organs to transplant or, or physiological issues or-- Speaker 2: There are a number of issues that are uniquely problematic for the African American population. The leading cause of kidney failure in blacks is diabetes and hypertension. Now, the leading cause of kidney failure in whites is diabetes, but the second commonest cause is hypertension. So we have more diabetes and more hypertension than other ethnic groups. And this is why we, for example, while we make up thirteen percent of the American population, we comprise thirty, nearly thirty-five percent of those people who are on dialysis and waiting for transplant in the United States of America, so that we're disproportionately afflicted and affected by hypertension and diabetes, two to four times the rates that are associated with other ethnic groups. And so that was one of the issues because one of the things that they identified as they did the study was that when you went into the Southeastern part of the United States of America, seventy percent of those patients who were on dialysis were black. And yet, less than ten percent of those donors were black. And this, this disparity of dichotomy that existed between the need for transplantation and donation was brought to my doorstep by the Southeastern Organ Procurement Foundation who wanted to unravel this mystery. As is often the case, when they come to unravel mysteries that relate to the African American population, the funds were becoming very scarce. As a matter of fact, they had no funding for us. So we did something that was pretty interesting. We went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and asked them to give us five hundred dollars. Now, in this day of asking funds for large sums of money, we asked only for five hundred dollars, which is five hundred dollars more than we had. And with this five hundred dollars, Dr. James Bayton, the eminent psychologist at Howard University worked along with me, and I worked along with psychology students to go into the African American community and to survey them and ask them why it is that African Americans are reluctant to become donors. We're disproportionately afflicted and affected by these diseases, hypertension and diabetes, but--and we have an inordinate, high prevalence and incidence rate of end-stage renal disease. But yet, we are reluctant to become donors, and the question is why? So we went to the community with questionnaire, developed by Dr. James Bayton and his students, and asked them the questions, "Why are black reluctant to become donors?" And at the end of this study, using this five hundred dollars, paying donors twenty to forty dollars a piece, we were able to evaluate some forty donors and get the answers to the question, "Why is it that African Americans are reluctant to become donors?" Story_ID: 128688 Speaker 1: We identified first that they were unaware of the fact that they were disproportionately afflicted and affected by the need for transplantation, and the need for donors. Secondly, they had religious myths and misperceptions that led them to believe that when they get into the Pearly Gates, they get into their great (unclear) morning, that they will need to have their own bodies and tissues in order to get into Heaven. This is far from the truth. Jesus Christ came--died and gave his life so that we might have a second chance at life. So it is the right and proper and Christian thing to do to give organs in life and after death. And so this was the second obstacle, the misperception that there's a religious reason when, in point of fact, there is no Protestant or Catholic group that is reluctant to give organs and tissues in life and after death. Now, there are some small Jewish segments and other populations that have a reluctance to give, but religion is not the obstacle. Even in the Islam religion, that is not the obstacle because nothing is as valuable as saving another human's life. So that we, we've identified that it wasn't--that while it was a lack of awareness, while it was inappropriate, but religion myths and misperceptions. Thirdly, they had the concern that, that we're gonna be used as guinea pigs again, as it happened in the early '30s [1930s] and existed until 19--late 1960s and the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Now, that's reflecting on at this juncture because I think the Tuskegee Syphilis experiment was revealed to the general public in 1972 or three [1973]. Also, during that period of time, the sickle cell anemia, the sickle cell anemia crisis in the black community was publicized even though it had already--it had always existed, it was publicized in the mid-'70s [1970s] too. So. Speaker 1: Right, so from--and, and the real problem was that from 1936 to the late '60s [1960s], penicillin was available. So here you have a group that they were researching on, experimenting on for which the cure for the disease was already present, and they didn't give those people that. So that it was clear that blacks were being used as guinea pigs. And so this has been one of the obstacles to organ tissue donation ever since. And so we had to develop ways to overcome this third obstacle. Speaker 2: And there were even--let me just point out too that there were even plays written in the black community about us being the spare parts for white people. Speaker 1: Well, that, that came up as well. The third was the Tuskegee incident. The fourth was the concern that if, if I become a donor, that all my body parts are gonna go only to whites and not go to blacks. That is not the case, but that was the misperception. And the fifth obstacle had to do with the concern about racism, the fear that basically, our society has been racists, and why should it change behavior. And so the--so we identified the five reasons African Americans were reluctant to become donors. And, and what we did though also, is in our group study, we had one, we two donors--one donor and one recipient and the other people who were not donors or recipients. And then what we did, we had a group of pilot--we had group studies, group periods, group workshops sessions, in which they would have dialogue between them. And at the beginning of the study only two of forty would sign donor cards. But the end--at the end of that intervention, all forty signed donor cards, which said to us, there's something about that interaction that would help us to overcome all of the obstacles, obstacles to organ and tissue donation. Story_ID: 128689 Speaker 1: And with that, based upon that survey, we decided to form the [Washington] D.C. Organ Donor program--project, and with the combination of partnership of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and the National Kidney Foundation, we formed the D.C. Organ Donor Program [District of Columbia Donor Organ Project] with you going to communities with a makeup just like the workshop that we had, with a healthcare provider, with a person who was waiting for a kidney, with a person who had given a kidney, and with a donor family member, and with all of these we'd go into the community, educating and empower the community to change their behavior, to give organs in life, give tissues in life and after death. And so with this in mind, between 1982 and 1986, we did just that in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], Maryland and Virginia. And to our great delight, the number of organ and tissue donors who were African American doubled. And the number of people who were African American also doubled. So that this then said that our pilot project that we started in the District of Columbia was a successful one and one that warranted duplication in other parts of the United States. Story_ID: 128690 Speaker 1: And with this in mind, we started the D.C. Organ Donor Program [District of Columbia Donor Organ Project], and we went to the Dow Chemical Company and made a presentation to demonstrate to them that by getting this information into the African American community, that the community which was educated and empowered to make a difference, would, in fact, make a difference. And the donor rate would increase just as it had in the District of Columbia. We made that case, and the Dow Chemical Company at the time was in need of a positive image reinforcement. And as such, they funded me to go to twenty-five cities across the United States with predominantly black populations, to educate and empower these communities by the use of the grassroots efforts and by the media, to allow us to get into the written media and the spoken media, TV, radio and whatever print media you had, to get the message out that African Americans were needed to become organ and tissue donors so that they can help other African Americans who were in need because we were so disproportionately represented on the transplant waiting list. Speaker 2: Now, let me just ask you, what year was the D.C. Organ Donor Program started? Speaker 1: The D.C. Organ Donor Program was started in 1982, and went through to 1988. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The Dow Chemical Company was started in--and they had "Take Initiative Program"--that's what it was called. The Dow Chemical Company "Take Initiative Program" began in 1985 and went through to 1992. And one of the things that happened was that, similar to what happened with the African American population, were able to identify, based upon Gallop Polls that were done in '85 [1985] and done again in 1990, that the number of African Americans who were now aware of the highly successful nature of transplantation in the African American community, tripled. The number of people who signed donor cards in the African American community, in that population, tripled. So we found that what we had done so successfully in the African American communities of the District of Columbia and Maryland and Virginia, was equally successful when we coupled it with the mass media campaign that Dow Chemical Company helped us to put on. And with this, we were able to see that the number of donors tripled. So, it then became clear that if you go and talk to the African American community, they will change their behavior and their mindsets, and become of the--become part of the donor population. Prior to our, our doing this--we were the first one to do this, they said that blacks would not donate, that they would not become part of the donor population. But we proved them wrong. And this is something, another miracle that has happened, where we've seen our intervention markedly improve and increase organ donation rates in the minority population, especially as role modeled by the African American population. Story_ID: 127978 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I--to give you a little history about the, how the [Washington] D.C. Organ Donor Project started and how the Dow Chemical Company sent us across the nation. Well, what we had developed was that we had a grassroots program that was developed based upon the Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council], which is to go in the community, educate and empower them. And we had that, plus the mass media effort that was provided by the Dow Chemical Company. So between those two, we recognized that what happened was that we'd taken a, a--the African American community, a community people said would not donate, and we'd done something which was to make the near impossible, possible, and that is that the African American community became a model. And we said that we wanted to then take this model and apply it to all of the minority populations. And, hence, we conceived the concept of M.O.T.T.E.P., the National Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program, which we then called the National M.O.T.T.E.P. And what we did was then to take the role model that we developed for the African American community in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] and apply it into fifteen sites across the United States of America. Story_ID: 127979 Speaker 1: Now, the real story behind all of this is that we, we did all of this, as much as we could, but, of course, in order to accomplish something like this, you have to have funds. We had none. So we talked about our conceptualization of [the National] M.O.T.T.E.P.[Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program] and presented to the bodies that would allow us to talk about it. And we also had an opportunity to present at [HM]Congressman [Louis] Stokes' meeting. He had a meeting in which he wanted to hear what was proposed in terms of going forward. So he gave us an opportunity to make a presentation before him. At that presentation was, happened to be [HM Dr.]Louis Sullivan who was the Secretary of Health and John Ruffin who worked for him under the Office of Minority Health. Speaker 2: Now, this is what year? What year is this? Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: This was in 1991, we conceptualized it. And in 1991, we made a presentation also before Congressman Stokes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And in this presentation, we talked about our conceptualization of this model, M.O.T.T.E.P., and how we wanted to apply it in fifteen cities across the United States. The only missing ingredient was money. Well, when we made this presentation to Congressman Stokes, one of the things that impressed him was the fact that this was a role model that was developed in the African American community, and was being spread to all of the ethnic groups. And it, and the potential was to start it in cities like Washington, D.C., Cleveland, Ohio and, and then take it to cities who had other ethnic populations like Native American populations, Alaskan natives and the Asian Pacific Islands in Hawaii. So we made the presentation to him, and he was impressed with it, impressed enough to get the Secretary of Health, at that time, [Dr.] Louis Sullivan and John Ruffin to allow me to go in to meet with them to try to make this into a, a grant in addition to which Congressman Stokes introduced it as a earmark into legislation that would allow for funding so that the National M.O.T.T.E.P. could become a reality. So we conceptualized it in 1991. Because of Lou Sullivan and Louis Stokes and John Ruffin, we were able to get it into a contract funding in 1993, in which we asked for, for four million [dollars] and got $400,000. With the 400,000 we developed a prototype in three cities, Washington, D.C., Cleveland, Ohio, and we then went for a grant to make it up to eight sites. And because of the success with the additional eight, $800,000, it made it up to $1.2 million, we then asked for permission to, to get a grant and go into fifteen sites across the United States of America and asked for $6 million and actually got an N.I.D.D.K. [the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases] grant for six million dollars for five years to take this into fifteen sites across the United States of America, in which we went to New York City, to Washington, D.C., to Chicago, Illinois, to Detroit, Michigan, to Houston, Texas, to Honolulu, Hawaii, to the Filipino population there, to the Alaskan natives of Alaska and to Los Angeles, California to the Hispanic groups in Miami [Florida], to the Latino-Hispanic group there. Story_ID: 127980 Speaker 1: And so we were able to use this combination of grassroots community education empowerment, combined with the mass media element in all of those different sites. The key to it though was the component of the grassroots effort in which the community organized itself and endorsed the programs that it would use to meet whatever community needs were necessary to educate and empower the group to become organ and tissue donors. And this then was done at each of these sites, and over a period of five years, with the organization and the funds that allowed us to provide media and the opportunity to organize the grass-root campaigns, were able to conceptualize [the National] M.O.T.T.E.P. [Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program], and then make it happen. Now, the thing that was really so exciting about M.O.T.T.E.P. was the fact that as we looked at the objective elements of the success of the program, were able to identify that between the time we started in 1995 when we got the formal grant--the contract began in '93 [1993], but the formal grant in 1995 and 2000. And by 2005, we had seen the number of minority donors--not just speaking of the African American donors which is a separate issue, but the number of minority donors, when we started, the minority population comprised fifteen percent of the American population. I'm sorry--the minority population comprised twenty-five percent of the American population but only fifteen percent of the donors. By the end of that period, while minority donors comprised twenty-five percent of the American population, it now comprised thirty percent of the donors. So we've seen a situation in which the organ donor population has increased by doubling, from fifteen percent to thirty percent when in--before it was not at the percent of its population, it is now is in excess of its percent of the population. Now, this was an accomplishment that we took great pride in, not saying that we were the only groups that were doing it, but we had--were the first to do it, and were able to see changes, not only that we were able to record, but we had an outside group look at the M.O.T.T.E.P. sites and compare and contrast them with the non-M.O.T.T.E.P. sites and were able to identify statistically significant improvement in minority donation rates, particularly in those sites where there were M.O.T.T.E.P. sites. So that we had done something that was at least improbable. We'd taken a group that was thought not to be willing to donate, and used them as a role model for other ethnic groups and seeing that, as a consequence of that, the number of minority donation rates has doubled. Story_ID: 127981 Speaker 1: What was also interesting to be--to identify was that in all ethnic groups except one, and that was the Native American group, that this role model was successful in increasing donation rates. Speaker 2: What happened in the Native American group? Speaker 1: Native American, we were not able to successfully accomplish that. And the reason we believe was because at the time, we didn't have a Native American successfully transplanted patient who could be the role model. In all the other sites, we were able to get people from the community who were actually transplanted, who then were able to take the message and were able to successfully get the communities to be educated and empowered to make the lifestyle changes that were appropriate. Story_ID: 127982 Speaker 1: In addition to increasing the donation rates, though, we recognized that one of the biggest problems was the increased incidence of end-stage renal disease in the minority population. One of the things that became clear over time was that while minorities comprised twenty-five percent of the American population, they represent nearly sicty percent of those people who are on the transplant list, waiting for transplants. So while it's impossible to expect the twenty-five percent of the population to meet the needs of those sixty percent, we certain have gotten them to get to the point where they're at thirty percent, and we're still moving to get them up to thirty-five percent. So that, because of their predisposition to high blood pressure and diabetes, the minority population is more disproportionately disadvantaged and by the afflict--affliction of hypertension and diabetes. But we have gotten them to the point where at least we have gotten them to donate in excess of their percent of the population. And that's something that we think is a major accomplishment, especially in transplantation where it was thought that we couldn't overcome the obstacles. We actually have recognized that with community education and empowerment and the mass media, we're able to overcome those five obstacles that we've talked about before, by having a spokesperson from the community to educate and, and empower the rest of the community to change their behavior. But in addition, we adopted a new concept, which is it "love yourself, take care of yourself" so that we can address this inordinately high incidence of end-stage renal disease by getting people to change their lifestyle and behaviors so that the first five years, we had the grant to increase donation rates. The next five years, we had the grant to change lifestyles and behaviors so that we should decrease the inordinately high incidence of end-stage renal disease in the minority population. And we have evidence that the community, based upon the surveys and the educational surveys that we did before our presentations, and then after the presentations, and then two to six months after the presentations, were able to see that these presentations made a difference, and that this was a difference that was sustained. And so we've been able to increase donation rates and we're able to see some of the stabilization of the rapidly rising incidence of end-stage renal disease that was part and parcel of the reason why the minority population's more disadvantage and needs transplants more than the majority population. So this then is what we've seen as a consequence of [the National] M.O.T.T.E.P. [Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program]. Story_ID: 127983 Speaker 1: Now, the, the issue that remains an issue is the issue of sustaining the funds that are necessary to keep sites like this growing and developing and, and becoming repopulated in other sites and locations because right now, we're talking about, about 100 and--close to 120,000 who are on the transplant waiting list. And we transplant about 30,000 people a year, which means you've got an, a disparity of about 80,000 people who are not gonna be transplanted. Because of that, twenty people die every single day because of the donor shortage in the United States of America. So, we need more [the National] M.O.T.T.E.P. [Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program] sites. Now, one of the encouraging aspects of it is, that when you have a donation--let's just say you have a donation of, of kidneys, not to speak of livers and other organs and tissues. Or if you just talked about dialysis, dialysis costs about $40,000 a year to dialyze a patient. For a successful transplant, it cost about $10,000 a year. So if you have a donation of two organs and you think about something like M.O.T.T.E.P. which, which we got about sixteen million dollars over the course of ten years, you can see that that's--you may think of that as a large contribution. But when you think of the fact that if you have a kidney transplant and the average kidney transplant in most populations last about nine to ten years, then after three years, you break even. So that if you have two donors--two kidneys from one donor, and you get a liver and other organs, you can save, as a result of that, upwards of twenty million dollars. So that if you think of one donor saving a $135,000 and you figure out that we're going to have, maybe two to three thousand donors from the minority population, this comes into savings into the millions of dollars. So going up from twenty to, to $100 million that can be saved if you have kidneys, livers and hearts, but if you're just talking about kidney alone, you're talking about saving something in the order of twenty to thirty million dollars which would--per year, which makes the investment of sixteen million dollars over ten years, a worthwhile return on an investment. And it's something that funding is a particularly special issue if you're gonna go into the community, educate the community and see that some of those funds that go into the community, they can educate and empower themselves to become part of the solution to the problem. And this then is what we're about. Now, one of the issues that is, is looming large is not only the issue that exists with organ transplantation, which is a major issue because saving lives--people who become organ donors save lives. People who become tissue donors improve the quality of life so that the blind can see, the death can hear, the lame can walk again and those who would otherwise die, have a second chance at life. So that organ, tissue donation saves lives and improves the quality of lives for many people. So if you had one donor, you can talk about saving six lives and, and, and allowing another fifteen people to have the quality of their lives enhanced. Story_ID: 127984 Speaker 1: Now, there's a new issue that's coming on to the field, and that is, stem cell transplantation. One of the problems is that everybody is aware of kidney transplantation and heart transplantation, liver transplantation, lung transplantation. They're not as aware of stem cell transplantation which is coming into the fore. The problem is that in the past, the minority community has been on the outside looking in. We talk about narrowing and eliminating disparities. Well, we've eliminated--we've narrowed and almost eliminated the organ donor disparity. We're close to eliminating the equitable allocation disparity. But now, as a consequence of what's happening with stem cell transplantation, if we don't have the same type of community educating, empowering effort as it relates to stem cell transplantation, we'll find ourselves, the minority population, once again on the outside looking in. And so it's important to have this kind of program, not only for organ transplantation, but also for what's coming into play very soon, stem cell transplantation. With stem cell transplantation, you're talking about the possibility of eliminating diabetes mellitus. You have millions of Americans who have diabetes, and, and the poor management of diabetes results in losses of sight, losses of limbs, loss--heart attacks, strokes and so forth. And, and we envision if the majority--minority community is not educated appropriately, then we'll have the same thing that happened in organ transplantation where the rich and the, the white population will take advantage of it. But the more poor minority communities will not be able to. And so the same way we educated about organ and tissue transplantation, we're gonna need to also educate about stem cell transplantation. So down the road, this is another arena which we haven't been able to successful permeate but it's an issue and an area that needs a similar type of education for stem cell transplantation. How can stem cell transplantation help eliminate diabetes, allow for corneal transplantation, more effective, to help addresses inflections, infectious diseases, and so on, going down to neurologic brain and nerve cell transplantation so that this then is the wave of the future, not to speak of necessarily the fact that we can have organs that are growing, organogenesis is part of regenerative medicine as well. And all of these things, the community, the minority community has to become educated and empowered to participate in. Story_ID: 127985 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. What are the source of stem cells? Speaker 2: Stem cells can, can be from a number of sources. One is the common, commonly disparaged fetal cell because you're talking about an embryo that comes. So that's one source of it. But we now know that more common sources are umbilical cord transplantation. Everybody that's born has an umbilical cord. So you can get that as a source. We now know that-- Speaker 1: So you can harvest the umbilical cord, save it and --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Umbilical cord, yes, save it and use it. Speaker 1: --and, and those cells would--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --be reproduced. Speaker 2: The problem is in the minority community, we don't, we don't get enough for a number of reasons. Finances is one. Education and empower, again, is the other one. So that, this then is something that--then, the other is that we found that you can get it from the blood and bone marrow, okay. So you don't need to worry about the stem cell, so that one of the programs that we've talked about, going into the churches and educating them and empowering about the fact that we can get cord blood and other sources of, of stem cells that do not involve the fetus at all so that we can get away from that religious obstacle to stem transplantation. So this, then is something that we, we believe it's something that, educating and empowerment in order to accomplish that. It's not the wave of today, but it is the wave of tomorrow, and that tomorrow is--may only be a year or two away. And so this then is our vision of what transplantation will be like tomorrow. For example, there is a new process that has occurred, just last year in which they're able to take an organ like the heart and the lung and take all of the cells out of it and just leave the network, the structure. If you then took stem cells from the person himself, put him in that structure--whether that's from another animal or pig or whatever, you could then have transplantation done without even needing immuno-suppression. This then is the dream and the vision that we have for transplantation tomorrow and the day after tomorrow. So that this then is going to require, again, the same kind of community education and empowerment that we did for organ transplantation for stem cell transplantation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that this then is some of the, the work that we are involved with because we feel that we don't need to be on the outside looking in again. Majority--minority health disparity is the theme of today, to narrow and eliminate health disparities. So in order to do that, we've got to continue to do the same thing that we've done before, but broader perspective. The fact that we've been able to do it in fifteen sites across the United States successfully, is the reason why we need funds to take it to higher heights and deeper depths, to accomplish that goal. Story_ID: 127986 Speaker 1: Did-do you--and I'm reminded of this when I--I've thought about this, and I may be the only one who would think about this, listening to this presentation. But I was thinking about prevention, and you mentioned prevention as something that you actually don't hear a lot of discussion about in the black community. But on the campus of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] there are a lot of restaurants that attend Howard that are counterculture, that are vegetarian-- Speaker 2: (Laughter)-- Speaker 1: --and have, and sell silver water and all kinds of other--I mean if people are thinking about prevention, have been doing this since the '60s [1960s], where that's not always true in the black community, where people are talking about this kind of thing, about prevention and health concerns ahead of time, like, you know, cutting out, you know, red meat, cutting out, you know, certain kinds of fat and cutting out certain--salt and all that sort of thing. But you've got, there're at least four restaurants I know across the street from Howard that, you know, are trying to serve people who are taking a different approach to diet and health. Speaker 2: Well, I, I think that "love yourself, take care of yourself" is one of the themes that we have tried to push since 2000 because an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. And we feel that our society spends far too much money on the terminal end and far too little money on the preventive end. It is clear that that's, hopefully, that's gonna change as we recognize the importance of, of an ounce of prevention. When we go into communities now, we emphasize healthy lifestyles. We emphasize the fact that the environment is poisonous as is the food you eat. And so, therefore, emphasizing the importance of obesity, which is an epidemic that is ever rising because obesity is one of the major causes of end-stage renal disease. It's a major cause of metabolic syndrome with diabetes again and hypertension, the same cycle that started the kidney problem in the first place. And so, in order to address that, we need aggressive campaigns that emphasize, "love yourself, take care of yourself" to cut back on the fried, greasy foods, to eliminate or decrease markedly the dependence upon red meat, to appreciate the value of fruit and vegetables, to emphasize the importance of exercise, the fact that thirty minutes a day exercise for five days a week is desirable, but mandatory if you're over forty. When we look the way in which our ethnic group and the minority ethnic groups in general are victimized by these diseases, especially, now, obesity which is reinforcing all the others, then you have to recognize that not only is it proper eating, but proper exercise that makes a difference. Now, I've talked about institutionalized racism, and that's a term that most people don't like to hear. But in my perception, it is the one element that is pervasive in all of these issues that talk about the majority, minority health disparity, at the foundation of a lot of this is institutionalized racism. And, and when you mention the fact that there are places, fast-food stores which are predominantly in the minority communities, when you want to--you gotta get healthy food, it's more expensive. So therefore, you're gonna have to go out of the ethnically deprived areas and the poverty-stricken areas and go into other areas, and it's more expensive. So because of that, a lot of our people then live off of the fast-food providers, and these fast-food providers force us to be in positions where we win the race from the cradle to the grave. And that's a race we want to lose, and the way we can lose that race is by "Loving yourself, taking care of yourself". And, you know, in our last [the National] M.O.T.T.E.P.[Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program] grant, we developed a model that I wanna talk about a little bit later, which is called the "Be Blessed Model" which will help us lose the race from the cradle to the grave. Story_ID: 128691 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about--now, does--you mentioned earlier about how some people, due to religion may resist, you know, did not like the aspect of harvesting tissue from fetuses for transplantation and how people thought they would not go to Heaven if they were not the intact being that was created, you know, when they were born. But there's another aspect of the church that you found interesting that it's changed, due to the educational process, and you were telling us during the break that now they're more receptive than ever, transplantation and procedures, you know, to prevent these diseases. Speaker 2: Well, I, I would tell you that I recall when we first recognized that religious myths and misperceptions are one of the commonest reasons for reluctance to become donors. And so we therefore recognized that getting into the church would be a very important part of our chore. And so I made every effort to get in the church and this is when we first started in the late '80's [1980s] [coughing]. And at that time, it wasn't as easy to get into the church as--we tried to get into the breakfasts and it was really a labor. But over the years--and I would say, along those lines, while the religious misperception existed, it wasn't that difficult to overcome because when I got an opportunity to have a one-on-one discussion with people and groups and were able to identify the ways in which overcoming this obstacle would be helpful to them in their lives, I would say that about ninety percent of the groups or people that I would talk to one-on-one, after I spoke with them for a bit, would be willing to change their posture because they realized that the, the--that when Christ came, especially the Christian groups, the Catholics and Protestants, when Christ came, he came and gave his life so that others might live. And as you look at the Muslim religion, as you look at the Christian religion, and as you look at many of the other, the Buddhist and Confucianism groups, one of the greatest things you can do in your life is to help somebody else and to save somebody else's life. So then when push comes to shove, and you also recognize that Christ came, died, gave his life for others, then this is Christianity. Love, love, love, that's what Christ is all about. That's what religion is all about. "Do unto others as you would have others do unto you." So that when you really talked about it, that it becomes clear that there really isn't a religious objection to transplantation. Now, there are some sects. There's a sect in India, there's a sect in, in the Jewish population where there are small sects where there is a religious objection. But this--I'd say that ninety-five percent of the religions that practice religion have no opposition to transplantation. However, that didn't mean that we had it easy getting into the churches. So one-on-one, talking to people, get into groups and talking to them, that was not a problem for me because when I got there, were able to help them understand and see that religion is strongly in favor of helping one another, therefore, is in favor of transplantation, transplantation. So, but getting into the churches too, in the beginning, in the early '80s [1980s] was not as easy. But as time has gone on, I find that there're many clergymen who have needed transplants and have received transplanting. Some of 'em got 'em from their members. Some of the donors were from their membership. And so as the churches become more involved with people in the membership and in the clergy itself, who need organs for transplantation, it has now become easier to get into the churches. And the most successful areas that we have had that helped us get across this mission--ministry of the need for organ donation has been the church and the women. Those are the two most powerful groups of getting people to change their minds and their behaviors. And I think much of our success has been the fact that we've been able to get into the churches now and that, and this is not because of, we've been so great in doing things, but that in point of fact, our community is so disproportionately afflicted by hypertension and diabetes. And, and therefore, the people have strokes, they have, they have heart attacks, they need heart transplants, they need liver transplants, they need kidney transplants and therefore, it is in their own best interests to become part and parcel of the solution which is increasing organ and tissue donation and increasing transplantation among our people of color. Story_ID: 128692 Speaker 1: Okay, you had something called the "Be Blessed Model"? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that we developed after our last grant from N.I.H. [National Institutes of Health] was to look at end-stage renal disease and find out what really is the causation factor. And as we look at some work done by [Dr.] Jules Harrell at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] who started his effort in 1982 and others across the country, we recognized that part and parcel of it institutionalized racism. Part and parcel of it is doing those things that are contrary to the soul and the mind of mankind. And out of it we've evolved--actually, Dr. Alonzo Campbell at Howard University was part of our team, evolved the "Be Blessed Model" which looks at the biological aspects of it, the environmental aspects of it, the behavioral aspects of it, the willingness to love, the willingness to forgive. And as we've looked at those elements of it, we have recognized that one aspect of it that most people don't even think about, but a very positive aspect of it is, is spirituality. And so as we've looked at, and when, as we put together "Be Blessed Model", we, we identified those factors that are associated with positivity and good health. And those factors that are associated with negativity and bad health, and so if you promote the positive, then what will happen will be, you win that race. If you promote the negative, that is hostility, lack of forgiveness, lack of love, then you will promote the losing the race--I'm sorry, the winning the race and dying early. Okay, that's the bottom line. If you, if you win the race, that means you die early. If you lose the race, that means that you have adopted those positive elements of forgiveness, of love and therefore, you will not be likely to be as afflicted by those negative elements and, and have a lot of hostility because it turns out, that institutionalized racism, hostility and hating are, are factors that result in you dying early. And so this then is what the "Be Blessed Model" is all about, promoting those elements that are spiritually positive and going away--doing away with those elements that are negative. One of the things that is associated with obesity is depression and, and not having love in your life. And so you eat so much, and you get too fat. And then you get too fat and you also get kidney disease, you get hypertension and those other things. So that this is what the "Be Blessed Model" is all about. And one of the things we'd like to do, apply broadly, is to see how we can not only have this as something that we've tested and done with some volunteer groups, but to see how this is done across the country, how--and if we can promote these positive attitudes and, and positive spirituality elements, if that then will help us turn around this negative tendency that we have towards winning that race from the cradle to the grace--to the grave, a race that we want to lose. Story_ID: 128693 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '92 [1992], you became the Charles R. Drew Professor of Surgery at Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and '96 [1996], the LaSalle Leffall Professor at Howard University. Just kind of walk us through your career, I guess-- Speaker 2: Well, I was pretty blessed throughout my career in that I went into a field, transplantation, that was very visible. And I also was able to go into the community, educate and empower the community, and also have the opportunity to write about what was going on and to have a lot of publications so that I was academically very successful and then have a program like [the National] M.O.T.T.E.P. [Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program] become so successful. As a consequence, I worked with [HM] Dr. LaSalle [D.] Leffall [Jr.], who was the chairman of surgery at Howard University for twenty-five years. And I worked as his vice chair for twenty of those years. And then when he, he retired, I had the academic qualifications that allowed me to become the first LaSalle Leffall Professor and Chairman. But that was because of our--my success as a transplant surgeon and the development of the transplant program at Howard University, and the success of [the National]M.O.T.T.E.P.. Because of those successes, I think they put me in a position so that I could assume the chairmanship, which was named after LaSalle Leffall because funds were raised in his name. And this then became the first LaSalle Leffall endowed professor and chair at Howard University. And this helped me to, actually helped develop a lot of programs in surgery at Howard University. And this then was a tremendous miracle in itself, to see me grow from the, from the streets of Harlem [New York, New York] to become the chair of, of the Department of Surgery at Howard University. This is, this was not even part of a dream that I had because my impossible dream was realized when I was able to go to Africa and become a medical missionary there. But this then took me to another level of excellence that I had never even dreamed about. And I am grateful and believe that all of this relates to, one to the other and they're all interrelated. Story_ID: 128694 Speaker 1: Okay, well, what is--now, in 2004, you established the [the National] M.O.T.T.E.P. [Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program] EXPORT [Excellence in Partnerships for Community Outreach, Research on Health Disparities and Training] Research Center of Excellence [sic, EXPORT Center of Excellence]. Now, what is that? Speaker 2: The, the "Be Blessed Model" emanated from the M.O.T.T.E.P. EXPORT [EXPORT Center of Excellence] grant which had centers for excellence that look into renal disease and figure out why it is that African Americans have so much renal disease. And so we studied this from the psychological, from the spiritual, from the neurological, and looked at all of the elements, the inflammatory elements, the non-inflammatory elements, the environment, the body, mind and the soul, of the body, mind and the spirit are part and parcel of all things that happen to us. And we recognized that one element that is less understood, and we saw this more and more as we looked into what, what goes into you getting renal failure. We realized that one aspect of it is the environment. And many of us who don't have the ability or the resources to move, where you grow up is where you die. And if that environment has hostile elements in it, and you can't afford to move out, then you could find out you have a high incidence of cancer, you have a high incidence of other diseases like Asthma, diabetes, hypertension and so forth and so on. And so this is, these are--this is what we did in that six million dollar grant, the Export Grant. We looked into what is the underpinnings of why people get renal disease in the first place. We're finding out the psycho-neuro, immunological play a role, but the spiritual perhaps is the most important of them all. And this is what we found out in that M.O.T.T.E.P. Export Grant, to find out why it is that we have so much end-stage renal disease. And that was the answer. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what are you--now M.O.T.T.E.P. [Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program] is still, still in operation. Speaker 2: Right, and we still need much more funds to keep it going in operation because it's--when you go to the cities--now, most of the cities that we have now are able to promote themselves, but we still have a national office that has to get the materials to do it. So we still are seeking funds and still in existence. But it's getting harder all the time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: And the need is greater than it ever was before because we have so many people waiting for organs and tissues for transplantation. And then with the explosion of stem cell, we see an even greater need for it. Story_ID: 128695 Speaker 1: And our health care is expensive. Do you have any thoughts about the, [HM] President [Barack] Obama's health initiative [the Affordable Care Act] that-- Speaker 2: That's--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --actually, being, I think the [U.S.] Supreme Court was deciding something about an aspect of it today [June 25, 2012] and whether it's constitutional. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, I don't know what the result is, but I think one of the most important part of, of health care is the need for universal healthcare access. One of the tragedies is that of the developed countries, the United States is the only one that does not have universally available health care. And I think that's a disgrace, and I think that one of the positive things that's coming out of the Obama campaign is to have universal health care. Now, I realize that Obama's not the first. [President Bill] Clinton's tried it unsuccessfully. And Obama is now applying it and trying to get it so that it's not to everyone but at least to get two-thirds of the population to have health insurance. And I think that's a great thing, something that is very important and I think it becomes extremely essential if we are trying to eliminate the majority-minority health care disparity. If we don't have a universal health care, the that majority-minority disparity will grow, will grow exponentially if stem cell transplantation acts come to play because that will aggravate it and, and accelerate the growth--the gap between the rich and the poor because that's really what's it all about. When you look at the majority-minority health disparity, it's about the economic situation as well as the institutionalized racism that we've fostered here in this country. You know, racism is a issue that is alive and well. The human genome has demonstrated that we have one race, Homo sapiens, okay. We have a number of ethnic groups, a number of different cultures, but scientifically and--scientifically, there is one race. Now, race is a social construct and that racial tension that exists between the superior and inferior, is what I believe institutionalized racism is all about. And that's a major contributor to our ill health and the reason why the majority-minority health disparity is in existence today. So one of the things that can help narrow that would be universal health care. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my perspective on it anyway. Story_ID: 128696 Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a--we always ask a question like this, and I'm trying to form it. But do you have a medical philosophy? Speaker 2: Do I have a medical philosophy? Well, I tell you, I've lived out a medical philosophy. And that medical philosophy is kind of old school. The medical philosophy I have is that patients come first. That's old and not new, but it's, the practice of it is, is interesting. You know, and I'll tell you something that as I've developed a transplant center at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I've had to sacrifice many aspects of my life, my health and my family. You know, I gave you a story of the fact that I had tuberculosis as a, as a fifteen-year old, and had a lobectomy when I was fifteen. And irrespective of all of that, I, when I had transplant patients, started the transplant center at Howard in the '70s [1970s], I stayed in the hospital at first because I was kind of a, almost a lone ranger although I had people helping me. I had the whole hospital working with me, but I stayed in the hospital for about six weeks the first time. And then, and when patients were ill, I had to stay in the hospital. So, so I, I really sacrificed my own personal life, my personal goals to the extent that the patients came, actually came first. And those who work with me and take care of patients, have to understand that, that is a medical philosophy. Now, I say that's a medical philosophy because nowadays, we're talking about, yeah, we say patients come first, but the doctor's health and the doctor's family and the doctor's welfare become very important roles. Now, I'm not saying that they're not important because there's a balance that is important. But my medical philosophy, what has driven me through the decades that have allowed me, in spite of all that, to have reached my seventy-fifth birthday in November of last year, is that I put patients first before everything else, except God. I put God first, my patients came second, and then came my family and then myself. And so that balancing act between that is imperative. For me though, my medical philosophy was that God came first, my patients came second, and then everybody else came after that. Now, I must add to you, you pay a price for that? My wife [Fern Marshall Callender] doesn't, didn't like it, doesn't like it today. But as, but I'm not as active as I was then. My family recognizes it, even though one of my children did become a doctor in spite of it. So that, there's a price you pay for everything, but the most important thing of all is probably the balance. But for me, that medical philosophy was that the patient actually comes first and the professionalism that goes along with that became imperative. And, and the reason that became extremely important is when I, when I--more or less, early on as a doctor, when I encountered the loss of a patient, painful, painful, painful. Less painful, if you've done the very best you can, if you put your patient first. And so that, over time, allowed me to evolve and to teach others that putting the patient first was something that was mandatory. That becomes less popular now, and the younger doctors aren't as willing to do that as I was. But I, I have no regrets and if, if I had to do over again, and my wife wouldn't like hearing me say this, I wouldn't change a thing. Story_ID: 128697 Speaker 1: That's one of our questions actually, but I won't ask it now (laughter). Do you have anything that you would do again--that you would do differently if you-- Speaker 2: Well, the--let me put it this way. A balancing act is important, and I can tell you this, as a husband, when I got married, I didn't realize it was supposed to be at least fifty-fifty. Now, when I started it was probably ninety-ten. I was contributing ten percent, and she [Fern Marshall Callender] was contributing ninety percent. Now, it's more like seventy-thirty. I'm doing the seventy, she's doing the thirty. So I've learned how to grow and develop along those lines as the husband and wife situation. But for my patients, I think the only, the only thing I would do differently about the patients first is, I'd make God first, my patients second, and I'd make my family third, but I'd, I'd spend a little more time with my family than I did in the past. You know, being in a hospital for six weeks for a patient is, is a bit much for your wife and your children to deal with. And, of course, it'd be nice if I had help so I wouldn't have to do that. But I would try to be a little more balanced and spend more time with my family if I could. That's the only change I would make if I had to do it over again. But I would still put God first, my family--my patients second and my family third. Story_ID: 128698 Speaker 1: All right, now, this is a question we always ask too. When you look back over your career, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy is something that most people, well, people who know me well might understand it, but a lot of people would, probably wouldn't understand, the fact that as I developed the transplant center at Howard University Hospital, I brought along a standard of care of excellence that went along with it, that most people may not even realize I was bringing to the hospital because for transplantation to be successful, you have to have the best medical care you can have. So at the hospital, we developed a team. We worked together as a team. The whole hospital was part of it. And so I believe that while I was building the transplant center and helping it to become the best it can be, I was bringing along the hospital and helping it to become the best it can be. And I think that, above all, will be a legacy that I will leave. It's an unsung legacy, and it's a legacy that most people don't even understand. But it's the legacy that I take most pride in. I took pride in the hospital and developing of the transplant center, seeing a kidney transplant center, a liver transplant center, excelling, seeing all that, seeing surgery grow and develop along with [HM] Dr. [LaSalle D.] Leffall [Jr.], with his leadership. And seeing all that develop, I saw [the National] M.O.T.T.E.P. [Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Program] develop and go from a non-entity to increasing organ and tissue donation and something that was said it couldn't happen, and it did happen and using the African American as a role model for organ donation. I saw all of those things happen, and I'm proud of all those, the fact that I could live to see all that happen. But I probably, the one I'm most proud of is, is the fact that I, I helped Howard University Hospital standard of excellence grow and grow and grow. Speaker 1: Okay,--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And whether I'm remembered for that or not, it's not important. The fact is that it actually has happened, and I've seen it happen. I've watched it grow, and I've seen it help all the other disciplines and, and I'm grateful that God has blessed me to the extent that I could be used for that purpose. Story_ID: 128699 Speaker 1: When you reflect on--could you tell us a story about a particular transplant, I mean a story that, that, you know-- Speaker 2: I have a great story to tell you. There's a young man I know named Antwon Braxton and he wouldn't mind me mentioning his name. He is thirty years old, May 30 this year. Now, the beauty of the story is that I met his mother when she was nineteen years old. We did a transplant on her at nineteen. We advised her against being pregnant and having a child because pregnancy because of the hormonal regulations, can threaten transplantation and survival. She, as most of my women patients, ignored me and went along and became pregnant, had a child. And she lived another twenty years. But she had Antwon Braxton who's now thirty years old today, and he's alive today because of the miracle of transplantation. I have another young lady, Chasten [ph], Niccole Chasten, and her, her mother had sickle cell disease. And up until that time, nobody had successfully had sickle cell, had a transplant, and had a baby. We advised her against it. She did the same thing. She decided she'd rather have, take the risk, have a baby 'cause that's what she always wanted to do. Now, after she had the, the child, about four years later, she actually died. But her son--I'm sorry, her daughter's alive today, and has twins and is a--going to college and is alive and well today because her mother sacrificed a successful kidney transplant that resulted in a pregnancy with a offspring who's alive and well and actually, only has sickle cell trait, doesn't have the disease, and is doing very well as a student at U.D.C. [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] today. So those are two of my proudest stories. I've got many others, but those are two that I, I would share with you. I, I also have one young man who we transplanted thirty years ago, Ronald Norris, who got a kidney from his sister. And he's alive and well, thirty years later and doing well. So, I, I've, I've been blessed. God has used me to help a lot of people and, and to train a lot of people who will grow up thinking about patients first. And so those are some of the blessings that I have had and, and I've, I--and I guess my greatest gift of all is to be used to the glory of God which is what I always wanted to do. And I, and I believe with all this that's happened, I have been blessed to, to be used to his honor and glory. Story_ID: 127996 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I see a very--the only fear I have, I must say this. I see a lot of positivity. The only fear that I have is that the [HM Barack] Obama presidency has frightened me a little bit. I was thrilled beyond belief to see the first African American president, and I thought that it might decrease to some extent, the racism that already exists in the United States of America. But to be honest with you, I've horrified to see racism raise its head as ugly as it ever has. I see in a lot of people, now, the only desire they have to do for the next voting period is to get that black man out of office, even to the extent of sacrificing their own needs and goals. The poorest people in this country are white. By addressing the needs of poor, black people, you're addressing the needs of poor white people. So since you've got so many poor people in this country, it is important that some of the things that Obama is fighting for are addressed. Now, go back to the question you asked me. Now, I--the concern I have is that post-Obama, the post-Obama legacy may be to lessen the positive and great strides we've made forward with the community education and empowerment. To me, the richest aspect of our health care delivery in the future rests on an educated and empowered community. And if because of what has raised its ugly head with racism, we lose that, then, then I would be fearful. But I think, as the nation appears to be recognizing the importance of an educated, empowered community as its greatest asset, I think that things are headed for a very positive result, as long as what I'm perceiving is not really what is actually happening because if we're gonna see a, a rebirth of the racism that has already existed, then that's problematic. I, I, I'm hopeful that in spite of the signs that I've seen, that, that the more positive elements will, will win out and we will recognize that diversity is one of our greatest strength and, and dwell on it and recognize that in diversity and addressing our diverse needs, the right way, that we will all grow and develop, and become the best that we can be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's my, my take on our future. Story_ID: 127997 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family. Now, do you have children? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, okay, my family is my greatest joy. I have a wife [Fern Marshall Callender] who is the, the soul, and she's love, charity itself. She's been so unselfish that through the forty-four years that we've been married, she's worked for me and not for herself. She's given of herself to the extent that everything she does is for me and the children. And, of course, that's something that I don't deserve, but I've been blessed to have. And so I've got a wife who's loving and in spite of being married to me for forty-four years, still caters to my every need. I had a patient once ask me, she said, you're married. I didn't think anybody would ever marry you because, you know, I'm, I spend so much time with my patients. But then I have three children. I have a son [Joseph Callender] who's a statistician who I'm so proud of. I have a daughter who's a lawyer for a big law firm in [Washington] D.C., and then I have a obstetrician and gynecologist daughter who works in Virginia. So I've been blessed beyond belief with a family that's so loving and kind. And then in addition to that, I inherited my--since I think, as I had mentioned earlier, most of my family is, was in the West Indies, so I don't get to know many of them. But when I married my wife, I got her, her mother and grandmother and great grandmother. And they treated me like a king and spoiled me to her dismay because they, whenever there was an issue between the two of us, they, they were on my side. So that I've been blessed to have grandparents, which I didn't have before. So that I was blessed to marry the right person for me, and therefore, I have a family that's loving and supports me as I try to support them every way I can. Now, more so than ever because I don't have as many patients as I used to. I'm not doing transplants as I used to in the past. So I can devote my time to my family which I couldn't do in the past so that I've been blessed beyond belief. My twin brother who I mentioned, who has been healthy all his life, unlike me, and who's a successful judge in Brooklyn, New York and a successful minister and is still practicing ministry, although he's a retired judge, has had a great life as well. And he has two children as well, and so I think both of us have been blessed and I think the fact that we were exposed to Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle and were brought up with our religious foundation, has helped us both of us grow and develop and to have rich successful, happy lives. Story_ID: 127998 Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Anything? I, you know, I--as I was growing up, I was always--when I was fifteen and after I got tuberculosis, I always thought that I would die at thirty. And to live to be seventy-five, fifty-- sixty years after having that dreaded [ph.], fatal disease, tuberculosis, is beyond belief. And I, I just--I don't understand it. I thought I would die from T.B. [tuberculosis] and have emphysema and those kind of things, all that stuff. And the fact that I'm seventy-five and I'm still pretty healthy for a guy my age, is, is a blessing beyond belief. Going back to the point, there's no blessing like health, and that's why we have to treasure it and why an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. And when you have health, treasure it and try to keep it. Exercise, push back from the table, eat healthy foods, less meat as possible so that you can lose this race from the cradle to the grave. So those are my, my thoughts. I've been so blessed with health since I had tuberculosis that I don't even know how to thank God for the blessing that I have. Story_ID: 127999 Speaker 1: Okay, well, our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered as a God-fearing surgeon who reached the impossible star and dreamed the impossible dream, and had his dreams come true. That's how I'd like to be remembered. Story_ID: 128000 Speaker 1: Okay, this is-this is me graduating from, wow, it looks like high school, huh? Wow. Speaker 2: And that would be 19--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: That's 1955, June of 1955. Speaker 2: High school, my goodness. Speaker 1: I can start. Yeah, this is my twin brother, Carl [Callender]. This is an article in Jet, when they talk about twins and how similar they are and how different they are. Actually, my twin brother is interesting because when I took him to a dialysis machine to show him, he saw the blood circulating and almost fainted. So I didn't understand how he'd be my twin and faint at the sight of blood. But anyway, here I am a surgeon, and he's fainting at the sight of blood. That's my twin brother, Carl. He was a judge in Brooklyn, New York and a minister. Speaker 2: [HM] Dr. LaSalle [D.] Leffall [Jr.] chair. I was honored to be the first LaSalle Leffall chair at Howard University College of Medicine [Washington, D.C.] in 1996. I had worked for Dr. Leffall for twenty years as his vice chair. Then I had the opportunity to actually be "the" first LaSalle Leffall Chair of Surgery at Howard University College of Medicine. Speaker 1: I had the distinct honor in 1991 of receiving a fellowship from the president of Dow Chemical Company, Frank Popoff, they gave a $35,000 donation and created a fellowship. And I have medical students rotating with me every summer. They get a stipend every summer to work with me. Speaker 2: That's a younger picture of me when I had black hair, when I was about thirty years of age, right after finishing my residency in surgery. Speaker 1: This is the first kidney transplant at Howard University Hospital in 1974, January 28th, of 1974. We did a kidney transplant with two patients, Scottie Leffridge and Mary Jones, the beginning of a new era. Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is when I was thinner and playing basketball, my favorite sport. I always thought I had a great jump shot. But I was only 5'9" so. Speaker 1: I'm still playing, yeah. Actually, this is my Aunt Ella [Waterman] who's--when my, when her sister, Ida [Burke Callender], my mother died, she took us and gave us the rich foundation that was with us for the rest of our life, that began at Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle. Speaker 2: This is my life's dream come true when I went to Africa. You can see how thin I was. I lost forty pounds in Africa. This is me there before I came home. Speaker 1: I was Port Harcourt, Nigeria in the summer of, March of 1970 to November of 1970. Speaker 2: This is a picture of us together in Africa with my team, taking care of patients, Port Harcourt, Nigeria, right after the [Nigerian-Biafran] civil war. Speaker 1: This is back in the United States, after, doing transplants and just a picture of me seeing patients. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a real younger picture of me when I was a, just got back from Africa. Speaker 1: You look like a native Nigerian on this one. Speaker 2: This is my twin brother and I as we, actually were together at the Frank Popoff dinner where they established the Clive L. Callender Dow Chemical Fellowship. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was us much younger when we were teenagers, wearing our formal attire, Carl and Clive Callender, twins. Carl is older than I am. He's thirty minutes older than I am. Speaker 2: This is 1955 or so, right or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, is that what it is? Speaker 2: You think so? Speaker 1: It looks like it, yeah, wow. Speaker 2: This is junior high school, '54 [1954]. Speaker 1: Now, that's a picture of me, wearing my favorite yellow suit which my wife [Fern Marshall Callender] made disappear right after I took it off. She didn't think much of that outfit. I thought it was the best one in the world. Speaker 2: This is one of the few pictures I have of myself and my two sisters and my twin brother. My sister, Paula, my twin brother, Carl, and my sister, Gloria, and myself. Speaker 1: Oh, this is myself and Roy Snider. We actually started a transplant center which is named after me, actually, in the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas, the Virgin Islands in 1982. Roy was the Commissioner of Health and later became the Governor of the Virgin Islands. Speaker 2: This is myself and Dr. Joel Stevens on the left, who is the first and only transplant fellow that I trained. Speaker 1: This is Ronald Norris, a patient I transplanted more than thirty years ago, who is showing off his Olympic Gold Medal. He won the transplant Olympics Gold Medal, and he was proudly showing it off. He's now thirty years after transplantation and doing well, got a kidney from his sister. Speaker 2: Now, this is the Clive L. Callender story I'm trying to get published about my life story, from the streets of Harlem to being the LaSalle Leffall professor at Howard University College of Medicine. This is a picture with me and Barbara Bush, we took at the White House, was so proud to be seen with her at the White House. Speaker 1: This is a picture with myself and Nancy Reagan, and she came to visit us at Howard University Hospital. Speaker 2: This is a picture I'm very proud of because this Antwon Braxton who, this is a picture of him and his mother, who risked her life to have the child, and then this is him sixteen years old, and, of course, he's now thirty years of age and doing well. Speaker 1: Then this, of course, is where it all began for me when I accepted Jesus Christ as my savior at Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle, and so I owe much of what I am today to Ebenezer Gospel Tabernacle and my Aunt Ella, not to speak of my mother, Ida, who I never met, who gave her life for me. Speaker 2: This is Scotty Leffridge, a picture of me--he was the first transplant we did at Howard University Hospital. At that time, it was five years after transplant. He lived eighteen years after the transplant. Speaker 1: This is Alan Gibson. He's a patient I transplanted, but because he was a choir member, he inspired me to start singing again and go back to singing in the choir. And this is a picture of us together, singing together in the choir. That's something I'll never--I cherish and never forget. Speaker 2: This is a picture of the governor of the Virgin Islands giving me a plaque in celebration of the Virgin Island, Howard University collaboration and the first transplant program at the Virgin Islands. And the center was thereafter named after me, the Clive L. Callender Center. This is Vernita Howard with her, Antwon Braxton. This is us right after her delivery. Speaker 1: And this is me in Africa with my wife, Fern, on the picture, you have her in the, on our missionary tour. And this is us at Port Harcourt [Nigeria], in the restoration of Port Harcourt General Hospital, Nigeria in 1970. Speaker 2: This is the formation of the [Washington] D.C. Organ Donor Program with Tony England on the right, Councilman [William Ridley] Spaulding, Patti Grace Smith in the middle and myself. The D.C. Organ Donor Program began with a partnership between the Howard University and the National Kidney Foundation. Speaker 1: This, again, is Vernita Howard and Antwon at the birth. Speaker 2: This is our trip to Rome [Italy] and a session with the Pope, and this is the only time I had an opportunity to meet with the Pope. Speaker 1: This then is 19--in 2001, Dr. Leffall and I were the front page of Black Enterprise, quite an honor and it's a distinction that I'll never forget. Speaker 2: This is a, when I was governor to the American College of Surgeons for the surgical section of the National Medical Association from 1998 to 2000, and from 2000 to 2002. I was fortunate that the (unclear) selected me to be the governor. Speaker 1: This is one of the youngest patients that we did a liver transplant on when he was sixteen. He actually, he actually began having problems with his liver when he was born, and thanks to Dr. Sam Ross, who gave him surgery, it lasted until he was fifteen, till we transplanted him. He is now thirty-one years old today. So he's sixteen years after that transplant. Speaker 2: I was honored in--by HRSA [U.S. Health Resources and Services Administration] in the 2008 Calendar to have my picture featured as one of the heroes of transplant, along with Velma Scantlebury, Dr. Samuel Kountz, the first African American transplant surgeon, Paul Taylor, the first African American transplant coordinator, and myself. Velma Scantlebury is the first and only black liver--female, liver transplant surgeon in the United States of America. Speaker 1: Minority Health Today is a picture of myself and Vernita Howard the other lady who had the baby. This was her fifteen years later. She had a stroke and was in the hospital. Speaker 2: In 1982, we were heroes and celebrated as heroes in the Virgin Islands as we did the first transplant in their history. It was very successful and we had our pictures in all the newspapers and all the television and all the radio programs. A matter of fact, they had somebody, radio, talking about the whole transplant from beginning to end. It was very successful and we're proud of the contribution, to have a partnership with our team from Howard, and the team from the Virgin Islands collaborating for successful transplantation at the center, which later became the Clive L. Callender Transplant Center...