 Story_ID: 372851 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Louis Carr, L-O-U-I-S, C-A-R-R. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Five, three, fifty-six [May 3, 1956], Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am president of advertising sales for Black Entertainment Television [BET]. Story_ID: 372852 Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depths there are five lightweight kind of People magazine-ish questions that I'm compelled to ask by management, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First one is: do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what is it? Speaker 2: Coconut cake. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I would probably say my favorite color is red. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I like all the seasons. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying. Not that I--I have quite a few so I wouldn't say I have a favorite one. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us one? Speaker 2: Let me see, which one can I give you? No matter what people tell you, you're not as good as you think you are. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a lesson for us all (laughter). Story_ID: 372853 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [L.A. Carr] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. We're doing one at a time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full maiden name was Lillian, L-I-L-L-I-A-N, Cheers, C-H-E-E-R-S [Lillian Cheers Carr]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Wow, now that's a tough one. My mother's date of birth was January 14th, 1939. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Hickman, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I can only trace back my mother's side of the family to probably my grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us something about them? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was--her maiden name was Hattie [Hattie Regan Cheers], and she married my mother's father James (pause). Speaker 1: James Cheers? Speaker 2: Yes. And, my grandmother--my mother had a brother, his name was James [James Cheers], also. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories passed down from that side of the family about what life was like in Hickman growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the interesting thing and I guess the unfortunate interesting thing about my family is, my family didn't live long periods of time. My mother died at fifty-five, my grandmother died at sixty-five, my grandfather died at--I would say late forties, as I can remember. My Uncle James was killed in the Korean War, so he died, I guess, at nineteen, twenty, something like that. So, if you look at my immediate family, it's not a long life, even on my father's side. Now, on my mother's side there--my grandmothers had two sisters and one brother. She--one of my great aunts is still living, her name is Eula Booker [Eula Regan Booker]. She lives in Chicago [Illinois], and she has one, two, three, four, five, five children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, but we didn't have a big family whatsoever. And, now, my Great Aunt Eula, she is about ninety-three or ninety-four right now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here in Chicago? Speaker 2: Which is, which still is very unusual because that is not the history of most of the people on my mother's side of the family, or father's side. Story_ID: 372854 Speaker 1: Okay, but are there any stories from that--from where they grew up that give us some historical knowledge about what it was like growing up in that place (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my [maternal] grandmother [Hattie Regan Cheers] was raised by a, a family called the Cages [ph.], which were, I think, a cousin of her mother's. All right, and they raised my grandmother and her sisters and brother in Hickman [Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because my great-grandmother and father died at very early ages. So, they were raised on a farm in Hickman and primarily did not have access to a lot of formal education during that time. They grew up with a lot of kids in the Cage family; so, that family was a big family. But more than that, they grew up on a farm and they moved to Chicago [Illinois], there's not much history there. Speaker 1: Is there a story as to why the family moved to Chicago? Speaker 2: The Cages moved to Chicago to primarily--it was--they was part of I guess that southern migration north, so they were part of that era that came up in the '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s] during that particular time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, they didn't even talk about Hickman much? Speaker 2: No, no, not about it at all. It was--Hickman was sort of one of them is, oh, it wasn't a lot, real, real pleasant so we don't talk about it. Speaker 1: Okay, but that's historic though, I mean, that if, you know, they loved it that's one thing but if they didn't (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. No, they did not love it, they didn't, they didn't like the whole farm life thing, at all. Speaker 1: Okay, so they--where did they work when they came to Chicago? Speaker 2: My grandmother was a hairdresser when she came and I think she went to one of the local schools here to learn that particular trade, and my aunts and uncle [James Cheers] I think they all sort of did domestic-type work at--I know my uncle worked on--for the railroad for a while. I mean, so, so it was a classic, typical-type opportunities that African Americans had during that particular time. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, the railroad and the hairdressing, and yeah, that is, that's very much like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, absolutely. Story_ID: 372855 Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother [Lillian Cheers Carr] talk about growing up and what things were like for her? Speaker 2: My mother grew up on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois]. She went to Manley High School [Manley Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] (pause). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She did a number of jobs before she worked for the city. She was sort of a--she worked at, you know, did domestic work. She worked as a food stylist, I found out, later in life. I don't know when she had that job but that came up one time at a Thanksgiving dinner when we were talking 'bout the turkey doesn't look like the turkey that you see in--that you see in the magazines. She said, "Because we don't spray paint the turkey, all right." (Laughter) And she--I was like how do you know that? And she said, "I had that type of job once upon a time." So, she worked for the city for over twenty years before she passed away in 1991. Speaker 1: What did she do for the city? Speaker 2: She was sort of an administrative clerk in the sewer department [City of Chicago Department of Water Management] and streets and sans [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, was she politically connected? Speaker 2: Yeah, she always politically connected, always worked the polls, always canvassed through the neighborhood--that sort of thing. She was into politics; she was into the Civil Rights Movement. I remember when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Chicago, she took us all out to, you know, see Dr. King, that sort of thing, so she was always involved in civic and political sort of activities. Story_ID: 372856 Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us about your father now. Give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is exactly like mine. His real name though is L.A. [L.A. Carr]. The initials L and the initials A. He was given the name Louis by the U.S. military. At that particular time, they did not let you in the military with initials as your name. So they said, you got to have a name, you can't come in here with your name L.A. Carr. So that's how Louis came about. Speaker 1: Now there's a--do you have any story about how he got the name L.A. 'cause it seems to be a common thing in the--I mean it's not common but there a lot of black people from the South that they end up with initial names that the initials stand for the initials. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I never asked because I knew so many people who had it, you know, if someone like--well, you just don't want seem stupid and I don't know if it's stupid or not so I just never asked and I just knew so many people--I still know a lot of people today, A.C, you know, I had a cousin named A.C. (Laughter) So, it's like I guess that's what they did back then All right. So, but the confusing part to me was how the military just game you a name, you know, like okay, how did that happen? And now that's my name, all right. So, he never really kind of gave me, you know, much information on it but that, you know, the military--my name is L.A. And most of my family called him L.A., they did not call him Louis. Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't give a meaning for A., they just gave him just for Louis? Speaker 2: No. It was just the initials L.A. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting story. So, he, he was born in Mississippi? Speaker 2: He was born in Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: Okay. You are testing me. Speaker 1: Well, you can get us in the ballpark if you want--it's okay. Speaker 2: I can get it. He died in, in 1995. He was fifty-nine when he died so we just go back that would make him what '44 [1944] or '46 [1946], 1946 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ok, so he was-- Speaker 2: Thirty-six [1936], 1936, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, 1936. Story_ID: 372857 Speaker 1: What do you know about your father's side of the family, I mean, how far back can you trace them and are there any stories? Speaker 2: Well, my father [L.A. Carr] was a Golden Gloves boxing champion. Speaker 1: Was that here in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: That was here in Chicago, in the featherweight division. He was a little guy, boxed for many years, he also became a boxing trainer later. But during most of my upbringing years, he was in prison. Probably-- Speaker 1: What happened, what was the story? Speaker 2: Bank robber. Speaker 1: Okay, now this would have been in the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: This would have been in the '60s [1960s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was like '64 [1964], and he was in the penitentiary up until 1970. He got out of jail right before I got out of college [Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa], so I got out of college in 1978. I think he was released from prison in like January or December--January '78 [1978] or December, January '78 or December '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Did he have a story about what happened? Speaker 2: The story was him and a friend tried to rob a bank in Detroit [Michigan]. Well, they didn't try, they did rob a bank in Detroit and-- Speaker 1: Was he from Chicago then? Speaker 2: He was from Chicago. Don't ask me why he was in Detroit. I guess--well, we know why he was in Detroit. (Laughter) And, they got away but it was snowing that day so the police was able to pick up tire tracks and trace them back to a hotel. Then he was arrested, was able to make parole several months later and then fleed. And he was on the run for over a year--Mexico, Canada, that sort of thing--before he was finally apprehended in a gun battle and was shot a couple of times. He always tells the story, he's the only person that, you know, that was shot, died, was pronounced dead and then came back. Because on the way to Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], they did pronounce dead, but obviously he was not dead. But he always got a kick outta telling that story, which was like, "That's not a good story." (Laughter) "You don't have to tell that." Speaker 1: You know Richard Pryor says, "They don't make us like they used to" (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. And he served time and most of his time at a prison in Texas and in Joliet [Illinois]. Story_ID: 372858 Speaker 1: You didn't get a chance to see very much of him [Carr's father, L.A. Carr] then I guess? Speaker 2: I saw--most of my memory of him was when I was a kid. He was in the Nation of Islam [NOI]; in my early years I went to the Nation of Islam for--that's where I received my formal education from kindergarten on up until-- Speaker 1: So you went to University of Islam [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I went to University of Islam. Speaker 1: All right, so he was in the Nation before he robbed banks? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: That's interesting, because that's usually just the opposite. People convert to NOI in prison and then--so he did just the opposite. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: That's interesting, well, so was he in the Nation when he--? Speaker 2: Yeah, Louis Carr 3X (pause). Speaker 1: That's interesting, that's just the opposite of the way it usually works. So, Louis Carr 3X, huh? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, or Louis 3X or was the Carr in it? Speaker 2: Yeah, Louis Carr 3X. Speaker 1: Okay, All right, 'cause lot of times they give the brothers just the 3X and not the--so that's interesting (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, he worked at the school. Matter of fact, he was the--I guess the janitor or the chief engineer of the school, when I was going there. So he had this sort of big stature at that point and so going to the school, and I always credit the University of Islam for my discipline because, you know, you had to walk the straight and the narrow even at a early age, back then. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: No talking unless you were spoken to, how you turn the corners, you know, FOI [Fruit of Islam], everything else. Speaker 1: That's true. That's the most disciplined organization in the black community, The Nation of Islam. Everybody recognizes that, no matter whether they like 'em or don't like 'em. They know they're the most disciplined. How did--now this is in '64 [1964] when he was arrested, that was when the Nation of Islam was achieving national notoriety through activities of Malcolm X and Muhammad Ali (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Both of them were, were live and doing things in '64 [1964] just before Malcolm was killed and when Ali won the championship [heavyweight championship]. Speaker 2: Matter of fact, the reason that I left the University of Islam and my mother [Lillian Cheers Carr] put me in public school was after Malcolm was killed, the school was shut down for so long, that my mother was like, "Oh, you got to get in school, I mean. You been out of school, you know, for like five, six weeks now. You know, we got to get you in school 'cause you'll be in trouble if you don't." And that's when she enrolled me in, in public school [Jacob Beidler Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 372859 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna go back some and we will come back to some of this 'cause of this is we'll have to talk about, but is there a story about how your parents [Lillian Cheers Carr and L.A. Carr] met? Were they both living on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] when they met? Speaker 2: You know, I do not know how my parents met because my parents I think legally only stayed together about a year after I [sic. they] met; it was sort of like--my parents were not together--I don't think when I was born. Speaker 1: So it didn't last very long? Speaker 2: It did not last very long. Speaker 1: So your mother was never in the Nation [Nation of Islam]? Speaker 2: My mother was in the Nation. Yes, my mother was-- Speaker 1: So were they both members of the Nation when they met? Speaker 2: No, I think my mother converted after she met my father. Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay, all right, but she stayed in? Speaker 2: She stayed in up until the time that I was--she moved me out of that school [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois] into a public school [Jacob Beidler Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 372860 Speaker 1: What did your father [L.A. Carr] do for a living, before, you know, before he got in trouble? Speaker 2: My father was always sort of (laughter) a entrepreneur, in his own rights. I can remember he always--he was a floor polisher, he was a carpet cleaner, I mean, and that's what he did at the school [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois]. I mean, he, you know, polished the floors at the school, I mean, that sort of thing. So he was always in sort of like, in the cleaning business as a entrepreneur. Speaker 1: Okay, and I know the Nation of Islam pushed do for self, have your own job and your own income as good principles (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Absolutely, absolutely. Story_ID: 372861 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Of my father [L.A. Carr]? Speaker 1: No, of yourself. I mean of anything, what's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory I had is that I did not speak until a late age. And my mother [Lillian Cheers Carr] and them taking me back and forth to the doctor saying that, you know, something wrong, you know, he doesn't talk, and the doctor saying he can talk, he can talk. He's just refusing to talk. And my great uncle was throwing me up in the air and my first words were, "Don't drop me." And that was sort of, you know, my intro into the talking world, all right. But, you know, I didn't start off with, mama, gaga, none of that. I just started off with full sentences. Speaker 1: Okay, self-preservation. Speaker 2: Right. And I hated people, hated company. It was just like when the doorbell and the phone would ring I would go into this tantrum of running and screaming and bumping my head up against the wall just like crazy, just like I hated people. An interesting situation now that I'm in sales, right? How could I hate people, right (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I'm an only child. I am my mother's only child, not my father's only child, let me clarify that. My father had many. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you know the others (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did. Speaker 1: All right, so, well, what were--now, you grew up on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Grew up on the West Side. Speaker 1: What neighborhood was it again? Speaker 2: I grew up in the Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois] area around Warren [Boulevard] and Kedzie [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 372862 Speaker 1: And what were some of the sights and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: You know, one of the things is that there was always drugs in my neighborhood, as they used to call it back then, narcotics. There was always narcotics on the block so I can remember, you know, looking out the window and looking at the junkies across--at the apartment building across from where we were, you know, shooting up in the hallways and things like that. We lived in a, a basically a two-flat with a garden apartment at that time and we were probably considered, you know, one of the middle class people of the block because we had a two-flat instead of a big apartment building. I also remember the gangs back then. It was the Vice Lords and the Mad Black Souls; they were the two prominent gangs in, in the area at that particular time. Speaker 1: That's one I haven't heard of, the Mad Black Souls. Speaker 2: The Mad Black Souls, they used to call them MBS; so it was MBS versus the Vice Lords. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you hear about the Vice Lords on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and, I think, the Four Corner Hustlers are there now or something like this but I never heard about-- Speaker 2: The MBS came along probably in the early '60s [1960s], and MBS was sort of the Vice Lords' competition. So those were the turf wars back in my neighborhood at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were growing up you had to learn to negotiate your way through all this, right? Speaker 2: Right. It was, it was sort of--my mother [Lillian Cheers Carr] and [maternal] grandmother [Hattie Regan Cheers] had lived in this two-flat for a number of years so they knew everyone in the neighborhood, and I can remember when I was going to the University of Islam [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois], you know, back then the Nation [Nation of Islam] was such a force in the community that they sort of looked at us as little soldiers, All right, 'cause we had our uniform on, you know, white shirt, black bow tie, black pants, you know, really didn't socialize or talk to anybody so they sort of thought of you as a strange, scary kid as people used to say back then. And I never forget my mother said--used to tell me, you know, you're not like them. You're very, very special--but you can't isolate them 'cause they will attack you. So you have to have a great skills and learn how to get along with them, knowing that you're not them, and you're better than them. And I used to have a real issue, I remember calling my mother--I used to always say, 'such a ghetto snob, you just such a ghetto snob, right, 'cause you're always telling me I'm better than everybody else and this and that. And she'd always say, "You are, you just don't know it yet." So I always remember having to have to negotiate my personality, because in the end of the day just like any kid, I was fascinated with the gang life, with the, with the life of the hustle. And I always thought that I was just as tough as them, but I had to, you know, be in this sort of gray area that, you know, my momma would kill me. And, you know, if I don't, you know, really learn how to negotiate with these guys, they'll kill me too, all right. So I always had to kind of figure out how I negotiated and interacted in this sort of gray area between the two. Speaker 1: That's a tough negotiation, isn't it? Speaker 2: Right, 'cause I feared my mother. I feared her, I mean, literally. I mean, I was one of those kids that if she scratched her head, I flinched, all right, because she was always telling me I got to be your mother and your father, I'm going be the toughest person you ever met in your entire life. So, you know, I was: "Yes, ma'am," you know, "yes, ma'am, yes, ma'am," you know, don't roll your eyes, don't slouch down, none of that, you know. So, she was consistently tough on me, and then she had my grandmother as a backup, you know, so if she got tired, you know, they'd tag team on you. Speaker 1: Did your grandmother live with you too? Speaker 2: My grandmother--we--me grandmother lived on the second floor; we lived on the first floor. Speaker 1: Okay, so wasn't all the same household but it was in the same--? Speaker 2: Right, because we didn't lock doors between the two so you'd just come on down, you know. Speaker 1: Were there other relatives living with your grandmother? Speaker 2: Well, the Cages [ph.], the elderly Cages who raised my grandmother, lived with her for a while. And then also we had a couple of great aunts and some cousins who lived in the basement with us for a while. So it was a--true, what we call a black family building, I mean, 'cause anybody whoever stayed there was family. Story_ID: 372863 Speaker 1: Did you start school at the University of Islam [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes, started kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay, was there a branch on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] then or did you have to come all the way south? Speaker 2: I had to come all the way south to 51st [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue], which is so interesting now that I live two blocks from where I started (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so it was at 51st and Greenwood? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's now like, pretty high rent area now? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was high rent then, but which is also a dichotomy, the school and the mosque that I went to is now a Jewish school and a Jewish temple. Speaker 1: That's right there, yeah, I know where--exactly where that is now, yeah. That's something, yeah. There is fascinating because it shift--it shifted over the years. It was like all black and part of what we call Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] now, used to be Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], people think it's in Woodlawn but that used to be Hyde Park over there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And populated by the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] people. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: So what was the neighborhood like when you were going over there? Speaker 2: The neighborhood was in, in the early '60s [1960s] was still a very, very upscale neighborhood, because I remember that the, the big houses and mansions were just fascinating to kids as we rode the bus 'cause I took the bus there. And that was just--always be fascinating to see houses so big, with so much land, you know, especially you know, back then, you then, you know, it was just like crazy, like, "Wow, what a house. It's so big." As a kid, everything looked, you know, twice the size that it looks today. And, 'cause I remember, even the schools seemed humongous from today, today it seems so small. But it was a very, very, very upscale neighborhood in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the Hyde Park of Bigger Thomas and Loeb and Leopold [Richard Loeb and Nathan Leopold, Jr.] and all that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Story_ID: 372864 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the neighborhood you grew up in and we were talking about the school [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois] and the neighborhood that was in. Did you like school? Speaker 2: School was--I don't know if I liked it, you know, when I went to the University of Islam at that particular time it wasn't something that you liked, you were there for a purpose, you know, it was a short day in terms of school, I mean, so you basically were only in school for four hours a day. And the first hour was sort of black history and you came together as a group, the whole school came together in a auditorium sort of fashion. And you listened to a lecture on black history. Women sat on one side of the auditorium, you know, boys sat on the other side of the auditorium, and then you broke into your classrooms and then there was a lunch period, and then after that it was sort of a, a homework assignments and wrap up for the day. And it was, you know, back on at that particular point, you know. So you really didn't think about it as something to enjoy. You didn't talk on the school bus 'cause that wasn't allowed so it was a very, very structured environment that you operated in, because you started off that way, you didn't know any different, you know. Speaker 1: Now does that, I mean, people--so how do they enforce you not talking on the bus? I mean, in the public schools they say don't talk, but kids talk anyway. But how do they enforce it? Speaker 2: There is some consequences if you talk. I remember--and usually the consequences were you had to go up and hold onto the railing on the--by the bus driver and a spatula would come out and he'd tag the back of your hand with that spatula. And in school when you talked there was a paddle that came out of the desk and it made its way to your back part, right, so that's how it was handled. Speaker 1: And there were no complaints from the parents about you're treating them too rough or, you know, there wasn't that kind of thing? Speaker 2: If the parents found out about it back then, then you got another one when you got home, all right. So you wouldn't dare tell your parents, you were just hoping that they didn't tell the parents. Speaker 1: Okay, now when you had black history classes, did you actually have, I mean, did they teach the, the history of Yakub, and that sort of thing or did they teach like a more conventional black history? Speaker 2: There was a more conventional black history, you know, everything from the migrations of African Americans from the South to the North, to the Civil War, it varied. Speaker 1: Okay, but it was what you considered really black history? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: No, no I didn't. I was always a good student, I mean, the first time I ever got anything less than an A is when I went to high school [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], all right, which was a, a devastating shock to me, because I was sort of a, I guess, gifted kid up until then. But it was--I never looked at it as something that--I think I kind of had this attitude today that it's not something that you enjoy, it's something that you do for a purpose. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any favorite teachers or teachers that you really looked up to a lot? Speaker 2: At the university (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At University of Islam. Speaker 2: No, not really. Story_ID: 372865 Speaker 1: Since you were there [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois] right up to those years when it got a lot of attention, did you ever have a chance to meet Malcolm X? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, I mean, they spent a lot of time on, on the males. They spent a lot of time, you know, stand up straight, you know, talk correctly, be focused, be disciplined, and a lot of that came out of the Fruit of Islam [FOI], you know, and learning self-defense and things of that sort. So, a lot of time was spent with the males, so, yeah. You had a lot of contact with people--whether that time, Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] or Malcolm during those periods. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any specific memories of some of the people, I mean, any stories about Malcolm X or Farrakhan? Speaker 2: The memories that I have was Sunday services being so long, because we didn't sit down. We had to, so I guess you would call it now a days like, guard the door, or guard the aisles. So, basically, you stood the whole time and you stood at attention the whole time. And I was always--I just like hated Sundays going to the mosque 'cause it was like, I'm going be like standing for like three or four hours, you know. So those are some of the memories that I have but, you know, in retrospect I think it taught me a lot. I remember being on the street selling Muhammad Speaks at that time, which I guess they now call The Final Call [sic. Muslim Journal] on Madison [Street] and Pulaski [Road], and my father [L.A. Carr] took me out there and I had my suit on and my bow tie and my stingy brim. And my father said, you know, get to work. And, you know, as a kid that young you said, "Muhammad Speaks," you know, at a very low tone. And my father said, "I can't hear you," and you know, "I can't hear you." And, "You got to raise the volume, raise the volume, raise the volume to, you know, you're on the corner, 'Muhammad Speaks, Muhammad Speaks'." So those are some of the memories that, that I have. Speaker 1: Did you consider that good training in those days? Speaker 2: Not then but now, absolutely it was good training, because it gave you confidence. I mean, if you're a kid, you know, six or seven years old out here screaming on a street corner selling a newspaper, you know, as you go on throughout life you don't have the shyness, you know, you're not so insecure about yourself so absolutely, it was great training. Story_ID: 372866 Speaker 1: So your father [L.A. Carr], he was an entrepreneur, you know, with his cleaning business and you helped sell the papers for the, the Nation [Nation of Islam]-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And was the message--I know the message of the--well I know the--but tell us something about the message of the Nation in terms of that kind of thing, business stuff? Speaker 2: Well, the message of the Nation during that particular time was that, you know, we are the chosen people, you know, African Americans are the chosen people and also, you know, we need to be totally independent of anyone else and be dependent on ourselves, so, whether that was through, you know, a entrepreneurship and in just trying to create a living for yourself or educating ourselves, you know. The big thing with the school [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois] at that particular time is that we will give you the truth. We're gonna give you the truth about our history in this country and how we got here, you know. So, and in public schools you were not gonna get that truth. So, basically, those were the big messages, you know, the truth about ourselves, about our communities to be able to show the positive-ness, you know, the upbringing of ourselves, you know, pick yourself up by your bootstraps, that sort of thing. So that was the message of the Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal], which was the newspaper at that particular time. Speaker 1: Okay. In retrospect when you look at it, what was--were the services much different from say a church service would be on the South Side or West Side [Chicago, Illinois] in those days? Speaker 2: Not really, not really. Much more--well most church services today are structured like that. It was very, very structured service. One of the other things I remember is that, you know, you couldn't bring any knives, any nail clippers, so they were going through the security thing, you know, this is, this is post-9/11 [September 11, 2001], well, you know, back then at the mosque they were going through that security thing before post-9/11, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a key feature of anything with the Nation, if you went there, you were going to be searched (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: And what was it--did you have a understanding as to why that was the only place in the community where that happened? Speaker 2: Well, I think number one, they always very protective of Elijah Muhammad, and all the other ministers that, you know, because, you know, the general population really sort of classified them as a sort of a sect, you know, a dangerous sect to the community because of their own independence at that particular point, so I think they were always fearful of whether it was the government or whomever, you know, coming in and doing some harm to Elijah Muhammad and some of the other officials with the Nation at that particular time. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a chance to meet Elijah Muhammad? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I mean, it was a very small, I mean, especially in today's terms, it was a very sort of small organization, a very small school, a very small mosque, so, you know, the interaction was very, very active among just about everybody. Speaker 1: Personal and intense, kind of (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Personal, yes. Speaker 1: About how many people in the school do you think in those days? Speaker 2: I would probably say back then it couldn't of been any more than two or three hundred. Speaker 1: Okay. And, do you have any stories about Elijah Muhammad or Malcolm X, or Muhammad Ali or of the big figures? Speaker 2: The story that sort of sticks with me is we had sort of I guess you would call it today a retreat. And Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], which was not a Minister Farrakhan--was not Minister Farrakhan at that time, but he was the speaker, and I'll never forget this, and I kind of use it today when I tell people stories is that he said, you know what the problem with the black man is, the black man sleep too much. He said, because while you sleeping the white man is planning the future of the world. They are deciding what communities are going to look like 10, 15 and 20 years from now. They are deciding new ways to change the economy 10, 15, 20 years from now, while we're thinking about today, they've already thought about tomorrow; that we're not visionaries. And that sticks with me today. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Any memories of Muhammad Ali, being such a colorful figure and all? Speaker 2: That was just sort of like, you know, what we'd call like a shot in the arm, a steroid of the community at that particular time because he was such a, a national and international figure. So when, you know, he would come to mosque or be around any time, you saw more security, you saw more people around, it was just like, you know--as we would say in today, he was a rock star (laughter). Speaker 1: How does--it just occurred to me your father was a boxer and trainer, did he have any interaction with Ali? Speaker 2: Not that I can remember. No, not that I can remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Seem like he would be a resource that could be utilized? Speaker 2: Um-hm. It was so many people into that at that point in time. Story_ID: 372867 Speaker 1: So in '64 [1964] you left the University of Islam [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois] and where did you end up going to school? Speaker 2: When--ended up going to school on the West Side called Beidler Elementary School [Jacob Beidler Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: B-I-D-L-E-R [sic.], I think. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you were in the--you were what, fourth or fifth (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in like the fifth grade. Speaker 1: Ok, yeah, ok. Now, how was that, was that a dramatic change for you? Speaker 2: Oh, it was crazy. I'd never seen anything like that in my life. (Laughter) I was in total shock. I'd never seen kids, you know, talking back to teachers, you know, kids throwing paper and books across the room, and of course, me not knowing any better I went there with my uniform on, and of course they were teasing me and made me the brunt of every joke. And I was like, what kind of craziness is this, you know. Hated it, I mean, it was like just a horrible experience for me. Kids picked on me, I fought all the time, you know, thank God for the FOI in the Fruit of Islam I did know how to defend myself, so I wasn't losing too many fights; but it just was, just like the craziness thing I've, I'd ever seen. I mean, because it was all new to me, I mean, there was no such thing as talking back to a teacher, there was no such thing as talking unless you were spoken too, all right. And this whole lunch thing, you know, because at the University of Islam, you had about fifteen minutes to eat lunch and it was very, very organized, so you know, you just didn't go--your class, you ate lunch with your class, you know, there was no menu. You ate what was served for you. And there was no talking at lunch. So you could imagine me going to a public school and sitting lunchroom like, what kind of craziness is this? It was just really culture shock for me. And, you know, I was really complaining to my mother [Lillian Cheers Carr], I hate this, I just hate this. This is the craziest thing I've ever seen and she's like, I know, but you just gotta hang in there, you just gotta hang in there. Speaker 1: Now, was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And school was so easy for me, it was no challenge whatsoever. I mean, I finished the homework before I left class every day. It was just that--'cause I was so far advanced because of, you know, the smaller classrooms the more discipline that you had at the University of Islam. Speaker 1: In retrospect when you look back--well, just as an outside observer it doesn't--it seems like you, you know, by going to a public school, you took a step down in terms of what you-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Did your mother--did she just have to leave the Nation [Nation of Islam] at that time or did she--I mean what was her thinking? Speaker 2: Her reason was that the school was closed down for so long after Malcolm [Malcolm X] was killed, she just--she said, "I just can't have you out here. I just can't, you know, 'cause I gotta work, you know, so I can't have you just out here sitting around because you'll find yourself in trouble." Story_ID: 372868 Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts--this is the first time ever heard this, but do you have any thoughts as to why they closed the school [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois] after Malcolm X was killed, because he wasn't a member of the Nation [Nation of Islam] at the time he was killed, he was a--? Speaker 2: Right. They feared for violence against, you know, there were all type of threats against the Nation at that time--threats, and they feared, you know, there were threats on school buses, that sort of thing. They were gonna blow up a school bus. So they just shut it down. Speaker 1: And, did the services continue as normal in the Nation? Speaker 2: No, no. Heightened security, it just became just a whole different type of world. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was sort of the, the '60s [1960s] 9/11 [September 11, 2001] situation. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you continue to be members of the Nation in those days? Speaker 2: We continued for a while and then it was just so unorganized and such--as my mother [Lillian Cheers Carr]--it was just such a hassle to go anywhere near because of the security, I mean, you know, it was just crazy. Speaker 1: So they kind of just kind of pushed you to the outside (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely. Story_ID: 372869 Speaker 1: You went to Beidler [Jacob Beidler Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] for the rest of your grade school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Beidler for fifth and sixth grade, and then and to J. Sterling Morton [J. Sterling Morton High School, Cicero, Illinois]--I'm sorry, Beidler for fifth grade, then J. Sterling Morton was a, what do they call them, a junior, junior elementary school? Speaker 1: Junior high? Speaker 2: Junior high, yeah, for seventh--sixth, seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, what was the culture like at J. Sterling Morton? Speaker 2: Just to me, just as crazy and this is the height of the gang situation, so you're fighting constantly. It was just like the wild, wild west, really. And, you know, you're trying to, I think, you know, my mother's [Lillian Cheers Carr] challenge was to try to keep the discipline that I had learned, you know, early in my life intact and still try to get good grades, but then the environment was not conducive to any of that. So, you know, my discipline started slacking (laughter) and became harder on me. It just became so like crazy and it started having them conversations that them black mothers have with their, you know, brought you into the world, I'll take you outta the world, all right, don't try me, all right. So, you know, when I look back, you know, at some of the things I was going through it was strictly an environment, I mean, because I wouldn't have even thought about some of that craziness, you know, when I was involved with the Nation [Nation of Islam]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you were--you always carried with you that you were part of the Nation even when you were in those situations? Speaker 2: I always carried the whole discipline thing with me, you know, I always tried to. And that's sort of like when my mother saw that slipping, you know, whether it was do that or do this and I'd say, huh? It was like what is that? What kind of word is that? Where did you learn that from? So, you know, the little things like that I was getting knocked in the head by my mother (laughter) like what kind of crazy communication is that, and you know, how I started talking, you know, when the clothes I wanted to wear, and you know, just wanted to become part of the culture. Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up did you watch television or listen to the radio like other families? Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely but there were certain disciplines that still, you know, "You can watch that but understand, you know, that ain't happening here. Just be clear." So, there was never, you know, "You can't watch this" or "You can't listen to that", you know, that freedom was always there. Or, "You can't play with this person" or "You can't"--they always gave me the freedom but they always said, "Remember where you live, now. All right, once you come back in here, you know, remember what's gonna happen". Story_ID: 372870 Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to Lane Tech High School [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Lane Tech, okay. Lane Tech's a good school. Speaker 2: Let me tell you, I always got--like I said, I hadn't gotten anything less than a A 'til I got to Lane Tech. But, when I took the high school entrance exam, I scored extremely low, and several of my teachers at J. Sterling Morton [J. Sterling Morton High School, Cicero, Illinois] said, this is like one of the top students in the school. He--we don't want him ended up at Marshall [Marshall High School; John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois], we don't want to end him up at Crane [Crane Technical High School; Richard T. Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] because--and those were the non-local high schools, because he's a much better student than that. So they asked that I was able to take the reading and the math test over, 'cause the first time I had scored, I came back with like a eighth grade reading level and like a ninth grade math, and then when I took it the second time--they petitioned for me to take it the second time, I came up with a twelfth grade reading level, like eleventh grade math score which gave me the opportunity to go to Lane. Story_ID: 372871 Speaker 1: You were in high school in '68 [1968] right, when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed? Speaker 2: I was in high school in--I entered high school in '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], okay, so you were still in junior high-- Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: Let's go back to that for a minute because I know that's a dramatic thing for anybody on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] in those days. And you said you heard Dr. King speak in '66 [1966] I guess when he was in Chicago [Illinois] and was staying on the West Side. Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely. Speaker 1: Do you remember what it was like during the riots after Dr. King was killed? Speaker 2: The riots, the burning of Madison Street, 'cause I stayed on Warren [Boulevard] and Warren was one block north of Madison, and, so you know, you could--the flames were like--and, and during that particular time there were a lot of retail stores on Madison Street, I mean, so you had a lot of ma and pa shops whether they were, you know, chicken places or, you know, the athletic shoe places that they have today. So, there were a lot of those shops, Three Sisters and all of those sort of things lined up and down from probably California to back then, probably Kostner, was just a lot of retail stores along Madison Street. And, you know, those days following Dr. King being killed, you know, those places were being broken into. Those places were being set on fire. It was just like a real crazy time. And then also, you know, we lost power so, you know, at night there was no street lights and then when the mayor [Richard J. Daley] called in the National Guard, you know, you had to be off the streets, you had the time curfew on it. So, it, it was a very, very interesting time in the city and in black history at that particular moment. Speaker 1: Right. That's one of the biggest riots I guess in American history here in Chicago on the West Side and-- Speaker 2: Right, absolutely. Schools closed for long periods of time, you know, until they could kind of get this thing under control, so it was a very, very, very challenging and devastating time. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any--well, did you basically stay at home during this period of time or did you have to go out into that? Speaker 2: No, just stayed at home during that period of time. Story_ID: 372872 Speaker 1: So at Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] now all this time, did you avoid getting involved in gangs during all this period of time? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't really--did you play sports in school? Speaker 2: I played--I was always an athlete, you know, so, whether it was, you know, pick-up baseball, football, basketball, track, whatever. So when I went to Lane, I tried out for the football team, made the team, and played football my freshman and sophomore year, got my arm broke in my sophomore year. And a lot of friends of mine had joined the track team so with my arm in a cast, you know, I would hang out at track practice and one day the coach said, why don't you just, you know, run with us? And from that, everything else was history, I became a high school, All-American part of the world relay, mile relay team, city champion, state champion so things just have their way of working itself out (laughter). Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story. I mean that's--so you became a mile relay champion here in the city? Speaker 2: Yeah, we broke the high school world record in the mile relay. Speaker 1: (Pause) So you had to run a quarter? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's a tough run. I remember some schools don't have anybody that can run it. Speaker 2: As we called it back then, "the man killer". Speaker 1: To sprint a quarter mile is tough. So, yeah, so you were in good shape in high school. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Story_ID: 372873 Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite subject in high school? Speaker 2: High school was really challenging for me culturally. You gotta remember I'm coming from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], coming from all black environments, almost 100 percent black environments, for my whole life. And then here I go to a high school that at that particular time was 99.5 percent white, so culturally I was like in a culture shock. So, here you come from being part of the majority, now you're clearly the minority, all right, and at that particular time it was all male too. So--and what I found out that those kids were much better prepared for high school than I was prepared for high school, so from algebra to geometry, to trigonometry to typing, everything else, the majority of my classmates was far ahead of me in preparation. So, basically, I was starting behind the eight ball. So it was challenging from an academic standpoint, it was challenging from a cultural standpoint, it was not sort of, my first few years, the best time of my life, all right. After I became a star athlete, you know, everything start falling in place for me, I mean, they wanted to spend more time with tutors with me, you got more attention from teachers, from counselors, and everything else because, you know, everything kind of evolves around those star athletes, especially in school like that. So I was able to, you know, try to get myself together. And also, coming from the background I had no inkling to go to college. I mean, college came about for me basically from coaches saying don't you want to go to college, and I'm like no, I need to get a job, I'm trying to get at the P.O. [post office], I'm trying to get to CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], I'm trying to go to UPS [United Parcel Service], you know, I need to make some money as quick as possible. So, they basically had to convince me that college was the right thing to do. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So when you were a senior then what kind of social life did you have, I mean, you were at an all-male school, and, I mean, did you go to a prom and all that kind of stuff? Speaker 2: Yeah, matter of fact my junior year Lane [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] opened up to girls. So, my graduating class was the first co-ed graduating class in 1974. But, you know, remember Lane was such a powerhouse back then in sports. It was just your whole world, I mean, whether it was baseball, gymnastics, swimming, football, track and field, the only sport that we weren't dominating during those times was basketball. But just about every other sport in the public league, we dominated. I mean, it was like everybody else was shooting for second. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So that was what was going on in Chicago [Illinois] then, huh? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, Lane Tech is known more as an academic school now I think. Speaker 2: Right. It's an academic school but when you have such a big school, I mean you know, Lane Tech is--I always laugh today and say, they only thing that doesn't seem that got smaller the older I, because if you look at the Lane Tech campus, it's still one of the biggest campuses, in acreage that you'll probably have in the country for a high school. I mean, so the facilities that we had were much better than everybody else, and then when you're able to--we probably had at Lane in the early '70s [1970s], we might have had seven thousand kids. Speaker 1: And mostly males. Speaker 2: And mostly males. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that would make for the great (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So can you imagine the talent pool that you've got to pick from, even though it's an academic school but you still--seven thousand males, you still can pick from a lot of boys for those sports teams. Story_ID: 372874 Speaker 1: Tell me, when you were a senior [at Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], what were your prospects, I mean, what did you see yourself--did you have an idea of what you wanted to become? You said you wanted to get a job as a cop or some job I guess, with benefits and that sort of thing. But when they talked to you in the school, did your envision change in terms of what you--? Speaker 2: You know, everybody kept saying, you know, by the time I was a senior, we were such a powerhouse in track and field that everybody was saying, you know, I started getting the calls from coaches, college coaches, right. And so between the--my high school coach, college recruiters and then the whole alumni association starts getting involved, having people who went to college come back, talking to you about going to different schools that they've been to, so then you start to say, okay, maybe this is something I should do. I mean, because nobody else--I had one cousin who had went to college at that particular time. Nobody else, I knew had went to college so it was sort of like, I don't see it around me, I don't hear it, you know, it's not an option for me. Speaker 1: Ok. Speaker 2: And then when the recruiting started, you know, you start visiting and I remember I visited, you know, Indiana U [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], University of Nebraska [Lincoln, Nebraska], University of Texas, El Paso [University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas]. You know, you start getting all the letters from Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania], USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], that sort of thing. So it puts you in the mindset, maybe I ought to think about this. Speaker 1: You got a good track name, because Henry Carr, in the late '60s [1960s] was a tremendous star, run the 220 [yards] and, I mean, he's no relationship (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, but I bet they remembered that name, Carr (laughter). Story_ID: 372875 Speaker 1: What school did you choose? Speaker 2: Well, a funny thing happened. We set the mile relay in the city--indoor city championships, the world record mile relay, and at three, nineteen, five on a Friday night. Then we went to Oak Park relays that Saturday and I tore my hamstring, and a severe tear. Matter of fact, it was so bad they said I would be lucky if I was able to walk without a limp again. So the night after setting the world record, you know, I'm on crutches. And that was like, I think, March 26, 1974. And so that--I saw everything just end right there, you know, prospect of college, everything else, done. Just--I was, I was finished. A very devastating time to be at the height of your life on one night and to be at the lowest the next night. And throughout April and most of May, I basically went to team practices [at Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], tried to jog but it was always with a limp. And, so, I'll never forget we went down to the Illinois state trials for the Illinois state championship and my coach came to me and said, "We've talked as a team and we wouldn't even be in the position we're in if you hadn't been here so we want you to attempt to run tomorrow." And I looked at him like he was crazy. I'm like, "Man, you been seeing me limping around here", you know. How, how you think I'm gone run? And it was about ninety-nine degrees down at Eastern Illinois [Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois], he said, "Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr], we just want you to try, and if you can't finish, we're fine with that. But we think that we want you to do that and we're gonna make an announcement that you're gone anchor the relay teams tomorrow." And he said, "Now, be prepared, the media gone be all over you. 'Cause everybody knows you got hurt, everybody knows what people say about your career, but I'm gone make an announcement to the press tonight that you gone run tomorrow. So, don't freak out." And, surely enough, press was just all over me asking questions, "When did you know you were gonna run, what type of workouts you been doing, what have the doctors said", and, basically, it was just, "No comment," 'cause I didn't know what I could do. And the next day when I got that baton, I ran the fastest 200 meters in state that year. It was just a miracle. I mean, I call it a miracle; went on to anchor all of the, the relays, we set state records. Then the next day for the finals, you know, I was hurting real bad, right. (Laughter) 'Cause number one I wasn't in that type of shape; number two, the injury had really started to ache again. I think that the heat had just really loosened me up. We went on to tie East St. Louis [East St. Louis Senior High School, East St. Louis, Illinois] for the state championship, we got second in the 400 meter relay which I anchored, which you know, the tape shows that we probably got first but we ain't gone go there, and we went on to take second in the 880 relay and then our mile relay won the state championship. And we tied in points with East St. Louis. But all of the offers that I had got, still coaches said what, "We believe it was a miracle, we can't the chance because we saw you after the race, we saw them icing you, we saw the bandages and everything, and we saw you on a crutch when you left that track. So we can't take the chance." Story_ID: 372876 Speaker 1: So, I said, "Fine", you know. It was never like a big dream or anything that I had had for years and that's how life works out so, you know, I went and filled out applications at the post office and the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], and you know, waiting on a call and I was at--in the park one day, and a little kid came and said, you know, "Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr], your mother [Lillian Cheers Carr] said come home right away." So in the hood when you hear something like that, you know somebody done died or something tragic happened. So I ran home and opened the door, went in the house, and there was a guy sitting in my living room and he said, 'My name is Ed Ehrhart [sic. Bob Ehrhart]." And I said, "Okay." He said, "I am the track coach for Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa]." I said, "All right." He said, "Do you know a guy named Phil Ferguson?" I said, "Yeah, I do know him." I said, "He used to go to Lane Tech [Albert Grannis Lane Technical High School; Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois]." He said, 'He came to me last week in my office and said, 'Do you have another track scholarship?' And I said, 'How do you know that? I do. And I'm looking for some guy to give it to.' And he said, 'You should give it to a guy by the name of Louis Carr in Chicago [Illinois].' And he said, 'All day I been meeting with reporters from Chicago Sun-Times and Chicago Tribune and every one of them said, 'Where have you been? This is one of the greatest athletes, high school athletes, in the nation. You should take that chance.' And he said, 'Sight unseen, I'm gone take that chance, if you want it.'" And I was just--I was stunned. I said, you gotta be joking. He said, "If you want it, it's a full four-year scholarship. I got every newspaper clipping that's ever been written about you right here, and I talked to your coach today, I've talked to all the trainers and physicians that have looked at you, and they said, after the performance that you had at the state championship, you'll be fine." And he said, "If you want to visit the school before you make up your mind, let me know that and I'll fly you down in the next couple of days." Flew down, and Drake has this tunnel, that leads to the stadium. And Drake has a track stadium that serves the football stadium, where most schools have football stadiums that serves as a track stadium, all right. Well, Speaker 2: I know they have the Drake Relays that are famous in the country. Speaker 1: Drake Relays, right. Speaker 2: Now where is Drake, Drake's in? Speaker 1: In Des Moines, Iowa. Speaker 2: Des Moines, Iowa, okay. Speaker 1: So when you walk through this tunnel and you go through this double doors to get out, and you walk out you're right on the track. And the coach says, Louis, I want you to turn around and look at what it says above those doors. And there's a sign that says, "Through This Tunnel Passes the Greatest Athletes In the World." Done. I was done. I was like, "Sign me up." Soon as I saw that sign, "I don't need to see nothing else, I'm done." And everything else is history. And that's where I ended up graduating from. Story_ID: 372877 Speaker 1: How was Drake [Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa], I mean, here they give you a four-year scholarship? Speaker 2: Four-year scholarship, you never heard of that now a days, four years guaranteed, all right (laughter), you know so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so that meant if you got hurt, you still got your-- Speaker 2: Still got, still got your education, right. So I got--you got one of the last one of those that the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] was offering. Speaker 1: Okay, so I mean, did your body hold up? Speaker 2: My body held up, I had a great career at Drake, great school for me. Drake is located in the hood. Drake is sort of built in a black community, right. (Laughter) I mean, so, when you walk off campus I mean, you see black folks all around you, all right. You know, right down the street you had the black Playboy Club, you had Roberts' 500 Room [ph.], all this stuff and then more, and you go like, huh! So, it's one of those few universities that's really not built--you would think of Drake in Des Moines [Iowa], that would be typical college campus, out in the corn fields, away from everything. But Drake is built in the heart of the city. And the city sort of surrounds it, and it's sort of like the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I like to compare it. It just kind of grows within the community, the larger it gets. But, you know, it was a great, great, great place for me. A small school, you got a lot of attention; both academically, and from athletic standpoint. So it was just a great opportunity, the perfect opportunity for a guy like me. Story_ID: 372878 Speaker 1: What did you decide to major in? Speaker 2: I decided to major in broadcast journalism because the head of the department, also happened to be what they called the voice of the Drake Relays, a guy by the name of Professor Duncan [James Duncan]. And he was a older guy, that still ran track, he was a Drake [Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa] alum, and he had one of the most distinct voice in broadcasting, and just a great, great, great guy. I mean, he was one of those professors that everybody wanted to be in his class, because he had a great personality, he was funny, just a great guy to learn from, a wealth of information, very successful in his own right. And just, you know, students--one of those professors that students just kind of gravitate towards. So I met him on my trip to Des Moines [Iowa] and I just wanted to be a part of what he was doing. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so did you have an opportunity to do some broadcasting now, yourself? Speaker 2: I had internships at local radio stations and--so amazing, Professor Duncan always said, "Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr], I think you need to go into sales." And I would say, "Professor, that's not what I'm trying to do, that's not what I want to do." You know, I want to be in front of the camera, I want to be in front of the mic, that sort of thing. So he said, "Well, why don't you try being a writer?" "Yeah, okay, but that's not what I wannna do." So he got me internships at some of the local radio stations in Des Moines as a news writer. And that was okay, but that was not what I wanted to do. So, finally, in my senior year I said, "Professor why do you keep trying to tell me that, that's what I need to do be a writer or go into sales 'cause I'm not trying to do that." And he said, "Well, I think I know you well enough now, and I think you trust me well enough, I can tell you this." He said, "You sort of have a southern drawl, and I don't think that the broadcast industry is going to do anything with that." Speaker 1: A southern drawl? Speaker 2: Right. He said you have a southern drawl. Speaker 1: Now, do you speak the same way now or do you have? Speaker 2: I speak the same way now. And he said that's sort of with a southern drawl. And he said, "If you come across--," and he did tapes of me, he said, "look at you and look at some--," at that particular time it was Max Robinson, you know people like that and he said, "I just don't think America is ready for that yet." He said, "There will become a time that you'll be able to be whatever you want to and America will get it, but not right now." So I was disappointed, to say the least--but it did not stop me from trying to pursue what I really wanted. So when I got out of school, you know, I interviewed, did the whole thing, small town interviews, you know, from Cedar Rapids, Iowa to Kalamazoo, Michigan, all those type of interviews. Story_ID: 372879 Speaker 1: So you graduated [from Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa] in '78 [1978]? Speaker 2: I graduated in '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, you know, didn't get no traction so everything else is history after that. I really started my career in the insurance industry because my mother [Lillian Cheers Carr] told me, "You gotta get a job, son. I ain't taking care of you no more." So I got the first job that I could find and I was sort of a customer service rep for Bankers Life Insurance [Bankers Life Insurance Company]. And from there, went on to be a New York Life Insurance [New York Life Insurance Company] agent, and was there probably about six years. Speaker 1: So in '78 [1978] you went on with--you were hired by Bankers Life? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay, and how long did you stay at Bankers Life? Speaker 2: I probably stayed at Bankers Life to round about '81 [1981], '82 [1982]. No, I'm sorry, take that back. I stayed at Bankers Life for probably about to '80 [1980], two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Then '80 [1980], New York Life? Speaker 2: Then '80 [1980] New York Life and I stayed there until '84 [1984], and then I got a friend--a call from a friend of mine who was working for Burrell [Burrell Communications Group] and said, "You want to work for Ebony magazine," and I said, "Nah." And he said, "Well, you gotta do me a favor, you gotta go to an interview." I said, "Come on, man." He said, "Just do me the favor Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr], just go to the interview." I told them you were coming. So I go to the interview, I had no idea it was gone be with [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson. (Laughter) And, interview with John H., and he offered me the job on the spot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was like, all righty. This is not going like I had planned. Speaker 1: Now, how did they even think of you for Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois], working in insurance? I mean, how did that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what happened was-- Speaker 1: Did you keep yourself involved in the media, I mean on some level at all? Speaker 2: No. They were--my friend at Burrell was handling the McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] account, and a guy by the name of Dennis Boston who was running sales at that time, asked him did he know anybody who's a good sales person, and he said, "Yeah, my best friend." And so he says, "Well, have him come down for an interview." And he says, "So I'll have him do that," so that's how that happened. And I went down and Dennis was in the room and Mr. J was in the room, and within an hour they had offered me the job. Speaker 1: So, Mr. Johnson was hands on at that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Everything he was hands on. Story_ID: 372880 Speaker 1: All right, so he [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was involved in hiring sales men, his sales force, all right. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely. And what's so interesting about that interview to show you how he notices everything, I had a button on my sleeve, I wasn't wearing cufflinks back in the day, but a button was missing, but I had another one there, and he asked me why did I come to an interview with him with a button missing. Like man, he saw that. And then, after he offered me the job, he told me I had to move off the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. I said, "Excuse me?" He said, "You gotta move off the West Side." And I said, "And why?" He said, "'Cause you have a ghetto mentality." I said, "What do you mean I have a ghetto mentality?" He said, "You're never gonna grow, until you get into a bigger lake." He said, "Right now you're in a small pond, with a small thought process so we got to get you out of that." And he explained to me that he used to live on 51st [Street] and Drexel [Boulevard], and he said, "When I lived on 51st and Drexel, Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr], I could of lived anywhere in the world I wanted to live 'cause I had enough money, but I had a nice place, you know, big and everything, and I lived there." He said, "But I didn't start to grow 'til I moved to 1040 North Lake Shore Drive. And then I saw the whole world for what it had to offer. So you gotta move." Wrote on a piece of paper, "Call this person so you can move right down the street, to 1130 South Michigan [Avenue]. Call them, tell them I told you to call, tell 'em to get you apartment." I had mixed emotions 'cause I was like, I don't know if I've just been insulted, or I just been complimented? (Laughter) You know, I don't know which one that just happened to me. And, I did move to 1130 South Michigan. And I ended up working for Mr. J for about a year and a half before I was terminated. Speaker 1: Now, were you selling ads for? Speaker 2: Ebony. Speaker 1: Ebony magazine. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So I know at that time he had WJPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois], Tom Joyner was on and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had WJPC, Tom Joyner, yep. Speaker 1: He also had like several other publications and he still does (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jet magazine and Jet Jr. [sic.] still existed at the time, um-hm-- Speaker 1: Ebony Jr. Yeah, in those days-- Speaker 2: And Ebony Man. Speaker 1: Yeah. Black World was still being published--no, it stopped then, yeah, right. Black World stopped in '76 [1976] that's right. Story_ID: 372881 Speaker 1: So, what happened, I mean, so you--did you enjoy working for Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson]? Speaker 2: I wasn't ready and I can say that in retrospect. Mr. J was extremely, extremely smart guy and I was just--had to much hood in me, you know, so I couldn't take constructive criticism. I couldn't take really being pushed to the limit from--I would just say, an ability standpoint. I didn't understand that was part of growing, he really liked me. And when I got pushed by my boss, I snapped. You know, cursed out my boss and everything else, and they fired me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you want to tell us what happened? Speaker 2: I think it had to do with some account they said that I hadn't done a good job. I said I had done a good job, I was working hard as I could, and you know, my boss pushed me, I cursed out my boss. Mr. J got involved and said, "Okay, that's fine but I need you to apologize." I said, "I'm not gonna apologize." He said, "Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr], I'm not asking you. I'm telling you to apologize," and I said, "I'm not gone do it. I'm just not gonna do it." And he said, "You're not gonna do it?" I said, "I'm not gone do it." He says, "Then you know what I gotta do." I said, "You gotta do what you gotta do." And I got what I call a real black firing, where security comes up, empties your desk drawer, put in a box, they escort you out, throw you and the box out on the street, all right. (Laughter) So, I got fired, was devastated, you know, just never thought I'd find myself in that type of a situation, ended up working for WBEE [WBEE Radio, Harvey, Illinois], for a guy by the name of Charles Sherrell selling ads. Speaker 1: Now, BEE is put in perspective is a very small operation, jazz--black jazz station located in was it Harvey [Illinois] or? Speaker 2: Very, very small, yeah. Absolutely. No, it was located downtown at that particular, uh hum. And so-- Speaker 1: So what year is this, this is (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was--now, this had to be like '80- probably by '85 [1985] or something like that. Speaker 1: Ok yeah, I guess so, right. So, Johnson [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]--you worked for New York Life [New York Life Insurance Company] 'til '84 [1984], then Johnson for '85 [1985], '86 [1986] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To about '84 [1984], '85[1985], a little longer like about fifteen months or something like that. Then I worked for WBEE for about three months. And I was dying. I was just like--it was just too small for me. Then I got a call from a guy by the name of Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And said, you know, "Your name keeps coming up and I want to talk to you." And this had to be towards--had to be like August of '85 [1985], September of '85 [1985]. Story_ID: 372882 Speaker 1: You have a, you know, John Johnson's [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] trying to get in touch with you and now Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], you know. You must be doing something right. Speaker 2: That goes back to another saying, what's for you is for you. All right. (Laughter) You can't even mess it up, all right. (Laughter) So, met with Earl, told me that, you know, he had talked to Mr. J. Mr. J told him I was ignorant and crazy, don't be bothered. But, so many people had mentioned my name he was willing to take a chance. Worked for Earl and he, he really liked me. Did a great job, was very successful. Then in May of '86 [1986], the same guy [Dennis Boston] who had told me about the job at Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], my same friend called me and said, "You gone get a call from a guy by the name of Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson]. Take the call, Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr]." I'm like, "Really? What is he doing?" "He got this little cable thing going and he want to talk to you about it." I said, "Okay, fine." I met with Bob at the Marriott Hotel on Michigan [Avenue] and thought he was a great guy, had a great dream, but I said, "I'm not your guy. I'm not the one. Just don't want no part of it, right." He said, "Fine." Then in June, I got a call from him again, said he was back in town and he said, "Can you just meet with me and maybe you can give me some recommendations." So I like him, so I met with him. And after I named a number of people, he said, "Well, Louis, that's not really why I called you." He said, "I'm trying to convince you to come work for me." And I'm like, "You know what, I appreciate that and I'm flattered and all that. I'm not trying do that." I said, "My--." Speaker 1: So, you were still with Earl Graves, right? Speaker 2: Right. I said my next move is gone be to a big white corporation. That's my next move. He said, fine. And this is now in June, in July I get a call from Bob, and he says, "I really want you to think about this, Louis. This is a great opportunity for you; your name came up again today." And now, now I'm starting to waiver, right. I'm like, okay, this guy's pressing me. He seems like he's a nice guy, you know, I done talked to people about this cable thing. Everybody's saying that the wave of the future, you need to be a part of it. But I, you know--and I always tease Bob. Bob had on sweat suits when I met him. I'm like, you know, ol boy just got on a sweat suit, you know. He ain't even got on a suit. I don't know if I should do this. So, I started thinking about it, and Bob called me. This is right after the Fourth of July--naw, I'm sorry, towards the end of July. And he says, "Louis, final call," and it was late one night. He said, "I'm not even trying to sell you, I'm just gone tell you one thing. Me and Earl are gone be successful without you. You just have to make a decision on what's the best opportunity for you. Don't think about me, don't think about him. What's the best opportunity for you." So that was Bob, you know, in retrospect, closing me, right. He was really closing me. So, at that point, I went and I talked to Earl. He just went nuts on me. Oh, he just went off on me, just telling me, you know, "How could you even be having a conversation, this is stupid, that ain't no real business," you know, I mean, he just really let me have it with both barrels. And that's when I said, "Now, that's what I'm gonna do," because one thing Earl never said to me is, "Make the best decision for you." He was saying, you know, "We need you, the company needs you," and like, okay, I got that. But let me make the best decision. So I did, and ended up making that move in August of '86 [1986] to BET [Black Entertainment Television] and I told Bob, "Three years, baby, that's all I'm giving you. 'Cause I see myself in a much bigger, much bigger company in a much bigger role." Well, that was in 1986. Speaker 1: That's twenty years ago . Speaker 2: That was twenty years ago (simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 372883 Speaker 1: What kind of shape was BET [Black Entertainment Television] in when you joined? Speaker 2: BET, just like most small start-up businesses, you know, was six years old, it was only thirty-three employees at that particular time. We weren't making any money. We were still trying to decide what the programing mix was. And, you know, so anybody who had a idea and had some film, you know, probably could get on the air. It was not like we were in hot demand. Speaker 1: Now, were you familiar--I realize having lived in--moved to Chicago [Illinois] in late '70s [1970s] and Chicago didn't get cable until the '90s [1990s], but a lot of the smaller markets had cable. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: My hometown had cable since seventy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, so that's why even I wasn't that familiar with BET. Like, what the heck is that? So, you know, we struggled like most, you know, small entrepreneurial businesses in the very, very beginning. But one of the things that I think kept me around, I liked Bob [Robert L. Johnson], liked him a lot. I liked his passion, I liked his work ethic, I liked his energy. And I thought he was an extremely bright young guy, at that particular time. So, it sort of kept you energized, you felt like a real team sort of thing so I kind of felt like, you know, my athletic days, 'cause you were small, nimble and basically being a part of everything, you know. When you're at a small start-up company, you know everything, you learn everything, 'cause you're a part of everything. So you learn about production, you know. You learn about cable affiliates. Just about everything you do, you know, the company does, you're a part of it. So it was, you know, real exciting times-there were real frustrating times, 'cause, as you know, in any--if you don't have all the resources that you need to be as successful as you want to be. So, we had some, some struggles in the early days but you always saw that there was a brighter light at the end of that tunnel. Story_ID: 372884 Speaker 1: In those days, what was your sales technique? I mean, how--what do you think made you a successful sales man? People are competing for you, you know? Speaker 2: I think in, in the early days it was primarily just work ethic, just hang in there, you know, we weren't doing no strategy stuff, you know, no tactics; none of that. It was just, work, work, work, work like a dog, you know. And just outwork your competitor, you know, just try to be every way you possibly can, as much as you can tell 'em a BET [Black Entertainment Television] story. Now, that's all it is. And we had the luxury of being the only guy, you know, in the marketplace telling a black, sort of consumer TV story. I mean, so we didn't have any competition at that particular time. So that the most difficult part of my job was explaining people to--of what the black consumer market was. Story_ID: 372885 Speaker 1: We're talking about some of the challenges of the early days of sale and BET [Black Entertainment Television]. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, right. And I was asking you off-camera like who were the--what's the competition at BET--or in those days there wasn't--there was no competition? Speaker 1: There was no competition for us in those days. I mean, the biggest competition was, you know, that black folks do they really watch a BET and how important is BET to their lives? Because, you know, black folks was watching TV long before BET came along. So what we had to do was sell what we called the emotional attachment that African Americans have to brands that are created for them, by them. Speaker 2: And BET stands for Black Entertainment Television? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what we had to do is so of go to back to my print selling days I saw at Ebony that African Americans have an emotional attachment to brands that represent who they are and what they want to be and things that are all about them. And that, that emotional attachment gives the advertiser a greater opportunity to influence they behavior. Speaker 2: That sounds good (laughter). So that was your, your sales plan? Speaker 1: That was our sales pitch in, in the early days. And it's still part of our sales pitch today; because, you know, one of the things that we, we do know, as African Americans and research has proven it, that African Americans are more attentive to places where they see themselves whether that's in print or whether in broadcast. And they are more passionate about that placement, about that arena, about that medium, about that magazine, about that TV show. But when you have a brand that says, you know, we're not just entertainment we are a brand for you so we're going to give you news and information, we're going to represent you in a way that you want to be represented, we're going to give you information that you want to give so it's not just like a TV show. It's a brand, that primarily African Americans feel that they own and that they can control, and that they influence. So, basically, that gives you, Mr. Advertiser a, a better opportunity to influence their behavior, to influence their buying habits, everything across the board. Story_ID: 372886 Speaker 1: Did you have to move to D.C [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: No. I always lived here [Chicago, Illinois], started as an account executive, went from account executive to a director, from a director to a vice president, from a vice president to a SVP [senior vice president], from an SVP to EVP [executive vice president] and to the president's title that I have right now. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now the--I was told that the--now tell me if this true, that the biggest advertiser in the early days was Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies]? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And wh- that kind of surprised me, why? Speaker 2: Well, Anheuser-Busch, when you think about the early days you had Anheuser-Busch, you had Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company], you had McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation], you had Burger King, you had the Ford Motor Company. You've got to think of the Civil Rights Movement, you got to think of Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and all of the places where there were being pushed to be more diverse in their hiring practice, more diverse in their media practice, those sort of things, more diverse in their vendor practices. So a lot of it came along with just the times, those times. So, you know, you had, you know, Reverend Jackson calling on Anheuser-Busch trying to get them to do more within the black community. You had him calling on Coca-Cola. So a lot of our advertisers we got because we were in the right time, at the right place. Speaker 1: Now that raises an interesting question. Now I don't know if there's an answer to this but was there any coordination between, say, Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], push of these big advertisers and the--and BET's [Black Entertainment Television] desire to get? Speaker 2: Where they went, I was behind them probably only by five days (laughter). Speaker 1: That makes sense, that makes sense. Speaker 2: And so, yeah, we knew that, you know, it's sort of like, you know, they, they would--they eyes would get opened and then we would come in and show them something, all right. Story_ID: 372887 Speaker 1: And I was told also that as the audience--BET's [Black Entertainment Television] audience, as what I was told, got progressively younger as, as time went on and? Speaker 2: Well, not really. I think if, if you look at it, it's got progressively older because when we started BET, it was nothing but videos, period. I mean, because that sort of what we were able to get at a very, very cheap cost, which means zero, from the record labels. So we had programing, which was primarily videos and we had an opportunity to showcase our stars, because at that time, MTV [Music Television; MTV] was not playing black videos. I mean, so whether it was a Bobby Brown or a Whitney Houston, they got zero air play, or Michael Jackson. We were playing Michael Jackson videos long before MTV. MTV's first black video was 'Thriller,' but we had been playing Michael Jackson videos. So, as we shifted into different genres of programing, our audience got older. Speaker 1: I remember the early, the top show or the top program on BET was 'Video Soul,' Donnie Simpson. Speaker 2: Donnie Simpson, absolutely. Speaker 1: Smooth Donnie Simpson. Speaker 2: Absolutely, out of Detroit [Michigan]. So, as we continued to add whether it be sitcoms, whether it be news and information-type shows, whether it be gospel music, whatever the case, the audience really got older. I mean, and our audience right now has a medium age of about thirty-three years old. Speaker 1: Okay, well, yeah, news and a interview news program with [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith, yeah, right. Did you have any--in those days, did you have any concerns about the programing and what you could sell or any ideas for programing that you thought might increase sales, or any relationship to--I mean, well, did you try to influence programing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in, in those days, Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] always had a saying, if it don't make money, it don't make sense. So, I had a lot of influence and say-so in the programing because, basically, I was going back to the programing department telling people what advertisers were looking for, and what they were willing to support. So they sort of had an obligation to try to come up with ideas and shows that would support the advertising needs. Story_ID: 372888 Speaker 1: In that regard, now--I know 'Teen Summit' was one. I know BET [Black Entertainment Television] in those days and now is sometimes criticized for having just, you know, videos and people shaking their rumps and this kind of thing, but 'Teen Summit' is a different kind of show, I mean, and [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith was different, and the comedy show was a little bit different. Is there a story about like how, maybe, a show was started based on a different kind of demand from the advertisers? Speaker 2: Well, you know, what we always try to do is strike a balance between what people want and what people need, 'cause a lot of times what people need and what they want to watch, all right. So, I think if you look at a 'Teen Summit,' you look at 'Black College Football,' you look at some of the other news-oriented shows that we did, you know back in those days, that's what people needed not necessarily is what they wanted. So, as a for-profit company, you have to try to balance yourself and say we're gonna give the black community some of what they need and most of what they want. So when we looked at ratings--so we hung onto 'Teen Summit' as long as we possibly could. Wasn't making money, we hung onto 'Black College Football' as long as we possibly could, wasn't making money. You look at 'Black College Football,' you say, well, why couldn't 'Black College Football' make money? Well, hell, are you looking at black college football when you turn on ABC or ESPN sports, because everybody playing football is almost black nowadays. So, when you look at that, you know, it's sort of like, okay, Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] versus Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] versus Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] . You know, the majority of the players on Ohio State and Michigan are African American, all right. So, if you're coming on live on a Saturday afternoon, are you gonna watch Grambling versus Southern, or are you gonna watch Ohio State and Michigan. If you're a huge sports fan, you're probably gonna watch Ohio State and Michigan, all right. Speaker 1: Because the caliber of sport is higher. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And then what we try to do- okay, let's not go head up with, you know, the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] or, you know, the big eight or, you know, whatever the case may be, let's do a delayed broadcast. Well, that didn't work either because, you know, people already knew the scores by the time the broadcast came on. So, from a viewership, those things didn't work and from an economic stance, it just didn't work. Speaker 1: Now, I think black college football--there are a couple of games--well, the Bayou Classic is big now. Speaker 2: Bayou Classic on NBC. Speaker 1: Yeah. And they--and it's a--the emphasis, I mean, they emphasize the sport on one level but the bands seem to be the. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: And then the, the--I guess the whole culture, black college culture gets exposure, you know, when those games televised. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So you had to--so you--BET couldn't figure out a way to make that viable in terms of? Speaker 2: Well, it, it's sort of like we didn't have enough of it, you know, it's like getting into the animation business or the kids business as we call it. If you're not in it up to your neck, don't get in it, 'cause you'll get beat down by everybody else who dominate it. So, you know, getting into the black college football--and then the other things that we had challenges with, a lot of those schools don't have television-ready venues so it becomes difficult and more costly to shoot. A lot of those schools don't have venues that fill up on a Saturday afternoon so you look like you're shooting a high school game versus a college game. So, there were a lot of variables that we didn't control in trying to make this thing a successful venture. Speaker 1: Okay, so a lot of factors to consider in that? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 372889 Speaker 1: Well, tell me who is the biggest, I guess, advertiser you were able to bring in and, and sustain, you know? Speaker 2: Our biggest advertiser is also the biggest advertiser in the world, Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio]. They're the biggest advertiser in the world, they're the biggest advertiser on BET [Black Entertainment Television] with brands like Secret, you know, Cover Girl, Tide, Cheer, things like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, they're powerful, you know, yeah. Procter and Gamble. So, was it difficult to get them to, to? Speaker 2: I mean, the, the thing that we deal with today is, you know, primarily why a BET today, when you've got so many African American leads and co-stars whether it's on 'Law and Order' or whether it's 'American Idol,' whether it's 'CSI' ['Crime Scene Investigation'], whether it's 'Desperate Housewives,' whatever the case may be, you have places where African Americans can see themselves and participate in a very respectful manner. So, why a BET during these days? Well, BET still is a very authentic brand, all right. It, it primarily still gives you things that you're not going to see on regular TV. When you think about--we just launched a new series about two weeks ago called 'The American Gangster - Crime Don't Pay' [sic. 'American Gangster'] and what it is, is a docudramas on African Americans who have been just as notorious as some of the general market or Italian gangsters that have been glorified and mystified in television and movies today. So whether it's Tookie Williams [Stanley Williams] who, you know, just was executed last year, or whether it's Highway Rick [sic. Richard Donnell "Freeway Rick" Ross], you know, names like that, that are not so familiar in history today but was just as notorious and just as infamous in our communities as the Corleone family and people like that, you know, Al Capone and things like that. But, if you ever see movies, you don't see even, even in the movies you don't see African Americans a part of that sort of culture. So, we did this docudrama on some of the African Americans that have been very notorious and, at the end of the day crime didn't pay, in our community. Huge, huge ratings, unbelievable ratings because it's unique. It's something new, it's informational. When you look at our award shows that we do from the BET awards to the Hip Hop Awards, I mean, the BET Awards out deliver in total viewership the MTV awards this year. I mean, so, we know that our community clamors for that type of entertainment and we want to continue to give it to them. So we have to today explain to advertisers that there's still a significant and a primary role for BET versus a CBS or MTV [Music Television; MTV], or VH1 [Video Hits One], or even a TV One. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And there's a strong case you can make for it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is there any particular--now this new--the new series now that's a docudrama not a--it's an ongoing series? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's like on every week? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. It's always been a fascination, you know, that poor people have for people who--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, going back to Robin Hood and Jesse James and, you know, other cultures do the same thing. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 372890 Speaker 1: Is there any particular show that you're the most proud of, I guess, in terms of BET [Black Entertainment Television]? Speaker 2: I would say the BET Awards because it's what we call the black Super Bowl. When you get 40 percent of the black households in the country tuned in all at the same time, on the same night, to watch a show--that's just huge. I mean, those are Super Bowl-type ratings. And when you get people from kids to senior citizens, you know, in the community giving you the thumbs up, "I was watching, I was so proud," you know, "You guys did such a great job." So, whether they are a Wall Street banker or whether they're the guy who owns the local barber shop or liquor store, when you walk in they say, "Man, I was so proud, I was so happy, the show was great," you know, that sort of attention and concern and emotion really is--makes you proud. Story_ID: 372891 Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the people that you work with at BET [Black Entertainment Television]. I know James Everan [ph.] was your boss I think when you started (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) James Everan [ph.], my boss. Speaker 1: Just kind of talk about some of the other personalities at BET in the early days and what you all had to do. Speaker 2: I mean, it was really like--and even today, BET is really a family. I mean, you know, we, we continually to operate like a major corporation, but I think we understand the concerns that sometimes African Americans have and also the lack of diversity, I mean, I think I spend more time as a manager counseling and mentoring probably, than my white counterparts, all right. I think I have to do that because we don't have generations of family who've been in Corporate American, who understand the politics, who understand the rules of Corporate America so I feel that I have an obligation to, you know, basically, you know, try to mentor my employees so they'll understand how to be more affective in the marketplace. You know, I think when you look at the old days, we all try to figure out--even when started becoming successful, we always wanted to hide our success because we thought that the general public would punish us if we seemed too successful. When we first, you know, turned the corner, we went public, started making money and all of those type of things, you know, nobody wanted to drive a car that was too flashy, nobody wanted to wear, you know, a, a suit that was too nice, definitely nobody wanted to wear no Rolex watches or anything like that back then because, you know, we thought that people would punish us because they didn't want us to be that successful. They want to determine the level of success for us. So, you know, I go back to, you know, Janice Thomas [ph.] back in the day who used to be my boss before James L. Brown, Curtis Simon [ph.] that used to handle the affiliates' sales for us, a ton of people, Jeff Lee [HistoryMaker Jefferi Lee] who used to handle programing for us. I mean, most of those people did extremely well through BET and part of that millionaires club that Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] created when Viacom [Viacom Inc.]--when we went public, and also when Viacom bought the company. Speaker 1: I know you mentioned Janice Thomas, I know there was a publicized scandal with her and some money or something, wasn't there something in relation? Speaker 2: No, that was Antonio Dunkan [sic. Dwight Crawford] who was our CFO at that particular time, that ended up being prosecuted for, I guess, accounting improprieties which are very common nowadays, which were not common back in the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Okay, but, yeah, it's something that affects all Corporate America, I guess, when you see what happens in Enron [Enron Corporation] or wherever there's a lot of money that's being made. You know, something like this can happen (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely. Yes. Story_ID: 372892 Speaker 1: Is there a certain benchmark that marks the growth of BET [Black Entertainment Television] from, I mean, from the small--it was much smaller in the beginning when you joined than it is now. Is there any one benchmark or a series of benchmarks that you can point to? Speaker 2: I think the thing that I'm most proud of is that we've been able to grow revenue double digits for twenty-six years. I mean, you don't have any company--very few companies--I can't think of one that can say that they've grown their revenue double digit for twenty-six straight years. And we've been able to, to do that based on what we think is black consumer market demand, and also what we think is just a great management team, and great employees who believe in the brand and are emotionally attached to the brand. So, I think we primarily--as you know, we were bought by Viacom [Viacom Inc.] in 2001 for three billion dollars. Right now, some five years later, we're--estimated value is over five billion. So, that still shows you the type of growth that was in this company and still there's a lot of growth left to go in this company. And, so, when you think about a targeted African American company at five billion in value, that's pretty good, based on about 350 employees. Story_ID: 372893 Speaker 1: I don't know if this is a proper question or not but I'll ask it anyway. How did you feel about the transition of BET [Black Entertainment Television] to Viacom [Viacom Inc.], 'cause it caused the black community, in general, a lot of trepidation. We were all proud of the fact that we had a black network and when we heard that it was gonna be sold, like we were upset when we found out that Johnson Products [Johnson Products Company] was gonna be taken over by Revlon [sic. IVAX Corporation] or somebody. I mean, we had the same kind of trepidation. How did you feel about the sale and do you think it was unavoidable because of the growth, or what? Speaker 2: I don't think it was unavoidable, I think it was the right thing to do in order to get bigger, all right, because when most companies in America today are sold--black, white or otherwise, they're sold number one, they think they may have peaked in their growth and they need a bigger organization, and bigger resources to help them grow or, basically, the founder said, I had enough and I wanna, you know, give it up and let somebody else do it. And I think when you look at us, Bob [Robert L. Johnson] had said, you know, based on our business plan and our business, and our resources, we've done as much as we possibly can right now. So, in order to go to another level, we need a bigger company with greater resources and that can take greater risks than we can on our own. And I think that's exactly what he did. And I think, also, when you think about Bob, Bob always said he built this business for his family and the well-being of his family. And I think every man and woman has the right to do that, and make decisions just based on that, whether you're black, white, green or yellow. And I think that he made that decision, and I think overall, as a person still with the company, it was a good decision. I don't think you can argue with, you know, five years later, we're two billion [dollars] more in value than what we were in 2001. And I think when you look at the type of programing that we have on air today, and you look at the brand extensions that we have, it was the right thing to do because it gave us the opportunity to grow bigger. Speaker 1: Okay, so really, do you think the transition is--I think a lot of trepidation from the black community is about the control (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) of the control Speaker 1: --of programing and that sort of thing. And do you think--do you still feel as much in control of what's going on (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. I mean, you got to remember Viacom is a company that owned a lot of niche brands. MTV [Music Television; MTV], Spike TV, country music, CMT [Country Music Television; CMT], VH1 [Video Hits One], so they were already--CBS--they were already a very diversified, targeted slash company at a lot of different demographics. So we sort of fit into that particular formula. And one of the things that they do as a company, they let brands be brands. So, you know, if you are targeting, as MTV is, twelve to thirty-four or if you're targeting men like Spike TV, it's eighteen to thirty-four, or if you're targeting Americans, they say, you know that better than we know that. So, we are a, you know, a corporate umbrella for support, but we only grow if you grow your particular demographic and targeted brands. Speaker 1: And once again, what is your demographic or our demographic for BET? Speaker 2: Our targeted demographic is adults, black adults, eighteen to thirty-four. And the reason we target eighteen to thirty-four, we think it's the sweet spot in the African American community. It's aspiring spot. Teens don't want to be teens, they want to be eighteen plus. Those of us who are over thirty-five, we really don't want be over thirty-five. We want be younger, so we call it the sweet spot for aspiring. Everybody loves to be in that space. And I think if we all think back, you know, the early late twenties, early thirties were the best part of our lives, all right. So, we look at that, because even if you look at advertisers, a lot of advertisers, they understand that's the aspiring spot for people. Story_ID: 372894 Speaker 1: I remember being at the Million Man March in 1995 and seeing the BET [Black Entertainment Television] truck there, and people were really proud of BET. BET is able to set up and broadcast and, I mean, it's something that we never had before so, I mean, it's like a--do you ever feel like a, an extra responsibility to the public because of that kind of feeling, that emotional feeling? Speaker 2: I think it's one, it's a sword and a burden all at the same time because we can't do everything that the community needs as, as a corporation but we can do a lot of things. The Million Man March was one of those things that we had to do. It's sort of like when any big icon in the black community dies, we've got to do some type of news on that. And we've got to do it quickly. When any type of tragedy occurs within the country that involves the black community, we've got to respond to that and we got to respond quickly. And a lot of times, we're not prepared because it catches you off-guard to respond in a manner that people want us to respond to. So we continually try to improve that part of our business. But, yes, it's a responsibility that we have and that, you know, we try to live up to as much as possible. Story_ID: 372895 Speaker 1: Now, do you see BET [Black Entertainment Television]--what do you see for BET in terms of growth in the future? How is it going to grow? I mean, you say the revenues are five billion [dollars] now, or something like that? Speaker 2: Value of five billion. I think you're going to see--well, I know, because I am on the inside. You'll start seeing scripted series programs, whether they're sitcoms or whether they're dramas just like you see on the networks. I think you'll see--continue to see some more specials that focus around things that are important to the black community. We're working right now on town hall meetings on African American health. We think health is the number one issue in the African American community led by obesity and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], because if you look at all of the diseases whether it's diabetes, heart disease, prostate cancer, whatever the case may be, a lot of those start by what we put in our mouths. So we want to be a part of education and influencing change and behavior, so you'll see that. So, I think, from a programing standpoint, which is what people see the most, you'll start to see some different type of programing on the air. You'll also see us doing more things in the community than what we've ever done before, whether it's participating in the Bud Billiken Day Parade [Bud Billiken Parada] or, or doing African American health fairs throughout the country. You're gonna see that, I mean, we will probably be in some major city forty-eight weeks a year throughout this country, you know, doing something BET branded. We've got the number one African American college tour, a black college tour in this country at fourteen stops in the fall, and basically, we get 50 percent of those college students at each campus to come out and participate in the BET Black College Tour. So, you're gonna see that. We have the number one content portal for African Americans, BET.com. When you go to BET.com, you've got music, you've got finance, you've got health, you've got a number of different portals that you can go to, that serve, you know, content in the African American community. Story_ID: 372896 Speaker 1: Well, in terms of growth with BET [Black Entertainment Television], now, is there a--what kind of a plan is in place for continuous--I mean, are we--does BET really try to focus on hiring young blacks to matriculate through the organization? Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we do and because of the lack of diversity in the whole media business it's difficult because, you know, I can remember when I first started at BET and throughout the first half of my career here, we hired a lot of people without experience and just suffered through, you know, what that gives you, all right. Now, at a $5 billion company, we really need to try to hire as many experienced people and I'm talking 'bout top level experienced people as we possibly can. And that's hard, because of nothing of our doing but of stuff that everybody else is doing, because they're not giving the opportunities to African Americans to come in at other companies who've been around a lot longer than we have. So, it's very, very difficult but we do have a mission to try to do that and if you look at our workforce, I think you would be very proud, especially in the management positions. Speaker 1: So, I know a lot of black people feared that--say when Viacom [Viacom Inc.] came in there were like loaded up with Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] guys or something and some other people. Are you ever criticized by the larger entity for not, you know--for hiring too many black people or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, absolutely not, absolutely not. I think they're very proud of our hiring. Story_ID: 372897 Speaker 1: Anything else you want to tell us about BET's [Black Entertainment Television] direction right now before I ask you about the foundation. Speaker 2: I think BET has a great future, I mean, as we sit here in December of October, I mean December of 2006, I think they have a great future ahead of them. Still an awful lot of growth, I mean, BET in five years could be a $10 billion company. And when you think about those type of numbers, there're an awful lot of companies smaller than BET, now, a lot of brand names smaller than BET. So I think it has a bright future. I think it still attracts some of the smartest and the best people in the industry, and as we continue to grow, we'll only do that even better. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any vision for what you'd like to see as maybe a BET two channel or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) well, we have BET J [Black Entertainment Television Jazz]. Speaker 1: Okay, the jazz, that's right. Speaker 2: Which is our flanker channel, which focuses on R&B, jazz, Caribbean music and it's getting more into genres outside of the music category. So we think that, that brand is going to continue to grow. Story_ID: 372898 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your foundation. Tell us about your foundation. Speaker 2: About three years ago, I started the Louis Carr Internship Foundation [Chicago, Illinois] because of the lack of diversity in the media community. And what my foundation does is that we give away internships, paid internships, every summer to about twenty kids all across the country, that gives them the experience and the opportunity to work in places like Discovery Networks [Discovery Networks International], BET [Black Entertainment Television], MTV [Music Television; MTV], Sean John, Warner Music [Warner Music Group], a lot of entertainment and media companies across the country, New York [New York], D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois], and L.A [Los Angeles, California]. And what I would hope is, is that through these internships number one, the kids really get to see at a young age the real workplace and also the opportunities that exist in what we call the entertainment/media business, so they can get at a early age decide, hate it, like it. And then be able to make some decisions on whether they're going to pursue it. And also that these corporations get some exposure to kids of color so that they can become more comfortable in their hiring practice, that, you know, these kids come with great ideas, with great work ethic, with great discipline, and with great focus and can really be a part of anyone's corporation that is looking to grow and make improvements in the future. So, I think we've done that, I'm excited about it. It's sort of a my give back to my community, and I think the kids really enjoy it. I mean, and we take kids from Ivy League schools, too--from historically black colleges [HBCUs], from small community colleges, I mean, just a great, great joy for me and my wife [Diane Carr] personally to be able to do this. And I'm just--I get excited about it more and more every year. In three years we've sent forty-six kids through this program. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, that's the summer program? Speaker 2: Summer, eight week summer program. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 372899 Speaker 1: Tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, that, number one, that we rebuild our communities. I'm personally involved in, in some real estate projects right now and then, hopefully, we'll start a real estate fund in 2007, where we go into African American communities in Chicago [Illinois] and we buy apartment buildings or we buy land, and that starts as the foundation of change in that particular neighborhood or community around, so that we're able to, say, buy an apartment building on this corner, but everything that comes up for sale in that block or that neighborhood, we're the first in line to buy it in order to upgrade those buildings, upgrade those houses, and we do that through, you know, improved living conditions like kitchens and baths, and windows, and all of the mechanics that come along with it. Landscaping those communities. And try to manage that real estate in a way that they become sort of a, a--the trophy for that community to say, I'm so proud of this particular block on King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], I'm so proud of this particular block on Drexel [Boulevard]. And then that sort of starts a groundswell of people in the community whether it be developers, contractors, politicians to kind of ride along and then participate in the redevelopment of our communities. I'm real excited about it. I'm not going to do it in a small way, I'm going to do it in a big way. And that's why I'm trying to, to create this fund that we'll be able to go in and really start to change some of the things here in this city, number one. Speaker 1: Okay, so you sound sort of optimistic about economic growth in the black community. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm a very optimistic, you know, because, you know, as somebody says, you know, I been blessed and I happen to be blessed off of black experience. So, when you look at my success and you look at my wealth, it was created off of the black experience. And even the things that I use for tools of success every day, whether it's the things that I learned at the University of Islam [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois] back in my early career, whether it's the things that I learned as a athlete, whether it's the things that, you know, I continue to learn, experience as part of BET [Black Entertainment Television], I, you know--it's sort of like, as I was talking to a politician today, I want to do the 360 black thing, you know, take it full circle that, you know. I grew up in the black community, I was educated, you know, partly in the black community, I made my success off of the--my money off of the black community, now I come back and help redevelop the black community. So, you know, I'm very, very excited about that. Story_ID: 372900 Speaker 1: In terms of economic mentors, I don't, I mean, I don't think I've ever talked to anyone who's had three of the greatest eco- you know, black entrepreneurs as mentors, I mean, John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], and Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson]. Speaker 2: Bob Johnson, absolutely. Speaker 1: So, I mean, how does that--do you have any, I mean, I don't know (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, I had a conversation with Bob Johnson three weeks ago, I was at his house and I was telling him about the piece that I'm trying do in the real estate, in the black community. And one of the things--I said, you know what's one of my big drivers, Bob, I said, when you look at white corporations and you look at successful executives in white corporations, they leave those corporations and they go someplace and they run another company or they go someplace and they'll have a start-up company, or they go someplace and they become a great philanthroper. When you look at black corporations, we don't spin off that type of talent that gets heard about in our communities. So, if you look at, you know, John H., you look at Earl Graves, besides the media families we don't spin off those people who go out and become successful in their own right and do something else. I want to be that first guy from BET [Black Entertainment Television] that goes off and say, I'm going to take what I learned and I'm going to take my passion for the black community back into the black community and then try to teach other people entrepreneurship, how to build a business with all of the business disciplines that it needs and, also, that it can be ongoing. So, you just don't make your money off of TV, magazines, radio, you can go back and recreate yourself based on your business acumen and your business experience and skills, and be able to do that--and at the same time teach other people how to do it and be extremely passionate and excited about it. So, when I look around and say, you know, why is Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] still looking like Bronzeville. It's not finished and we done built, you know, Central Station [Chicago, Illinois] and we done built Dearborn Park [Chicago, Illinois], and we done did--all at the same time that Bronzeville got started, why is it taking so long? So, what I'm saying, it don't have to take that long if you got the right resources and the right talent in place, and the right relationships in place to rebuild communities like that. You know, why do we have to fight to get retail opportunities in our communities? We not only need Walmarts and Targets and Starbucks, but we need better laundromat facilities and things like that in our community. We need better corner stores in our community that sell quality food, I mean, every community--I have a house in Florida, you know, and it's a nice, nice neighborhood but we still got a corner store, all right. So every community needs those type of retail opportunities, so that's what, you know, I want to be able to do and be the first guy out of BET to say, "Hey, I went on to do something else that helped the consumers that gave me my wealth." Story_ID: 372901 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. When you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you're still a young man by the standards of business, is there anything that you would differently now, looking back? Speaker 2: Yes. I probably would've listened and took advice from more people, from my mother [Lillian Cheers Carr]. I'll give you example: when I got out of college [Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa], my mother said, you know, son, I can do one or two things for you. Don't have a lot of money, but I'll sell what I got to see you go to grad school if that's what you want to do, or law school, or I'll sell what I got to see you buy some real estate, because at the end of the day, son, I want you to be able to determine your own destiny. And if I had did that earlier--you know, life has been good and I'm not complaining. Life has been real good, but if I'd did early, I would have had a much better start and had a much better understanding than I have today as I'm trying to get this thing off the ground and do it today. Number two-- Speaker 1: What you said, this is profound in some ways because I don't think that people--the sacrifice that she was willing to make was well thought out. She knew what she wanted you to do. Like John Johnson's mother [Gertrude Johnson Williams] sold her furniture for him to get started, but you didn't--it didn't strike you at that time as being--? Speaker 2: Right, 'cause I wanted to be, you know, a news guy, corporate executive, I had, you know, dreams of grandeur at that particular point. And also, if I knew what I knew today, I would have you know, been more like a sponge with a John H [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], more like a sponge with a Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], and I am a sponge with Bob [Robert L. Johnson], I mean, because, you know, we sort of had such a long, long, long career together. So, you know, learning, you know, everything from, you know, leveraging yourself and making yourself a brand, you know, all those type of things that I, I would've done at an earlier age. And that's what I try to do now when I'm mentoring kids or I'm even mentoring my staff, you know, you know, trying to give them some education and guidance on some things that I learned the hard way or learned late in my career, that they can now execute on early in their career. Story_ID: 372902 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done in this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think today would be my legacy, is my foundation [Louis Carr Internship Foundation, Chicago, Illinois]. I think more people are proud of me because I have given something back; not only money, but only time and experience. I think people really get excited about that, because one of the things we have to do in our community--and I do push black philanthropy real, real hard--because I think that's something that we're not taught at a young age, like the Jewish community. Our black philanthropy mostly goes through the black church, you know, where our giving is. But we have to learn to give outside of the black church to organizations that are trying to help rebuild and educate our community in some form or fashion. So, you know, those are the type of things that, you know, as I look back and as I continue to do, I want to educate people on--because it's so important. I mean, it's so important. I don't think we realize that, you know, it still takes organizations outside of the black church to do some of the things in our community; whether it's teaching art classes as my wife [Diane Carr] do and trying to, to run a art center in the black community, and educate people on African American art, you know, and the value of it, and not let people come in our community and steal our own value and take it out. You know, so, we've got to be sort of responsible as African Americans who've been successful, is bringing back some education, some experience, and some of our personal resources in order for our communities to keep growing and keep redeveloping as we go forward. Story_ID: 372903 Speaker 1: Just occurred to me, this question just popped in my head as you were talking. Have you--you were raised in the Nation of Islam, are you still--do you still consider yourself a Muslim (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --or what's your spiritual? Speaker 2: No. I am a Christian. I belong to a Pentecostal church called Apostolic Church of God [Chicago, Illinois], one of the biggest churches in the city and in the country. My pastor is Bishop Arthur M. Brazier [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur Brazier]. And, you know, if you think about my experience from high school, you know, being, being up on top of the world one night and the bottom the next day because of an injury and still get a full scholarship to college, and it works out well for me, to the type of jobs that I had, you know, I do believe it was God's plan for me. And, as I said, you know, when it's His plan, you can't even mess it up. It don't matter how hard you try, you can't mess it up. And I think that, as I look at my career and some of the things that has happened for me, it definitely was God's plan. No doubt about it. Story_ID: 372904 Speaker 1: You want to talk about your family a little bit before we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My wife [Diane Carr]? Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: I've been married, we just celebrated this year, twenty years. Matter of fact, we were calling this the twenty/twenty, fifty/fifty year. Twenty years married, twenty years at BET [Black Entertainment Television], I turned fifty, she turned fifty (laughter). So, we call it twenty/twenty, fifty/fifty. She's been extremely supportive in, in my career because I'm gone over two hundred nights a year, because of, you know, offices in New York [New York], D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Detroit [Michigan], and L.A [Los Angeles, California], and clients, you know, dispersed among those cities. So I'm away from home over two hundred nights a year. We kind of added up over twenty years that I've spent five years on the road. And she's been very, very supportive of, of everything I've done. The real estate business now, we own three apartment buildings and adding more like every quarter. And she's the person that is just, you know, pushed her stuff to the side of what she's doing and, and helping run that business for me. She is--has a degree in graphic design, she just received her appraisal license from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois] African American art appraisal, so she's like one of ten or twelve in the country, African American art appraisers. So, I'm very, very proud of her. She is the president of the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois], which is the oldest African American art center in the country, and she's trying to keep that alive and struggling with that, and you know trying to raise money to do that and educate people on art, and writing grants, you know, to try to get more money to, you know, and try to tie into the Chicago public school system [Chicago Public Schools]. She consistently is involved in whether it's civic, social, or whatever, organizations. So, she keeps me grounded totally, you know, some things I'm like, I don't want to go, I don't want to go. She says, you got to go, you got to go, you got to go. So, it's great--she's been a great supporter, and, as I always said--at her birthday party, my cousins always ask me every anniversary, "Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr], did you do the right thing?" I said, "I did the right thing." So, she's a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful person. We both have small families. She only has a sister, all of our parents have died since we've been married, my mother [Lillian Cheers Carr] and father [L.A. Carr], her mother and father. So we don't have any kids because she was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis about fifteen years ago, and she's sort of the poster child for the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] of how someone can be diagnosed to have it all over their body and still function. And if I hadn't told you, you wouldn't have known. Because she did all the things that were necessary from food, lifestyle change, exercise, everything else, to be able to manage it in a very, very consistent and manageable way so that she can have a normal lifestyle. Speaker 1: That's, that's something. Well, before I ask my last question, do you have--is there anything I should have asked that, that we need to talk about before? Speaker 2: I think we kind of covered it. We did a lot of talking a long time. Speaker 1: There's probably something. I know there's always something. Story_ID: 372905 Speaker 1: But, this is the last question, similar to legacy but we always ask people how they would like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Not for the things that I did, but for the service that I gave, because at the end of the day when I leave BET [Black Entertainment Television] no one will remember that I had one of the most illustrious careers as a sales executive, nobody going to remember that. But I think they will remember at the end of the day what I gave for that career and whether that's my time, my experience, my money, or whatever the case may be. It's for what I gave, and that's how I want to be remembered. And how I changed people's lives, you know, even the people who work for me. At the end of the day, I always say, when we part and we will part, I want you to say, he gave me something that changed who I was. And, so, that's why I spend a lot of time, you know, trying to educate my employees and trying to motivate them. And, also, even my friends. You know, I think it's very crucial that when you get to a certain level and you've had a tremendous amount of success, that you give back everything that you possibly can in every way that you possibly can. You know, whether it's, you know, read that book--I, I've got a young man that I mentoring right now and he called me about a month ago and he's extremely talented, extremely bright, I mean, he's gifted, and I said, "How's the grades?" He says, "Aw, I just took a test, my mid-terms and I got a A, two Bs, two Cs and a D." And I said, "What's that about?" He said, "I was just coasting, man, just coasting." And I said, "William [ph.], I said, black people started two hundred years behind, how in the world can we coast?" I said, "We started two hundred years behind everybody else, what--don't ever use that word again." I said, "Even though we started behind, they're not coasting, everyday they're trying to win, every single day. So how in the world you going to tell me you coasting?" Story_ID: 372906 Speaker 1: What you just said reminded me of a question that I didn't ask and I think I'd be mad at myself if I didn't ask it, but having those three great mentors, could you maybe talk about like what lessons did you learn from them, John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], and Bob, Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson]? Speaker 2: I'll start with Bob. I'll never forget it, we was at a dinner one night and he said, "Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr], define enough." I said, "What?" He said, "Define the word enough." I said, "Bob, wh, wh, what kind of game, what kind of trick is this?" He said, "No, I'm serious, 'cause I don't know what it means." He said, "Because I don't have enough success. I don't have enough." He said, "I want to be able to continue to grow constantly, constantly." And I think from that, what I learned was never be satisfied. Always be looking to improve yourself or somebody else. Never say, "I got enough," because even if you have enough personally, is that enough for you, can I give some of that to you? Is it enough to give to you, and to you, and to you, and to you, and to that organization? Is it really enough, because we, as a black community, got so many issues. Is it enough? So, number one, enough is never enough 'cause you can always do more. What I learned from Earl Graves was Earl's just stick-to-it-ism. I mean, Earl continued to try to through hard times, through good times. He just can hang in there. I mean, you look at the magazine business has been up, it's been down, it's been up, it's been down. And he continues to hang in there, continues to try to recreate. You know, I had a meeting with Butch [HistoryMaker Earl "Butch" Graves, Jr.], his son, a few weeks ago here in my office. And you look at how they try to recreate that book [Black Enterprise] constantly to stay current, and also to be able to educate and really understand what the needs of black entrepreneurship is in today's time. And from Mr. Johnson, he was way before his time, way before his time. The discipline that he had, he understanding that he had of African Americans, and the challenges that we were going through, the structure that it took to be able to keep us disciplined and to keep us motivated. As I said, I would of paid much more attention if I had known back then what I know now, and learned a lot more from them what I did. But he was the guy, he--if, if they say, every big company needs a pusher, somebody to just keeps the foot on the peddle, or as somebody says, keeps they foot in your butt, he's the guy that constantly did that to push you to higher and higher heights. So, those are the three lessons that I learned from those great men. And I think I'm blessed to have had the opportunity to know all three of them on a very, very personal level...