 Story_ID: 669700 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Arese Carrington [HistoryMaker Dr. Arese Carrington]; and Arese is spelled A-R-E-S-E, and Carrington, C-A, double R, I-N-G-T-O-N. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? And I know you may not--well, okay. Speaker 2: Well, I was born on July 16th, 1958. I'm a native Nigerian, and I got my American citizenship in 1995. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a medical doctor and also an international public health specialist. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October 20th, 2016. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at my home in the suburbs of Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let me ask you about your name before I go any further, just--is there a meaning, special meaning for your name? Speaker 2: Yes, my first name, Arese, it means--it's a Nigerian name from the Benin kingdom, and it means somebody born into this world, gifted with so much, and basically they don't really have anything to worry about and they've been gifted, and when people see them succeeding, they shouldn't envy them because it is in their stars, so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Thank you. Story_ID: 669701 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, we are supposed to ask five warm up questions that only require a short answer, and the first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is called dodo, and that's fried plantains. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is red because it's bright and it's bold. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year--I toss between spring and fall, but I would say fall because I love the beauty of the changing leaves during fall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere warm, especially when it's winter here. Speaker 1: That makes sense (laughter). Do you--the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is a mantra my father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] gave me as a child, and that is: defend the defenseless. Story_ID: 669702 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Dora Ukponmwan [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan], and the last name Ukponmwan is spelled U-K-P-O-N-M-W-A-N; her maiden name was Obaseki. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Benin City [Nigeria], and her date of birth was September 17th, 1922. Speaker 1: All right, now, what can you tell us about the history of your mother's family? How far back can you trace them, and what occupations did they hold? Speaker 2: I can trace my mother's side back to my great-great-grandfather who was Oba Ovonramwen [Ovonramwen Nogbaisi], the king of Benin, who was on the throne during the British punitive invasion of Benin in 1897; and he was the one, when the British came, was sent to exile and died in Calabar [Nigeria], never to return to his kingdom. Her grand- her great-grandfather--that was her great-grandfather, my great-great-grandfather, and her grandfather was Agho Obaseki; he was the iyase of Benin, and that's the same as being the prime minister of Benin kingdom. And her father was Gaius Obaseki, and he was a businessman--he traded in timber, cocoa, and a lot of other commodities. He also was a title chief. He was also the iyase of Benin, and that's equivalent to like the prime minister of the Benin kingdom. So my mother came from a royal family and came from a family of titled chiefs. Speaker 1: Okay. How, how do you spell iyase? Speaker 2: The iyase of Benin--that is I-Y-A-S-E; that was the title. Speaker 1: And how do you spell Obaseki? Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Obaseki-- Speaker 1: Obaseki. Speaker 2: --O-B-A-S-E-K-I. Story_ID: 669703 Speaker 1: Your mother comes from a, a royal family, and did, did she talk about growing up and where she went to school, and all that? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, she talked a lot because one of the things my parents [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan and Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] made sure they did was they told us about the history of our ancestors, and they took pride in telling us about that because if you read the history books, Benin--the Benin empire was a very great empire. And my mother went to school initially in Benin--that was her early education, and at a time when they were hardly educating females, her father [Gaius Obaseki] believed it was very important for both males and females to get a good education; and she went on initially to become a teacher, and then he sent her to England in the '40s [1940s], where she studied nursing and midwifery. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did she talk about what it was like growing up in those days? Now this is--she grew up during the time that the British were dominating Nigeria and it was--what did they--did they even call it Nigeria then? Was it British West Africa, or what? Speaker 2: Yes, in, in, in those days. 'Cause after the king--after they overthrew the king of Benin [Ovonramwen Nogbaisi] and sent him into exile, the British then were conquering various kingdoms and empires in that region. So it was during the early days--it was during the colonial rule, and--but my mother grew up, she said, in a very privileged setting because her par- her father was extremely rich, he came from the royal family; and she said, but despite that, one of the things that was very important that the- her father told her was it was important to be generous with what you have. So she grew up--although she was weal- she came from a wealthy family and was privileged, she shared a lot, so she said she was used to having cousins, having friends, and everybody also having part of whatever she was privileged to have. Story_ID: 669704 Speaker 1: And did she talk about her family's relationship to the British colonizers? Speaker 2: Well, that in history is documented because her grandfather [Agho Obaseki] and the king that was sent in--on exile, they were best friends apart from him being a son-in-law to him; and her grandfather was also a businessman and believed in opening borders, and the king at that time didn't want the borders open. So when the British came and took over the empire, her grandfather tried to make peace between the British and the people of Benin because there was so much turmoil going on, and the British had come and literally tried to burn down the whole city. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so--well, I guess I was trying to figure out like what--'cause I know this is a tense situation with a, with a country occupied, but how did--how did it--did it affect your mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan] at all? I mean the British occupation of Benin (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not--not really because at that point in time she was much younger and she, at a certain stage, went overseas for studies. The initial invasion of the Benin empire--that affected all the people of Benin because one of the things that was most painful was their king being sent into exile and they didn't have a king anymore; the city being burnt down, and the Union Jack being put up in place of where the palace was; and a lot of the bronzes that belonged to the empire had been taken away. So, for the Benin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now these are the famous Benin bronzes. Speaker 2: Yeah, the famous Benin bronzes. So, for the Benin people, that was a very painful error. But my mom was not born at that time; that was during the time of Ovonramwen [Ovonramwen Nogbaisi] and her grandfather, so my mom was born later. Speaker 1: So she was born nearly f- what, forty, fifty years after the? Speaker 2: It was--the invasion was 1897; she was born in 1922. Speaker 1: Okay, so twenty something years after, afterwards. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. So by that time, there'd been some kind of a living--or worked out. Speaker 2: At, at that time they had restored the Kingdom of Benin. The son of the king that was sent into exile came back and became Oba Eweka [Eweka II], so the people of Benin did have a king again. So, some form of tradition had been restored at the time she was born. So they now had--they now had a king. And coincidentally, historically this is a very important day in the kingdom and empire of Benin because-- Speaker 1: Today you're talking about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Today, October 20th, 2016, the fortieth king of Benin has just been installed, and he has given himself the title Oba Ewuare [Ewuare II]. Before he was installed, he was known as Prince Eheneden Erediauwa, and that was the name of his father; his father was Oba Erediauwa. And now that he's been installed the king, he has taken his own title and he's going to be known as Oba Ewuare. And as we say in the Benin kingdom (speaking Edo), oba ghato kpere, which means long live the king. Story_ID: 669705 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name was Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan, and I will spell Noyoze for you: N-O-Y-O-Z-E; and Ukponmwan, U-K-P-O-N-M-W-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father's date of birth is 16th of September, 1922; he was born a day before my mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was born in Benin City [Nigeria]. My mother was--he was born in a village near Benin City; my mother was born in the city. And there is a contrast in their birth because he was born into a relatively poor family; his father was a preacher, he had other siblings, they were barely getting by. And so he was not born with all the fanfare my mother was born with when she was born, and in--on his side I--'cause he grew up an orphan 'cause after he was born, his mother, while she was expecting twins, died during childbirth, and his father died shortly after out of--people say he was just so distraught after his wife died. Now, his father was a preacher; he had taken Christianity as his religion and was not traditional. He married only one wife, even though traditionally the men had several wives. And he had really taken to his life as a preacher and gave most of his children names from the Bible, like my father's name, Elisha, is from the prophets--Elisha. Speaker 1: Now, what denomination was he in? Speaker 2: Anglican-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because--yes, Anglican. Speaker 1: Okay, which would--to people in the United States would be the Episcopal church, which is the exact same thing as-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Anglican. Yeah. Okay, the Church of England. And so--okay. So, did he go to school in Nigeria, or did he? Speaker 2: Oh, my father, he went to elementary school in Benin and, like my mother--'cause a lot of the secondary schools were outside Benin, although they had some there. He went to secondary school outside Benin; he attended Government College in Ibadan [Government College Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria], and he was very brilliant. They said my father was a genius when it came to math, and as a matter of fact, he would go and solve math problems for seniors, and he had no problem--he would see a problem, just look at it, and in no time he was able to solve it. That was his favorite subject. Story_ID: 669706 Speaker 1: He later met my mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan] when she was in--teaching, teachers college, and they became--they started dating; and soon after that my mother's father [Gaius Obaseki] sent her overseas to study nursing and midwifery. So, soon as my mother got overseas, she started writing my father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] to find out about scholarships so he could come and meet her there, and my father was able to get a scholarship 'cause there was no way he was going to be able to afford to go overseas. He was so brilliant he was able to get a scholarship to go and study engineering in England. So he went to University of London [London, England] and studied civil engineering; and when they got to London [England] they met up again, and later got married on December 31st I believe it was 1952 or '51 [1951]. I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Was there any opposition from your mother's side of the family to her marrying someone who was not a royal person? Speaker 1: Well, there was--yes, there was some opposition; and it wasn't just because he wasn't from a royal family, but her father felt that she had been used to so much wealth, she had been used to a different socioeconomic status and he felt, like fathers feel protective of their daughters--she was the eldest child and his first daughter, and he just felt protective--what if she couldn't cope. But my mother felt, you know, love triumphs over everything--that love is more powerful than anything you could think of; and she assured her father that she would be fine. So--and my--her father saw that my father was a young, responsible, intelligent man, and just because he wasn't born into wealth or wasn't born into royalty, wasn't a reason why he should stop them from marrying. So he eventually agreed for the wedding to take place and gave his blessing 'cause that was what was very important in those days: to get your parents' blessing. Speaker 2: Was that unusual in those days, for someone of royal birth to marry someone who was not; or, or did it make that much difference there, you know? Speaker 1: I don't know, but I know that a lot of families try to marry people with the same social background as they had. But I don't know if it was unusual, but I know in their case that it worked out fine--I'm here. Story_ID: 669707 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities--when you think about what they look like, what they walk like, talk like, their sense of humor, their wit, their interests--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I take after both of them. I think I look more like my dad [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan], I believe. Both of them are similar: both are very good looking, and also both of them are very compassionate; they both believe in social justice. Education was very important to them. My father believed that everyone, both male and female, should get an education; and my mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan], too, believed that because her father [Gaius Obaseki], too, had told her that--that it was important. My father believed that without education, he would have remained in some village on the outskirts of Benin [Benin City, Nigeria], and his life would have been very different; and so both of them, I think, were very strong on that. Very loving parents, and my mom was more of the disciplinarian, I would say; and they also believed that you should have compassion for your fellow human beings. So they gave us all the basic, important characteristics that I think that one needs in life to be a good human being. Story_ID: 669708 Speaker 1: So, did your father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] work primarily as an engineer, or as a minister? Speaker 2: No--my father was never a minister (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: His father was that. Speaker 1: His father, all right. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. My father worked as a civil engineer. He graduated in England [from the University of London, London, England], he worked for some time in England; my mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan] also worked as a nurse and midwife in England, and then they started having kids. They came back to Nigeria, my father continued as an engineer--civil engineer; he worked in the ministry. First it was called the public works department [Federal Public Works Department]--as a civil engineer and head of the waterworks, and then later it was changed to the Federal Ministry of Works and Housing [Federal Ministry of Power, Works and Housing] and he worked there, rose to become the director of that ministry of works and housing. My mother, when she came back, had at this time, a number of children; she continued to have children. There are--I have six siblings; there's seven of us. And so she decided to become a full time housewife and raise all of us, and both her teaching and nursing background came in very useful. Story_ID: 669709 Speaker 1: You have six brothers and sisters, or? Speaker 2: I have four sisters and two brothers; there are five girls-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and two boys, and my parents [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan and Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] made sure we all got a good education. Two of my sisters are lawyers; one's a chartered accountant; one's a linguist; and two of my brothers are civil engineers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right--a well educated family. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'm a doctor. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So it was almost a nation in the family (laughter)--cover all the bases. Speaker 2: (Laughter) All the, all the basics. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 669710 Speaker 1: Tell us what it was like--now you grew up in Benin [Benin City, Nigeria], or? Speaker 2: I grew up in Lagos [Nigeria]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because my father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] was working in the ministry [Federal Public Works Department; Federal Ministry of Power, Works and Housing] in Lagos, and--but for holidays, we used to go to Benin every Christmas and it was a tradition. And where I grew up in Lagos was called Ikoyi, and this was where-- Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: I-K-O-Y-I. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And this was where a lot of the kids whose parents were in the civil service grew up; and the British had lived in these quarters before they left, when Nigeria got its independence in 1960. And so my memories growing up were living in this nice residential area, riding my bikes on the street. A bit of a tomboy--I would climb trees, I would, you know, just generally be outdoors with nature, and so that's my recollection of growing up. And in terms of family, I enjoyed just having my siblings around--playing with my siblings. It was a loving family. We all ate dinner together every evening and my father would sit at the head of the table. My mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan] always sat to his left side, and I once asked him, though, why was that seat to his immediate left only for my mom, and he said to me because that was a seat closest to his heart, (laughter) and I never forgot that. So, now in my house, when my husband [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] sits at the head of the table, I sit on his left side and I remember what my father said, 'cause that's the seat closest to my husband's heart--the seat to the left of the man, so--yes. So, my father was the love of my mom's life. They really, truly loved each other; and they showed us the example of what it means to have a good marriage, to have a strong marriage. And, you know, my mother would always say that marriage is not a sprint, you know; it's--you--it's like a marathon and you've--it has its ups and downs, but you've got to know that it's a sacred thing. And I think because of the example I saw with my parents in terms of marriage and--it has helped me, and I came up with this acronym of the importance of the different things you have to bear in mind--the foundation of a marriage--and I call it CUTLER, C-U-T-L-E-R; and the first thing my mother used to say is communication--you need to communicate with your spouse, and I found that's very important. And then U is for unity. You need to be united, so it's like when you marry, you become one; and marriage is that union. And so the two of you become united in all fronts, and united against all confrontations. And then T is for trust. You have to trust somebody who you decide to marry and who you may have kids with, and who sometimes your life depends on that person; so that's very important. And then you have L, which is for love. Love is the most important weapon there is. Love knows no boundaries, love conquers everything. And then the E is for endurance. Like my mother has always said: it's not a sprint; when you go in there, you should go in there for the long haul. And the only thing my parents used to tell us is that in any marriage, in terms, spousal abuse, and--mentally or physically, is a no-no. Nobody should ever stay in a marriage where there's that; and that I also tell couples. I say, as long as there is any form of abuse that marriage is not worth saving. And then you have--for CUTLER, you have the R, which is respect. You have to respect each other; don't talk down on each other. So, that's my acronym, so I always go through it--CUTLER: we communicated, the unity there, the trust there, the love there, the endurance, and the respect; and that's the foundation. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --so you, you--it sounds as if you grew up in a beautiful home. Speaker 2: I did, I did. And I lost my parents--my father died October 30th, 1997; my mother died June 13th, 2013. And it has been very difficult; that's been one of the most difficult things to me. I've not been able to let go in the sense that I still miss them dearly; I still miss that love, I still miss that wisdom because they used to impart so much wisdom. So, I tend to write poems and I write letters to them and I read it to them, and that's, that's what helps me get through the fact that they're no longer around. Story_ID: 669711 Speaker 1: Tell us something about the culture of the people of Benin 'cause this is something we don't--we rarely get a chance to interview someone from the continent of Africa. I think we've only interviewed maybe three people-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know of all, in our whole collection. So this is kind of important. So just give us some basics about what a--I mean--and how it affects--how it affected you when you were growing up, which made things a little bit different for you than it would have been had you grown up here, or grown up in Britain or some other place. Speaker 2: Well, in terms of the culture of Benin: Benin was an empire; it was a very grand empire, and the history of Benin has been written about--a lot has been written about it. And one of the things about the people of Benin, especially the ancient empire of Benin, was that they were very brave people. They fought many battles in which they were able to conquer their enemies; or if their enemies attacked them, that they were able to protect themselves. And Benin people believe a lot in tradition. They have a lot of respect for the king, and they see their king as their leader; they take their issues and their problems to the king, and a lot of times this can be settled just within the palace without it--once the king spoke, that was the final word. And there's a lot of respect for elders. We grew up learning that the wisdom of our elders cannot be ignored, and that respect for our elders must always be adhered to. And I remember my grandmother on my mother's side--my, my maternal grandmother. She would be sitting on the balcony of her house, and as people walked by, whether they knew her or not, because they saw an elderly lady sitting there, they would curtsy and greet her out of respect; and she would respond, calling each of them, "My child," you know, "go well." And so that was an important thing: the respect for your elders. Story_ID: 669712 Speaker 1: You were born two years before independence--1958, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and Nigeria got its independence in 1960; I was just two [years old] then, so I don't really have a recollection of the whole independence year. But I later read that it was a very exciting year because Nigeria had been discussing and having debates as to the importance of getting its independence from the British rule because the British actually had taken different kingdoms and put them together and called the country Nigeria, and then they were ruling it. And later on, the people wanted their independence; and they had the north and the south, and the south was really pushing for independence, but the north, at a point in time, really didn't want it immediately. So in 1958--I believe Ghana got theirs just two years before Nigeria did [sic.]. In 1960, Nigeria finally got their independence. Story_ID: 669713 Speaker 1: Yeah, and Nigeria is--I know there are more groups than just three, but the basic groups, from what I understand, are the Hausa, and there are very many different kinds of Hausa, but the Hausa-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --is to the north who are primarily Muslim; then you have Yoruba, you know, which have been many different kinds of Yoruba-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but they're in the--more in the, at least in the middle; and then the other major group is in eastern, southeastern Nigeria, Igbo, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The eastern sides, yes, you have the east, and then you have the west, and then you have the north. And then in between you have the mid-west where Benin is, so--and there are several different ethnic groups in Nigeria, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and there are several different dialects that are spoken, but the lingua franca for the country is English. Speaker 1: Right, right. So, Benin is in the Yoruba, you know, speaking group, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Benin is--no, Benin--they speak Edo in Benin; it's in the mid-west, so it's in between the east, it's in between the west, so--but it's in a region that was sort of carved out, and it's called the mi- it was called the mid-west but now we have several states, so it's like--things keep changing; it's, it's not static. We've gone from regions to states, and the states have increased in number. So right now Benin is in the--within a state called Edo state. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, correct me if I'm wrong, but the British carving up--carving out of Nigeria really didn't pay any regard to ethnic--yeah. Speaker 2: No, they didn't, and that has been why Nigeria has had this continuous turbulent sort of history, and that was also part of the civil war that was fought. So, you have people from different ethnic groups with different cultures, different beliefs sort of clumped together, and so there's the issue of dominance and who gets what; and so that has not been properly, or was not properly discussed or sorted out when the British clumped everyone together and called it Nigeria. So there's always been this sort of one group deciding they want to secede from the rest of the country. The time of the Biafran War, the east wanted to do that. Right now you have a lot of unrest--part of the east is saying again they want to do that; and sometimes the west feels that they are marginalized. So there's always a group that's feeling marginalized because they are not part of the main equation. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 669714 Speaker 1: And I guess the first two political leaders were Tafawa Balewa [Abubakar Tafawa Balewa], who was the prime minister, and the president, Nnamdi (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nnamdi Azikiwe--yes, yes. Speaker 1: --yeah, Azikiwe, who--I'm very familiar with him; he's one of the heroes of Pan-Africanism worldwide, and is somebody that--in fact, I named my son Azikiwe-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --just, just me; but there're a lot of people--because he had a presence here at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] where he taught for many years and an influence on a lot of the organizations here that a lot of people have an affinity for him. Speaker 2: Yes, that's true. Those are part of the founding fathers of Nigeria; we call them the founding fathers, so Tafawa Balewa, Nnamdi Azikiwe, Obafemi Awolowo, (Unclear) Enahoro [Anthony Enahoro]--these were the people that used to go to parliament and, you know, debate and fight that Nigeria needed to have its own, you know, leaders and not have colonial rule. And so we called them the founding fathers of our independence. Most of them are gone now, so--which is sad, and Nigeria has had all its various turbulent periods, and one of those periods was when my husband was ambassador to Nigeria--the U.S. ambassador to Nigeria. 'Cause it's gone from--Nigeria has had a lot of military leaders that keep truncating any form of civilian rule there is. So, during the time we were there, they had the Abacha [Sani Abacha] dictatorship, and my husband was very vocal in, in showing that that tyranny was confronted and I, I joined him in making sure that he was able to make his voice heard, and that support that was needed for journalists and activists and human rights group that were being terrorized then by the military leader. Speaker 1: Okay. We'll probably get to that and speak more about that later on-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but your husband is Walter Carrington [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] who we interviewed about seven years ago, was it about seven years ago? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Walter Carrington. Speaker 1: Yeah. He was ambassador to Nigeria-- Speaker 2: Yes (unclear). Speaker 1: --from the United States. Speaker 2: Yes he was. Story_ID: 669715 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about growing up. Now, did you--I mean you grew up, you grew up in Lagos [Nigeria], right? Speaker 2: I grew up in Lagos--Ikoyi, Lagos. I went--my elementary school was Corona School Ikoyi [Lagos, Nigeria]; it was a school that had a lot of the expatriate children in it, so I used to spend a lot of time playing with a lot of my friends after school; and one of the things of--'cause it was--when I was about nine [years old], during the time--the civil war started while I was in elementary school, and when I was at Corona School, there was a school next door--Corona School was a private school, and a lot of kids who were there, their parents were either a civil servants, or they were expatriate kids. We had a lot of good teachers, we got the best books--everything was there at our disposal. And right next door to us was this public school, and this public school it was only separated from us by this fence which you could see through, and you could see the stark difference with the kids there: they didn't have the amenities, they--their uniforms, they didn't have to wear socks and shoes, some would come to school without shoes. And so from the early age--from an early age, I used to wonder, but we're all kids, why were they having it so different? Their teachers would carry canes and they would spank them, and that was not allowed in my school. And we used to go--some of us would go across the fence and talk to them and see what was happening. And you could see that--as kid- we were all the same; we had the same, you know, yearnings; we thought like kids. And I began to think of issues of social justice--things of--issues dealing with education, dealing with equity. So, from an early age, these questions were in my mind; and I would ask, why do some of us have it this way, and why do others don't? 'Cause I didn't believe that people who were less fortunate and weren't given opportunities, I didn't think that they would be able to get--reach their maximum potential. Speaker 1: Not--without the same kind of start, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, without--yes, without that same kind of start. Story_ID: 669716 Speaker 1: When you were a little girl, the Biafran War was going on. Did you--was that discussed much in, or did you see--because here, in the states, it was on the news every night, they talked about it every night, and it's one of the few stories in Africa that they, they covered like that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They covered the Congo crisis with Lumumba [Patrice Lumumba], remember that was on NBC News and CBS, and--you know, 'cause there very, there're very little African news here, but that was a story they covered, and they covered the Biafran War to some extent; I mean to the extent that we knew that children were suffering and there's a lot of suffering going on there. Was that--did you--were you keenly aware of it when you were growing up, or? Speaker 2: Yes, because--initially, my parents tried to shield us, just at the beginning of the war, because they were hoping that things would be resolved and there wouldn't be a war, and I mean I was a kid then; and I remember how I found out about the war. It was at a friend's house, and I went to visit her and I saw that they had a whole room of supplies--it was almost like a supermarket. They had cases of water, food, and I asked her, you know, what was going on, why did they have all this? And she whispered to me that she wasn't meant to know, but she knew that her parents were stocking up because they said a war was about to begin. And that was the first time I heard anything about a war. I had gone to her house to play a usual hide and seek, play on the seesaw, swing, and--you know, like a child, carefree; and there she was telling me that there was going to be a war. So I said to her that I'd not heard of that, and I didn't think that was true, but as soon as I got home I would ask my parents. And I got home, and I went straight to my parents and I asked them, "Is there going to be a war?" They were both silent and they looked at me, and I knew something was wrong. My mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan] hugged me and said, "Don't worry, we're going to discuss this as a family later on--we will talk more about this." And at that point, I knew something was wrong 'cause my parents would immediately answer any question you asked them, and I continued talking. I said, "I don't want a war for a hundred years," 'cause I figured that a hundred years is, you know, a long time, and I wouldn't have to bother about it in a hundred years; and I was like really petrified, but I had to wait because my parents wanted to address this as a family. So, at dinner that night, my father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] began to tell us what was going on in the country, and I think it was at that point, that childhood innocence that everything was carefree--there was nothing to worry about--suddenly left me, and I was suddenly faced with the reality that in a war bad things happen; and my parents tried to break it to us as gently as possible, and then they took us through a drill of what would happen if there were bombs being thrown, where we would--the shelter, and it was like so much all of a sudden just was there, and I realized that the country was going through a very deep crisis. But, as time went by, and you get to school, everybody now knew there was a war, but the war wasn't really happening in Lagos [Nigeria]; it was happening mainly in the east--in the region that had now been named Biafra by the Biafran leader [Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu] then. So we went back to our normal selves, not worrying too much about the war. Occasionally, there were few bombs dropped in Lagos. In school they be- teachers began to drill; we used to have these drills for if there--the siren for bombs--what you do, and all that. So we sort of settled into that routine. Story_ID: 669717 Speaker 1: And then, at--I think it was summer of that year, we went to Benin for vacation. Usually we'd go overseas, but because of everything going on in the country my parents [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan and Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] didn't want to leave the country at that point in time, and they decided they should take us to our country home in Benin. And we got to Benin, and the very following day, the Biafran soldiers had advanced and took over Benin, so they were now in captivity; and that was my first experience of actually seeing soldiers--people being killed, people being shot. And it was a very disturbing experience; and as I may talk of later on, or I can say it now, was when I realized that the situation was so dangerous that my father decided that--so the whole family is not lost, if something was to happen, to divide the family into two, and one half would try to escape and one half would stay; both decisions were very dangerous, but he figured that at least, you know, one half would survive. And it was very difficult because I realized that we were going to be separated and we didn't know if we would ever be reunited, and that was a very disturbing and sort of nerve wracking situation for me. But my father realizing in that--'cause I was also very close to my father, but I was one of those going to stay behind, and my older sisters were the ones, and older brother were the ones going to go with him. And my father looked at me and said to me that he trusted me, I needed to be brave, and he said I should look at my younger siblings, make sure I take care of them because they're defenseless; and he said to me that, "You must defend the defenseless," that that should be my duty--to always defend the defenseless. And all of a sudden I felt so important and so big that my father would give me such a task: to defend my younger ones. And so I forgot about my fears, I forgot about myself and my worries, and I said yes, I would make sure I was--defended my younger siblings--they were twins--and make sure that when, hopefully, I was reunited with my father, I would be able to give an account that I did my job well, and that if I wasn't, I would at least know that he gave me a duty and I performed it; and that was where I got that mantra, defend the defenseless, from. Speaker 2: That's something. I, I hadn't realized that, that Benin was taken over, but--now this is--the Biafran leader was Yakubu (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ojukwu--there was Odumegwu Ojukwu [Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --he was leading the Biafran side; Yakubu Gowon was leading the Nigerian side--the federal side. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. But Benin was in captivity for some--for some months; and the federal troops later on came, and they were able to liberate Benin. Story_ID: 669718 Speaker 1: There's also an interesting story there that concerns my husband and--because at that time, Benin was under captivity and I was in Benin, my husband Walter [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] was a Peace Corps director; and he came to Benin to rescue, or to evacuate, as they call it, the Peace Corps volunteers who were stranded in Benin at that time. And I remember being told that the Americans had come to save us from captivity; and later on I found out that, no, it wasn't that, it was the Peace Corps director that came to an area near where our house was to evacuate the Peace Corps volunteers. So, who knows? That was a first time that we kind of, may have met, unknowingly, 'cause there I was stranded in Benin, and there he was--he had come to evacuate. So, he may have--he passed our street; I may have seen him, not knowing who he was. But it was not until almost thirty years later that we would meet again, or twenty something years I would say later. Story_ID: 669719 Speaker 1: When did you start thinking about becoming a doctor? Speaker 2: Right from an early age. I care a lot about people; I'm, you know, a people person. I hate people being in pain, I hate people being sick; and so I wanted to make everyone well, and I knew whenever we were sick it was, "Let's go to the doctor so you can feel better." So, from an early age I said, okay, the doctor makes people better, so that was my childhood vision: to make people better. So I needed to become a doctor. Speaker 1: Now, did you have any role models in the community that were doctors, or? Speaker 2: An uncle of mine was a doctor and he was actually my family doctor, and he realized that I was very caring and I took an interest in whatever he was doing when I would come to the clinic with my mom [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan]. And my mother, remember, was in the healthcare because she was a nurse and she was a midwife as well. And so she always told me about the importance of, you know, the healthcare system and the importance--the important roles doctors play in the hospital. And so my mother also was an influence in me deciding to become a doctor. I mean my father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] was an influence in my brothers becoming civil engineers, but my mother was an influence in my becoming a doctor. Story_ID: 669720 Speaker 1: Now wh-, in, in Nigeria in those days, did sexism around professions exist the way it does--still does in the United States? I mean there are women doctors here, but they had to like fight, you know, over the years to achieve, you know, respect in a profession like being an M.D. or an engineer or a scientist even. We've, we've interviewed people who are your age who had to really fight in the United States to become an engineer or a physicist or--you know because they were saying women don't do that, or women are incapable of that. Did you have that same kind of a stigma in--? Speaker 2: Well, Nigeria's a patriarchal society, so of course. Women are relegated to the background, and that was why my father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] felt it was so important for his daughters to all get an education and have a profession because he knew that they had a steeper hill to climb than the boys; and so--he also knew that even with their profession and with the education they got--that in terms of jobs and in terms of position, that the men or the male colleague would always be put first. And so, I think in a lot of African societies, especially because they're patriarchal, the woman still has to fight a lot to prove herself and--even now. And medicine--at the time I went to medical school [University College Hospital, Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria], there were quite a number of females studying medicine, but you find things like the sciences. Like, a woman wanted to become an engineer or a mathematician; people were like, "No, no, no, that--you don't need that profession." And so women are discouraged from certain professions--that, that is true. But that's one of the things that I do when I go--is, you know, talking to women and talking to men about the importance of dropping the patriarchal nature of the society, and embracing gender equality because that is still something that a lot of African societies are fighting for--that gender equality. Speaker 1: Hm. Okay. Story_ID: 669721 Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask you about the demographics of school. Now I assume that most of the students in your school are African students, right--from the continent, right? That, and-- Speaker 2: Are you talking about col- university [University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria], or? Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about grade school [Corona School Ikoyi, Lagos, Nigeria] right now. Speaker 2: Oh, elementary school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh. In elementary school, like I said, the school I went to was a private school--had a lot of expatriates, so it was a mixture, so we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. By expatriate you mean people from other countries? Speaker 2: Like, okay, people from other countries in Nigeria. So we had a lot of British students-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --whose parents were working in the country, we had Egyptians, we had Lebanese, we had Nigerian; so it was, it was a wide range of people in the private school I went to. Speaker 1: Okay. And who were the teachers? Were the teachers a wide range, or were they--? Speaker 2: The teachers were a wide range. A lot of them actually were wives of the expatriate people who were working there and like either the British, or the different--Egyptians; we had different--we had--also had Nigerian teachers, so we had a spectrum of people. The principal was actually British-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she, she was the wife of the reverend of the church we used to go to, she was Mrs. Payne and her husband was Reverend Payne [J.J. Payne]; and we used to go to their church on Sunday, which was St. Saviour's Church, Ikoyi [Our Saviour's Church, Lagos, Nigeria]. Story_ID: 669722 Speaker 1: Now, high school. Where--did you stay in Lagos [Nigeria] for high school, or did you--? Speaker 2: For high school I was in Lagos at one of the premier colleges: Queen's College, Lagos. And that school was founded during the colonial era. Speaker 1: Now, this is--I want you to try to explain to us the, the system-- Speaker 2: The system. Speaker 1: --the school system to me because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's different from here; when I say high school, it may not mean the same thing as when-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, I know, 'cause we in Nigeria follow the British system. So, high school I believe is what we call secondary school because you have--'cause from high school we go--from secondary school we go to college, so would that be the equivalent of your high school? Speaker 1: Yeah, secondary school then is what I'm talking about. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, so you're talking of secondary school. So, for the secondary school I went to was Queen's College, Lagos; and I then later went for the latter part of my high school, which we call A level, at International School, Ibadan. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Secondary school was Queen's College in Lagos. Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And then International School, Ibadan-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and there was--from International School, Ibadan, I went to university to study medicine. Speaker 1: All right, so--okay, International School in Ibadan [Nigeria] was the same as a four year college, I guess is here, I suppose? Speaker 2: Yeah. Queen's College, which was the first part of secondary school, and after, you do five years of Queen's College, you do what they would call your O levels; and then, you then go on if you want to further your education, to another two years which they call A levels; and then from A levels, you now take an exam to go into university. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So I don't know where it fits in as junior high, senior--yeah (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are the A levels at--was that at--were the A levels at Queen's College, or? Speaker 2: No, the A levels were at International School, Ibadan. Speaker 1: International--oh, okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. The first five years, the O levels was at Queen's College, Lagos; and then the A level was at International School, Ibadan. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you finish the A levels, then you're ready to go to university (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) University. Speaker 1: --to study a profession? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --then you're ready to study. So, from there I went to University of Ibadan [Ibadan, Nigeria]. Story_ID: 669723 Speaker 1: Were the schools like mixed, boys and girls together; or, or were they male and female, or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Queen's--Queen's College [Queen's College, Lagos, Lagos, Nigeria] was an all-girls school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at the time I got to Queen's College, the war [Biafran War] was--the first year I was in Queen's College, the war was tailing off. So in my first year at Queen's College--that was in 1970, the war was just ending; and I remember when the war ended. Now, after the war ended, you had--people who had been stuck in the east tried--who had left school and they'd been stuck in the east during the war, come back; and when they came back, one of the things the principal tried to do was to ensure that they were well integrated back into society. So we had four houses named after the different parts of the country: so we had Dan-Fodio house, which was named after the north; we had Obi house named after the east; we had Emotan named after the mid-west--Emotan is a Benin name; and we had Obasa named after the west. And the principal put--kids were just randomly selected into the different houses, and so--just to help everybody integrate and unify as one people. And so, it didn't matter if you were from the north--you could be in a house that is named Obasa, which is Yoruba; and you'd have people from the east there as well. And they--the school tried to reintegrate and just tried to put the war behind us, and tried to see how we could move forward as the nation. Story_ID: 669724 Speaker 1: Tell us about International School at Ibadan [International School, Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria]. Now you said it was a segregated--Queen's College [Queen's College, Lagos, Lagos, Nigeria] was se- all--what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, the word segregated, no, it wasn't se- it was an all-female school, so. Speaker 1: Okay, well--all right. Speaker 2: Well--yes but, you know, when-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --segregated here means something harsh, so. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know what you mean. Speaker 2: So, no, it wasn't--it was just an all-female school, which is common in the British system; they have these female boarding schools. It was a boarding school, and we were--we lived on campus, so. Speaker 1: Now, is this something that would be in sync with African society, too--and Ni- I mean Nigerian society? I know there're different groups, but is this something that would happen in the traditional society--that you'd have like males going to school with females? Speaker 2: Yes, you have--yes, you have--you had that, yes; you had girl--all-girls schools--boarding schools, and you had all-boys school. International School, which was different, as a matter of fact, was a coed, and that was uncommon, and a lot of their--some parents were hesitant to send their kids there because it was coed; they wanted that separation. But International School was coed and you had--but you had the girls dorms and you had the boys dorms separate from, from the girls. And it was from there I did my A levels and then went on to University of Ibadan [Ibadan, Nigeria] to study medicine. Speaker 1: Now, are there any--did you have favorite courses in school? Speaker 2: Yes, I liked biology--that was one of my favorite subjects. For A levels, I studied biology, physics, chemistry 'cause that was what was needed to get into medical school, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, from what I understand in the British system, if you're going into the sciences, then that's about all you focus on; you don't really have to focus on history or literature or anything at that point. Speaker 2: Well, at that point you don't have to, but now--because when--now you can decide to add that. It wouldn't be your main subjects, but you could add that as subsidiary subjects. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, because I used to--I loved writing, so I used to do writing, but that was not one of my main subjects, so. But my main subjects that I needed for medical school is physics, chemistry and biology, and that was what I studied. Biology was my favorite. And after two years, I did my A levels and I got admission into a number of universities; and I decided to go to University of Ibadan, which was actually within the same place where--International School was situated within the campus of the University of Ibadan, so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 2: And, and then I did my pre-med; and then left the campus of the university and went to the University College Hospital [University College Hospital, Ibadan] to start my clinical. Speaker 1: In Nigeria? Speaker 2: In Nigeria. Speaker 1: Okay. All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was still part of my--yes, I was now a medical student doing the clinical part of my degree at the University College Hospital, which used to be part of the University College of London [sic. University College London]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But this is in Ibadan [Nigeria]. Speaker 2: This is in Ibadan. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, were there any favorite professors or teachers along the way that--? Speaker 2: Well, there was some professors that were very helpful and encouraged, and a number--I would say a number of them so I, I wouldn't want to say one name and miss out others; I would say, on the whole, that most of the professors were very encouraging. Speaker 1: Okay. I--reason why I ask is that some people that we've interviewed are in a situation where there's one professor, or one--or someone that really focuses on them and encourages them and helps 'em along, you know, beyond another. And then there are other people who are--they--a man [HistoryMaker William "Mo" Cowan] said--this morning said all the professors were good, and he, (laughter) he didn't on focus any particular one (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so--yeah, I would, I would, I would say the same thing. University of Ibadan and University College Hospital was a premier place in Nigeria; and people who taught there took their work seriously and students there also took their studies seriously, and so I would say that generally we got very good results from the type of stuff, or professors we had. Story_ID: 669725 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you much about the cultural life of growing up in Lagos [Nigeria] or Benin [Benin City, Nigeria] or Ibadan [Nigeria]. Here--I mean as popular culture, 'cause there's a lot of television, movies, and radio, and that sort of thing. Did--I mean did--was that a big factor in growing up when you were growing up in Nigeria? Speaker 2: You mean television-- Speaker 1: Yeah, media and? Speaker 2: Yes, it was, but not as much as today. I mean so much has changed; the kids are born with an iPad in their hand. So it's--then, you had a situation where TV wasn't 24/7; you had hours when the channels were on, and we would watch--we had maybe two hours in the day where they had children's program where we watched TV, and then otherwise we were either out in the garden playing or doing other things that were creative. So everything was sort of done in moderation. So, we had the radio and used to listen to a lot of pop songs from the West, and so that, sometimes, could have an influence on kids because you knew a lot of the singers--when they were singing you knew their songs. But otherwise I don't think in my case that I would say that that had such a strong influence on one. Story_ID: 669726 Speaker 1: I think a lot of people here don't have a sense of what a urban life is in Africa, or they don't even have a sense that there is urban life--some don't, which is crazy. But when Martin Delany visited Abeokuta [Nigeria] in 1859, I had in my mind, when I first read about it, that he visited a small place, but then I later read it was a city of 150,000 people in 1859 (laughter), which is some- you know, it's something that was quite different from what, you know, you would, you would imagine. And I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --I know a lot of people now--and you, you've encountered, I'm sure, they don't have any idea of what urban life is on the continent. Speaker 2: Yes. The thing is--that's why traveling is very important. My father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] also used to make sure we traveled a lot to different places 'cause traveling in itself is an education; and reading a lot is very important, just--not just academic work, but just reading for pleasure, reading about places, knowing about people, and I think that helps to broaden one's mind. There is--growing up, there wasn't much difference from--as far as I know and how I lived--from, if I lived, you know, in England; so urban life--you have everything. So it's not--I'm not quite sure what it is you think people can't process or what their thoughts were. It's not--Africa is not one big village, you know; it's several countries, and within those countries, it's not just one big village again. You have the cities, you have the rural life, and you have, sort of going back and forth between those two. If you live in the city, the cities have been modernized, the cities have--or they're meant to have water and electricity; and they have people who are knowledgeable about the West. You live in the rural life, it's a rural setting; so it just depends on where you are. So I try not to sort of go into the sort of argument where some people still think that in Africa people still live in certain parts and are not, you know, aware of how people live in the Western world, so--but it's just, to me, living and growing up in Nigeria was just normal. Story_ID: 669727 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) What are you trying to--tell me what it is you're trying to get at? Speaker 2: No, I--well, sometimes when I ask older people to describe what it was like growing up, and they say, "It was just like it is now." Well, no it wasn't ninety years ago. So I'm just--if, if there's a difference at all, I wanted--I wanted you to, you know, let us know if--I mean I can't believe there's no difference, but I do know that there is, there is, there is strong urban life in Africa going on, which you just alluded to--you know, you got the same thing other people have in cities and such. But if there's a difference at all, what would it be? Speaker 1: It--you see, I grew up as if I lived in the West in that my family was middle, upper middle income. My father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] worked in the ministry [for the Federal Public Works Department; Federal Ministry of Power, Works and Housing], we were civil servants, we traveled; so, life was pretty much the same as it would be if I was living in a Western, you know, city. Now, if you are asking about people who don't live--you know, who are not privileged to live, you know, that way--yes, things are different; things could be tough. Like I said, my father grew up, you know, with a lot of difficulties because he grew up in the village, and things were very different. It's difficult for me to describe because I would be describing it from an outsider's view. I do know about these places 'cause a lot of the things we do, or charities we're involved in do go and work with kids that are not in--it, it's a--it's the difference between here. When you talk of urban kids here, these are kids that are not as privileged as kids that are in the suburbs, if I understand clearly. When you're talking in the states here--when we're inner city kids, they are not as privileged as kids that are outside in the suburbs, not in the inner cities. But over there you have--kids who are living in the cities are the ones that are privileged, as opposed to kids that are living in the outskirts or living in the village or living in, you know, the less developed areas. So there's a kind of--it's, it's sort of like opposite from what happens here. Story_ID: 669728 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about London [England] now. How old are you when you go to London? Speaker 2: Oh--started going at a very early age because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but to medical school is what I mean (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, the medical school? Speaker 1: Yeah, the University of London [sic.], yeah. Speaker 2: No, I went to university in Nigeria--University College Hospital [University College Hospital, Ibadan]-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --in Ibadan [Nigeria]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which I said was a part of University College London at one time. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So you didn't--you didn't go to medical school in London at all, but all in Nigeria. Speaker 2: No, no--I went to medical school at University of Ibadan--Nigeria-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --University College Hospital. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well what, what area of medicine did you specialize in? Speaker 2: Well, when I studied medicine, one of the things that interested me was general medicine, so--which is what you call a family practitioner here, or family doctor. I wanted to have an idea of everything; and during my internship, you do rotations through all the different parts of medicine. So you would go through gynecology, you go through medicine, surgery, and I think I got a feel of everything; and I wanted to be a general physician so that I would be able to see patients early, and then be able to do something about it before things got out of hand because by the time you were seeing a surgeon, or you were seeing, you know, a gynecologist, you were seeing them for specifics. So, but a general physician or a family doctor--you could help people, tell them how to stay well, you could also treat them before anything got out of hand. And so my interest was in general medicine. But, again, I found that even with general medicine, you could only treat one person at a time, and I was eager to do much more; and I felt that I wanted to do preventive medicine--public health--because with public health, you could put public health policies in place that would help populations at a time, so that was important to me. Speaker 1: Okay. What were some of the, I guess the most important public health issues that, that you wanted to solve? Speaker 2: Well, I came--I did my public health degree here in the states at Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts] and--at the time I finished my public health degree, one of the things back in Nigeria that we encountered all the time as a doctor was malaria. Malaria is endemic in Nigeria; we have a lot of deaths from malaria. After I worked in University College Hospital, I set up my medical practice--Health and Medical Services [Lagos, Nigeria]--and you found out--which also gave preventive healthcare apart from clinical medicine, but it focused more on preventive healthcare. But a lot of people, one of the things they always came down with was malaria; and this was something that could be prevented if they knew what to do, and also could be treated before it got out of hand if they sought treatment early. 'Cause--a case that really rattled me was a case of a young girl who passed away from cerebral malaria in the ER [emergency room] when I was at University College Hospital, and I realized at that stage that malaria, although it's endemic and people get it a lot so they don't take it seriously, is very deadly. And so when I decided to do public health here in the states, and change from clinical medicine to public health, one of the areas I wanted to focus on was international public health; and I wanted to focus on things like malaria, and at that time AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] was becoming an epidemic in Africa, or had become an epidemic in Africa. So those were areas I focused on in public health. Speaker 1: And so when did you come to the U.S. to study public health? Speaker 2: I came back when my husband's [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] term as--when my husband's term as a U.S. ambassador to Nigeria finished, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so we're jumping way ahead (laughter). I'm just saying because this is taking us way ahead from where we are, but. Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause you were asking--we're talking of the medical-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we're talking about what happened after medical school and what you, what you decided to do. So you were a family practitioner for, for a long time though? Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, for--for that, and that's what I said in a nutshell, and one of the things-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was very common was people always came down with malaria. Story_ID: 669729 Speaker 1: One of the things that you did--correct me if I'm wrong once again--is that you were a medical officer for the Nigerian Airport Authority [Nigerian Airports Authority; Federal Airport Authority of Nigeria]? It's in '81 [1981] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that is--now, okay, so basically, we're going through the CV. Yes, in--what we do in Nigeria is you have to do a year of National Youth Service [National Youth Service Corps], and I did mine as the physician for the Ibadan Airport [Ibadan, Nigeria]. So you do one year of national service for the country, so I worked as a physician for--. Speaker 1: So this is true for all the university graduates in Nigeria? They had to do a year? Speaker 2: Yes, you do one year of national service in-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --relating to your field, and you're posted anywhere in the country. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So--okay, so you worked with the airport authority; then in '82 [1982], it says that you were a medical advisor for the Fan Milk company [Fan Milk, Ltd.]. Speaker 2: Yes, then I worked--then I worked as a medical advisor and consultant for a multinational company, which was a dairy company; and they had an on site clinic for their staff, so I used to run the staff clinic. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was what--and while I was there, one of the things again, each time I was practicing clinic medicine, public health and preventive healthcare kept coming to my mind 'cause I would see a lot of the staff, and a lot of things they come down with are things that are preventable; and also that was when I took an interest in nutrition and how nutrition affects the health, and so I came up with policies. Like, the company provided anti-malaria prophylactics free for all the staff. I also came up with the fact that it was important that we helped in terms of their nutrition, so we would give out multivitamins to the staff to help with, you know, their nutritional needs; and also we did things to ensure that they knew about having a healthy environment, which also played a role on the health. Story_ID: 669730 Speaker 1: I know preventive medicine, even in the United States, is relatively new when you look at the whole history of medicine here. There was a time that doctors only fixed problems; they didn't really talk about how to prevent 'em that much. But is--so, to what extent I guess as an M.D. does any of the traditional medical practices in Nigeria come into the profession? Speaker 2: It's--they're two separate things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, it really doesn't come into the profession. But they do have a body of, you know, the traditional medical practitioners, but that's very different from medical doctors. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's a wall between those two things then you're saying? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if would be--I, I--they're very--they're different things, you know; they're, there're those that--and again, it depends on what aspects of traditional medicine. Is it herbal medicine that you talk about in traditional medicine? So we try not to let patients get confused as to what is needed to do. If somebody needs surgery, no amount of herbs they're going to take is going to do the surgery for them if they have to have surgery. So, those type of lines and barriers are drawn in terms of the two different practices. But the Nigerian Medical Association and medical council [Medical and Dental Council of Nigeria] is very different. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So is it, is it difficult to--I mean do people seek like medical help there? I know--'cause even some people here don't really go to doctors; they--or they think that there's another--you know, there's a group of Christians that, that think that if you just pray, you know, you'll get better. But is it--does traditional religion prevent people from using medical science there to a greater extent than it does here? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think the main problem is the healthcare system is in shambles; and I think that people cannot afford to see doctors, and that's what mainly keeps them away from seeing doctors, you know, back in Nigeria. So, I feel that focusing on making healthcare available for everyone is extremely important because healthcare should not be just for the privileged, it should be available for everyone, no matter who you are. And I think the government needs to put more emphasis because the wealth of the nation depends on the health of its citizens; and right from when we were young, I always used to hear the saying, health is wealth. So, why we don't put in enough attention to healthcare and provide funding for that so that even those in the rural area have healthcare available is something that's mindboggling. Story_ID: 669731 Speaker 1: But one of the things that is important that has developed, and something that I've practiced, is community health--taking health to the level of the communities. Because a lot of times, you have tertiary healthcare which is not accessible, not affordable; and the people at a lower level in the villages, or people who can't afford it or can't get there because of the distance, are shortchanged--they don't get any form of healthcare. So taking that healthcare to them within their communities, understanding their communities, and even finding people within the communities that can monitor their health, so you have these laypeople who you train who know what signs or symptoms to look for, and know when it's necessary for them to seek the attention of a doctor. You have that within the community who'll be able to urge the people: "I think you need to go and see a doctor; this is not something you can leave untreated." So, getting to the communities is very important, and that has helped in solving some of the healthcare problems. And even having what they call the primary healthcare system, where you have these tiny clinics situated within these communities and that can do the basic things if it's just one doctor or just a nurse; they can take the blood pressure, they can take the temperature, they may even be able to do--check for malaria parasites under the microscope. So, at these certain basic things, they can give talks on health education; so that helps to sort of bridge that gap and fill in some areas where it's lacking. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, I know Britain has like free healthcare, France has it and Canada. Canada is part of the commonwealth of Britain. I mean is there, is there talk about making--does--is there talk about doing universal healthcare in Nigeria where it's a--you know, it's free, I guess, to people; or is it--or if not, then what are the barriers to it? Speaker 1: You know, way back, they used to have it, but it's had--the country's had so many years of mismanagement and corruption and issues of governance that a lot of the things that the citizens had and were entitled to, have all gone; and the healthcare system is in shambles, so you don't have that anymore. I mean there were teaching hospitals where people could go to and they would get free healthcare; they wouldn't have to pay. But now these hospitals are not well funded, so they're not well staffed, they're not well equipped, so if a patient goes there, even though it's meant to be free, they end up having to buy their drugs, they end up having to pay for their bed, they end up having to pay for literally everything. So it's no longer free. And that's one of the issues that unfortunately is happening now; and I think the first thing they're trying to do is to put a plug on corruption so that at least this money that belongs to the people can be used to help in different areas and not just individuals f- in government feel they can just take the money like that. So-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that's what they're trying to do right now: tackle corruption. Story_ID: 669732 Speaker 1: To what extent--now, I know Nigerian government has flipped over a few times due to military coups and that sort of thing. To what extent--how does that affect, or how did that affect you as a doctor, trying to deliver medical services to patients and every time the government--Buhari [Muhammadu Buhari] steps up, or Mohammed [Murtala Mohammed], or whoever it is, you know, or you know Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo]--every time the government flips, does it change the basic goods and services that people get and--? Speaker 2: It's been--practicing medicine in Nigeria has been a big challenge for doctors because part of your profession is that you swear an oath to save people--to help people. But sometimes the government makes it virtually impossible to do that work; and there are times doctors have been so fed up they have gone on strike, and when doctors go on strike, you then have the issue of hospitals closing and people having nowhere to go to except private clinics, and the private clinics--they can't afford. So, I think that this whole aspect of bad governance has had an impact on the healthcare system; and not just the healthcare system, it has an impact on society as a whole. Things that are important, like healthcare, education, the ability for young people to generate income--those things have been thrown to the back, you know, and there's no focus on that. So you have a lot of the youth today that feel rejected and neglected, and that's why you're having a lot of all the turbulence and demonstrations and militant groups coming together. These are a lot of idle youth who feel they have no future, and these are things the government needs to address because for that redevelopment, you need to focus on education, you need to focus on health, you need to focus on income generation because that in itself gives peace and stability; and without peace and stability, you don't have--they talk of investors coming in. Investors don't go to where there's turmoil, they want to go to a place where they know that they will be able to go there and, you know, go there for the long haul. Now, shark investors will go into any region--they go in and get out; they're not going there to help in development or to make sure there's employment or to exchange knowledge and talents--they're not going for that. But that's what you want: people who are going to come in for the long haul. Story_ID: 669733 Speaker 1: And so I think that it's very depressing that a country with so much potential still cannot harness its potential; and to still be at a stage where it's called either the largest economy in Africa or the second largest, and you have poverty so rampant, you have people who have no shelter, who sleep on the streets under the bridge. And I'm not talking of a few people, I'm talking of loads of people in shanty towns; and it's going out to these areas that you really begin to understand and begin to see all the deficiencies that exist in the way these people are being treated by people who should be protecting them. And that's where I really have a lot of issue because I think that every human being deserves to be treated properly, with respect, and be given opportunities to harness their potential--be given opportunities that if they work hard, that they will succeed; that if they decide to go in and study for something, that they will have that opportunity to get that education. So, many times you see kids right from when they're young, their parents can't even afford to send them to school; they can't afford to feed them. So they're out on the streets--they are hawking food. I remember one day I was driving and I saw this little kid literally wailing, wailing, and so I stopped. And this was years back when I still was in Nigeria, and I asked the kid what the matter was, and the kid said that they had this tray they were meant to sell of food, and they had dropped the food and their parents would literally kill them because that was what--they were going to use that money to survive; and I was really disturbed. And I asked this girl how much was everything that she was meant to sell, and I paid for everything as if I had bought it, and you could see the joy in her--joy in her face, and what I had done was really nothing much. But to tell you the extent of suffering, and to tell you the extent that parents will go to, even when it comes to their own child, literally be so harsh on their child because of survival. So I think that these type of issues need to be addressed. A country as rich as Nigeria has no business having people in such dire need, and I'm hoping that at some stage as a nation they will get it right and begin to be laying emphasis on social justice and a more equitable distribution of the wealth. Story_ID: 669734 Speaker 1: How far did you rise in the public health world in Nigeria when you were there? Speaker 2: In Nigeria I hadn't gone in to do public health yet-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I was working, I had my own medical consultancy [Health and Medical Services, Lagos, Nigeria], and I was working with embassies, I was working with multinational companies; and mainly focusing on health policies with the multinational companies on how they could address health issues with their staff and what they could put in place to help with the healthcare of their staff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was when I came here I now went into public health (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. But--so you--but you started thinking seriously about it when you were there? Speaker 2: Oh, yes; I started thinking seriously, so as soon as I came here I knew I didn't want to continue with clinical medicine; I wanted to go into public health. Speaker 1: Now, one of the big public health crises in Nigeria took place when your husband [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] was ambassador to Nigeria, and that was the environmental crisis caused by the drilling of oil and letting it leak all over the place, and other hazards of the oil drilling industry that were high- which were called to the world's attention by many, but Ken Saro-Wiwa (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ken Saro-Wiwa. Speaker 1: --was the main one. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, and unfortunately, as we talk now, I just heard that his son [Ken Wiwa] died yesterday, which is very, very unfortunate, so. Speaker 1: Did he die, or was he--? Speaker 2: No, no, he--did say he was ill and he--this was in the (unclear), so may his soul rest in peace, so it's-- Speaker 1: And we ask--for those watching this, tell us who Ken Saro-Wiwa was and what he was doing, and what happened to him. Speaker 2: Well, he was an environmental activist, and he was looking into the pollution of their land because a lot of oil companies were drilling, there was degradation of the land; and the government was doing nothing to rehabilitate the land. People used to survive through fishing, they used to survive through agriculture--farming; and with the degradation of the land the villages could no longer, you know, carve out a means of survival. So Ken Saro-Wiwa was an activist, got together with some other activists and started to make demands of the government and started to make demands from the oil companies that they should clean up their land. And also, the revenue they were getting from the oil, more should come back to assist the people who were suffering the brunt of this drilling. Speaker 1: So, this sounds perfectly reasonable and sounds like something the oil companies could afford to do, and--oh, what region was this in? What part of Nigeria was he focusing on? Speaker 2: This was the Niger Delta area, which--Niger Delta, it spans from--a number of states are involved, but these were all like the River Rhine area; they call it the Niger Delta area--the oil producing areas. Speaker 1: Okay, and what would be the closest city to this? Speaker 2: You're looking at Port Harcourt [Nigeria]; you're looking at Owerri [Nigeria]; you're looking at all the River Rhine areas--the Bayelsa [Nigeria]--Bayelsa area. So, these were the areas that we called the Niger Delta-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and even part of Edo state; and that was where, the area he was talking about, that the oil is coming from their land and the money is going elsewhere. Story_ID: 669735 Speaker 1: And so he began to address the government on these issues--confront the government on these issues; and the oil companies began to feel that it was disturbing how--their operations on the field because they would have demonstrations, and they would have people come out to say they were not going to allow any drilling to go on. Now, corrupt governments--then you had the dictator in government--Abacha, and a lot of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's Sani Abacha, right? Speaker 1: Yes, Sani Abacha--General Sani Abacha. And a lot of the money that was being--the revenue from the oil was being taken by a few people, and that was where--I mean you heard millions and even billions probably of dollars were hidden in Swiss banks and different banks around the world. This was money that was generated from oil, and this money belonged to the people of Nigeria. A lot could have been done to help the people if this money had been used properly. And these were part of the issues that Ken Saro-Wiwa was fighting for and addressing--that you need to ensure that the people in this area are not left behind. They can no longer fish, they can no longer farm; what are the alternatives for them? Now, the dictatorship, government, didn't like that, and they arrested a bunch of them and then executed some of them; and that was a very sad part of Nigerian history, that those lives--innocent lives--were just taken like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, the execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa made na- international news. Speaker 1: Yes, it did because that, that day it happened, I remember my husband [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] had been trying to see Sani--Sani Abacha, then dictator, to ask that these--Ken Saro-Wiwa and the others--should not be executed; they--whatever it is, they should be pardoned for whatever grievances the government had, and while he was trying to get a meeting to see Abacha, they were executed; and that caused an international uproar, and several of the ambassadors were recalled for consultation. And I remember my husband had to come back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]--in protest, they recalled a lot of their ambassadors of several countries. Story_ID: 669736 Speaker 1: And this was a real time of ty- tyranny--a real time when anybody who said anything was rounded up and sometimes you never heard from them again, so it was really dangerous. And you can imagine, if they could have--there were assassination attempts on my husband's life--Ambassador Carrington [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington]; and so you can imagine, a government that would be so bold and brazen to try and assassinate a U.S. ambassador, what chance did the people of the citizens have? And that was why it was so important that during that time we stood up. My husband stood up and, you know, I joined him in that fight for human rights for the people, for freedom of the press; and also for democracy because the people--a free and fair election had been held in 1993, and it had been annulled by Babangida--General Babangida [Ibrahim Babangida], another military head of state. So we were just having this succession of military heads of states, and it just kept taking the nation backwards; and we were hoping that when--Abiola was elected in 1993 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Abiola, yeah. Speaker 1: --Abiola--Chief Moshood Abiola--that this would be an end to military rule, but then the elections were annulled; and then you had Abacha [Sani Abacha]--you had Shonekan [Ernest Shonekan] briefly, an interim president, and then you had Abacha, and that was the nightmare--one of the nightmares--worst nightmares the country had ever had. And history will never forget what the country was put through because if the elections were not annulled and we had had President Moshood Abiola, we don't know--the country probably would have had time to move from this military sort of dictatorships to free and fair elections--to democracy; and would have time to start building on democracy, the will of the people--strengthening the social structures that are needed for democracy. But that whole period of Abacha coming in took us back again; and it was an unfortunate time, and people were too scared to say anything. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're talking about the, I guess, the '90s [1990s], basically, early '90s [1990s] to mid-'90s [1990s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're talking of--yes, yes, we're talking of--from 1993 when Abiola's elections were annulled to 19--you're going on to 1995, or 1994 when Abacha was now there; and he was there until--we left in '97 [1997], so I think he was there until about '98 [1998] when he died. Story_ID: 669737 Speaker 1: It's an interesting time, 'cause we, that we--there were a lot--there was lots of news of Nigeria in this country but it was conflicting. We had junkets out of--[HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun brought a junket over to visit Sani Abacha; wined and dined and--all around Nigeria, and sent him back very happy in, in thinking that everything was all right, or at least telling us everything was all right, which it was not. The other, the other news--you know, some of the other news we had was always conflicting. I remember the news of Abiola's wife [Kudirat Abiola] being killed in a traffic accident at some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that was very sad. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was very sad 'cause I-- Speaker 1: It was obvious retaliation -- Speaker 2: --I, I knew her very well. She--in my book I'm writing, 'Defend the Defenseless' [Arese Carrington], which talks about the Nigerian Civil War [Biafran War], and talks basically about two phases in Nigeria--the civil war, and then--'cause that was a dark era in Nigeria; and then the Abacha era, which was another dark era in Nigeria. And I talk about her then. When her husband [Moshood Abiola] was in prison, she took up that mantle and became a fighter for democracy. She now led all the pro-democracy groups and activists crying out--the rallying cry that her husband should be freed, the election results should be honored, and that military rule should be abolished. And she was very vocal, she was meeting with ambassadors, she was coming overseas to talk to people here as to what could be done to help Nigeria. Unfortunately at the same time, some people from here, African Americans, were coming and giving a wrong picture, like you just said; and Abacha would meet them, wine and dine with them, and they would go back and say, "Oh, he's okay," which was not the truth. And that made things more difficult for my husband, Ambassador Carrington [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington], who was trying to stress to state department [U.S. Department of State]--trying to stress to America that, "No, things are not okay; this man is a dictator. This is what is happening." And Abiola's wife often used to come to the embassy and used to come to the residence to discuss about the issue with other pro-democracy groups, and--because they were afraid to speak out, they were being watched, they--some of them were being detained, and some of them were being killed silently. And the weekend before she was killed, she had come to the embassy to meet with--he was Ambassador Shattuck [John Shattuck] who was visiting and talking to some of the human rights groups; and I remember that was the last time I saw her. She was a dynamic, bold, brave woman who otherwise had been a housewife, a businesswoman--focusing on that aspect of her life. But when history called on her, she did not waiver; she took up that mantle and led the fight for her husband's release, led the fight for democracy with the people of Nigeria behind her--those are the people who believed in democracy. And the government didn't like it; they felt she was becoming too powerful, too vocal, and she was assassinated. And the corner where she was assassinated now is called Kudirat Abiola Corner. And also, I think she has a street in New York [New York] where the Nigerian em- the Nigerian--the consulate is in New York. And I think that those are moments in history where people have been called to perform a certain task; and she did not waiver because after her husband was imprisoned, people were wondering who was going to take up that mantle--who was going to lead them. And she was the unlikely person, but she came up and took it up as if she had been all her life an activist, but she hadn't been. And she made a mark. And they were so scared of her that they decided to assassinate her, and that was a really gory thing. And my husband and a lot of the other ambassadors went for her funeral and--just to make a statement to the Abacha dictatorship that the world is watching, and the world won't be silent on things like this. Story_ID: 669738 Speaker 1: The Nigerians had a history with these different coups and governments of leaders trying to strike a balance and, and give an image to the world while there's other things going on in the country that--and some have been better than others, of course, but was it Fela Kuti's mother [Funmilayo Ransome Kuti] was killed by the government--it's been said, anyway, that soldiers killed her. He was outspoken critic; I mean you've got-- Speaker 2: Gani Fawehinmi--he later died, but he had been imprisoned so often that people sort of say the treatment he got in prison was what probably led to him falling ill, you know, and dying at a fairly young age. So, a lot of the human rights activists and pro-democracy activists, they were always thrown in prison; and prison is no summer camp in Nigeria--the conditions are terrible. And these people did not commit any crime, their crime was trying to defend the rights of their people, which is not a crime. Speaker 1: So, Nigeria does not lack for heroes because anybody who stands in that kind of situation-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we-- Speaker 1: --yeah, takes a tremendous amount of courage. Speaker 2: Yes, it, it, it does. Speaker 1: So, so-- Speaker 2: As you see, there was--oh I was turning around to see if--there was a book that someone wrote, 'Heroes of Democracy' [Joe Igbokwe], which lists all these people who actually fought for, you know, democracy in Nigeria. Speaker 1: Yeah, we just keep hoping for the best. Story_ID: 669739 Speaker 1: Tell us now, when did you meet Walter Carrington [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington]? How--how did you meet? Speaker 2: Well, we met at a reception for--at the Belgian embassy for--I believe it was a reception at the Belgian embassy; and he had just arrived then, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this '92 [1992], or--I guess, or--? Speaker 2: This was in '93 [1993]. And we met at this reception and I was talking to--I was--I--like I said, I had a medical practice [Health and Medical Services, Lagos, Nigeria], and I used to work for some of the embassies; and I was at this reception and he had just arrived. I was talking to, I believe, a French diplomat and a French businessman and he came over to join our conversation; and they--he asked them who I was so they introduced me. And it's a long story, but that was when I first met him; and I've written it all in my book, 'Defend the Defenseless' [Arese Carrington], so, once it's out, the whole story of our romance and how we got married in 1995, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 669740 Speaker 1: You said he's, he [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] was the U.S. ambassador to Nigeria, and after the--at a certain point--so you married while he was in Nigeria, right? In--as an ambassador (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I'm--I married while he was in Nigeria; and one of the things, you know, that I will mention here is--because we hear a lot of people talking about immigration and what it takes, and I will say that the U.S. is very thorough in, when it comes to immigration because even though I was married to the American ambassador, the one thing they do is they expedite it, but they do their homework. First, you have to have FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] clearance, you--and when I say FBI clearance, they go back and find out what you did as a baby. One of my elemen- one of my schoolteachers said they asked her questions about who I was, how I was--so they do a thorough job. You have to have--you have FBI, you have CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], you have medical clearance; you have every possible clearance there is. The process between when we met and decided to get married and finally--because he had to get clearance to--for us to get married, being that he was the ambassador--it was several months, and that is expedited. And, and not unto that, when they give you the worldwide clearance, then, you know, we were able to get married. So they do a thorough job of checking people's background. At least I know they did; I mean maybe because he was ambassador, but I think they did a, a thorough job. Story_ID: 669741 Speaker 1: Now, there is a part where my husband [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] always teases and says I should tell the story was when President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] came to Nigeria and we were having--they were having a meeting with General Abacha [Sani Abacha], and one of the common phrases they use in Nigeria--everybody is sister or brother; you all call yourselves--I may not be blood related to you but I would refer to you as my brother, and that just means we are all Nigerians. So as we walked into the meeting with Abacha as--President Carter, my husband, and--I was accompanying Mrs. Carter [Rosalynn Carter]; we were just going (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was in--just for clarity, President Carter-- Speaker 1: Former President Carter. Speaker 2: Yeah--he was there to--? Speaker 1: His Guinea worm project [Guinea Worm Eradication Program]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He had this big Guinea worm project in Nigeria. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was trying to eradicate the Guinea worm parasite, yes. Speaker 1: Eradicate guinea worm, and he is--yes, he is doing a great job with that, so he was there to see some of the guinea worm projects. And at the same time, he was there to also talk to General Abacha about some of the political prisoners that he had, you know, that--the conditions under which they were being kept--one of them was General Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo] then--was not conducive. And so we're walking to the meeting, and as we come in and the embassy people are introducing the American side, and as they get to me and they're about to say, "This is so, so and so, the ambassador's wife." Abacha goes, "Oh, you don't need to introduce--that's my sister." And my sister is just a general term; I'm not related to him at all. And so, later that evening at the state banquet, I was seated beside President Carter, and he turned to me and asked, "Are you really Abacha's sister?" (Laughter) And I said, "Oh, no--no way; we're not even related." And I said, "The term my sister is just used generally in Nigeria for someone who also comes from Nigeria." And I tease--he must have breathed a sigh of relief that--, "How did our people miss this?" (Laughter) So, yeah, so that was the incident of that. It's just a general term. And I said, "I'm not even from the same part of the country; not related," but we do refer to people as my sister and my brother. Story_ID: 669742 Speaker 1: You were married in 1995 to [HistoryMaker] Walter C. Carrington, the U.S. ambassador to Nigeria; and you were married in Benin, right? Speaker 2: Republic of Benin which is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --different from the Kingdom of Benin. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right I got--all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. That's an important distinction. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, and what was the wedding like? Speaker 2: Well, because my husband was ambassador, we decided to elope to the Republic of Benin; and we decided to do that because we didn't want a big wedding that would give rise to everybody trying to impress the ambassador with various presents that would lead to a conflict of interest. So we told my parents. My father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] and mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan] came the evening before we left for Republic of Benin, said prayers for us; my father blessed the union, and he did in a traditional way, which was he lifted me and put me on Walter's lap, and what they do is they count seven times, they put--the first time lift you up, and at the seventh time they let you rest on your husband's lap; and that means that they have given their blessing, you know, for the marriage and for the union. And so they did that quietly--just my parents and some siblings; and the following day we went to the republic of Cotonou [Benin] and we got married at the registry, and the Canadian ambassador was there, and one of my sisters came, his two secretaries, and also his chauffeur. So, those were the people at our wedding. And my daughter [Temisan Oyowe Carrington] was there. And we had this quiet wedding and had a reception after; and after the reception, we did some sightseeing and went to some of the museums. And I remember that when I went to the museum in Republic of Benin--because Republic of Benin actually was once part of the vast Benin empire, and during the time when Benin was an empire, it had conquered a lot of the surrounding area and stretched up to the area which is now Republic of Benin. So, in the museum they have a lot of traditions that are similar to Benin tradition, and the tour guide was explaining in French some of these traditions; and with the French I understand, which is not that great, I saw he was explaining it wrongly to (laughter) the visitors. And so, I now turn to him and explained in French to him that what he was saying was not right, and this was what it was meant to be, and this was the history of Republic of Benin, and this was where the items he was talking about came from, and why the similarities are with Benin. And he looked at me shocked and he said to me, "You're correct, but I assumed all the visitors didn't know, so it didn't matter what I said," (laughter) and he laughed about it. But I was like so shocked when he was saying something completely different that I had to correct him and--but that was with the little French that I knew, I made sure that our history needs to be recorded correctly. Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After the wedding, we went back and we had a reception and had--just to announce that we were now married, and the embassy had the reception for us. And a funny incident was--everybody feels they're very important in Nigeria; they, they have this VIP, once they're rich or they're a high position in government, they're automatically VIP and they are invited to every function. And there was this businessman who had heard we got married, and he assumed that we probably got married in Nigeria and that he must have gotten an invitation. So when he saw us at the reception which the embassy had, he said, "Oh, I'm so sorry I didn't attend your wedding; I got the invitation, but I was out of town." And I had--like a diplomat--that was my first diplomatic test. I smiled and I said, "Oh, thank you," and I knew there were no invitations because we didn't have the wedding in Nigeria, and we didn't give out any invitations; it was a quiet intimate wedding at--in the Republic of Benin. So he assumed because he was an important VIP that he got an invitation, and it never existed. But I was a perfect diplomat and I thanked him and thanked him for his good wishes. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you get instructions on diplomacy from your husband or the staff? Speaker 2: I think I got that way before I married my husband--that sometimes it's important to be a diplomat and bridge the peace. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a sense of that already, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Being a part of a royal family. Story_ID: 669743 Speaker 1: But in '95 [1995] though, you stepped down as medical director of Health and Medical Services in Lagos [Nigeria], right? Speaker 2: Yes. After (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --we got married-- Speaker 1: And you had been--okay. Speaker 2: --to avoid any conflict of interest, I stopped working officially in medical capacity of the company. But what I did do was I was involved with the spouses of ambassadors, and we worked with a lot of the charity--charitable organizations, provided healthcare at charity clinics, and did a lot of work--charity work. Speaker 1: Okay. But it was in Ni- so you were there two more years as the ambassador's wife; and you all left in 1997, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: For the United States. And this is--he [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] described--and I--I wanna ask you to describe it if you'd like to the, the dinner that was held for him in his honor by the Nigerian people, and what happened at that dinner. Speaker 2: Oh, you're t- the farewell party. Yes, that is another incident where the Nigerian community, the pro-democracy group activists--they decided to hold a farewell party for us and to thank him especially for his support because as an ambassador, he didn't just come to observe, he made sure he came and embraced the people and embraced their struggle for human rights--for democracy, because those are their ideals America believes in. And so they're these people fighting for those ideals, so the least he felt he could do was not just to observe, but to embrace it and be part of that struggle; and that was what he did, and the people were very appreciative. As a matter of fact, there's an enclave that's named Walter Carrington Crescent [Lagos, Nigeria] where you have all the diplomatic consulates and some of the missions. And at that party--we went to the party and--first of all, the first place where the party was meant to be held they had sent a number of military people there, they had closed off the street, and they had told the people who owned the house--a private house--that they couldn't host a function there. So the people immediately got to work and found a secret venue and started informing people quietly that this was the new venue. So when we arrived at the first venue, we saw the whole place had been closed off and the military commander who had been put in, in charge of that task came to us and said, "Oh, they were doing something in that area; it was closed off," and gave some lame excuse. Already, the pro-democracy group person with us had told us they just wanted us to see how far the military was going, that there was a new venue for the party. So they got into the car and told the driver where the new venue was, and took some of the back streets. We got to the new venue: it was this compound belonging to one of the pro-democracy groups, and there was a big gate there. They saw the ambassador's car, allowed it in, they shut the gates. By this time a lot of the diplomats were already there, the pro-democracy group and activists, they were already there, people were waiting for us to arrive; and so when we arrived, the party started. Story_ID: 669744 Speaker 1: And somehow, the dictator Abacha [Sani Abacha], the president Abacha did not want that party to hold because he felt my husband was--the people always felt energized whenever he talked; they felt energized to continue to fight for their freedom, for their rights, and to continue to fight for democracy. And so he was like, "I'm not going to allow him to give a speech like this because it will just sort of rouse and energize the people." And while the party was going on, I think the military people he had sent to close off the area realized that there was another venue, and they came looking for the venue. In the middle of the function, we suddenly heard thumping at the gate, and the whole paramilitary group, this time armed with guns, had been sent to this location. They actually broke down this metal gate--a heavy metal gate, I mean I, I don't know how to describe it but massive; and came into the compound with their guns 'cause there's more--there was more than one building in that compound. And they came in with their guns, pointing it--full glare of diplomats--and saying the party should stop. And-- Speaker 2: So there are--just to be clear, there are ambassadors from other countries there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, there were, there were--they did not care. There were ambassadors and diplomats from other countries. There were press people there; they did not care. They had reached the stage where they were determined that they were not going to allow that function to go on; and they were pointing their guns. And I just stood there, and it looked like a scene, a scene from 'Rambo' where you had all this military and paramilitary groups just pointing their guns searching for one person. And as soon as they got in, you heard them say on the walkie talkie, one of them, "Sir, sir, we have found them. I can confirm Ambassador Carrington [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] is here." And we could all hear. And the next thing they said the party had to be stopped. And Gani [Gani Fawehinmi], who I told you is this human rights lawyer, picked the microphone up and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How do you spell his name? Speaker 1: G-A-N-I--Gani-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Fawehimi, F-A-W-E-H-I-M-I. Some add an N after the I: H-I-N, H-I-N. Speaker 2: H-I-- Speaker 1: No, H--not N there. Yeah, H-I-N-M-I, Fawehinmi. Speaker 2: Fawehinmi. And he then--okay, so that's--Fawehinmi's his last name. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 669745 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he picked the microphone and said, "This is a private residence. We can meet and do whatever we like here; you can't stop the party." And there was this junior officer who kept saying he would shoot him if he didn't put down the microphone. And for a few seconds there was a lot of confusion, and then one person decided that--let sanity prevail. Here, you have several countries with their ambassadors; if they start shooting, you don't know who's going to get, you know, shot at; and so they--the commander came and told the soldier to put the gun at ease, and then spoke that--, "Please everybody, clear the place." And that was how the diplomats left because they said, you know, for security and safety, the diplomats should leave, and we left, and some of the human rights people stayed behind and started engaging with the military people who later, they said to us, told us that, you know, they've been given these instructions--they know it's wrong, they know they shouldn't be doing this, but what can they do? So, the human rights people now sort of embraced them and their senses, and said to them, "Look, look at your uniforms--tattered; look at you, you're hungry. Look at the way you're being treated. You're given instructions to fight your own people--destroy your own people, and no one takes care of you." So, all the food that had been prepared for the reception, they told them, "You go eat, at least have some food in your stomach," and, you know, they engaged in dialogue with them. And so that was a time where there was just so much fear. Even when the military and the junior officers knew it was wrong, there was nothing they could do; they had a dictator [Sani Abacha] in power. Speaker 2: I know--I think your husband [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington] told us in the story that at one point when the guns were trained on the podium, that Gani Fawe- [Gani Fawehinmi] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Opened his chest--opened his chest. Speaker 2: --yeah, opened his shirt. Speaker 1: Sorry--he opened his shirt and exposed his chest and said, and said they should shoot him; and--yes, he was a very brave man; he, he knew the law, and he told them--he does things within the law, and that was against the law--that people could assemble privately in their compound--in their house--that the military had no right stopping it, so that--. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a big drama. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And yet, with the government against your husband at that point, as you said, a street or a circle is named for him now? Speaker 1: Yes, now, when democracy came, in appreciation of how he stood with the people, they named an enclave Walter Carrington Crescent [Lagos, Nigeria], and that's where the U.S. consulate and other consulates are located. Story_ID: 669746 Speaker 1: So in the United States--and I think Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo] was elected in '99 [1999] after--now there's a strange period that I remember where Abiola [Moshood Abiola] was talking to the U.S. ambassador [sic. assistant secretary of state for African affairs, HistoryMaker Susan Rice] and dropped dead or something? He was a--I mean it was really--I, I don't even understand how--I mean do you have any insight into any of that? Speaker 2: Yes, so many theories--conspiracy theories have been said with that. I think what happened was Abiola had been in detention for so long; he had not been allowed to have medical care. He was somebody that was I believe, according to his doctor, was a known hypertensive, and he was probably subjected to a lot of things we are not privy of while in prison. And all that had an impact on his health. And he was cut off from the outside world so he didn't even know what was happening. And one of the things that, you know, makes you realize how cut off he was, when they told him about Kofi Annan, he said, "Where was Boutros Boutros-Ghali," that, "where--who is Kofi Annan?" Speaker 1: Yeah, the UN ambassador [sic. United Nations secretary general] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had no idea. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He thought it was still Boutros Boutros-Ghali. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. So he had no idea--that was how cut off he was. And then--now, I think, also the possibility that maybe he would get his mandate back. A lot of things were thrown at him at the same time--the possibility of him getting his freedom; and still he hadn't had any medical attention, they still hadn't given him any medical attention. Abacha [Sani Abacha] had died at this time, there was a, a new head of state [Abdulsalami Abubakar] in place who was trying to transition back to democracy, and they were trying to have talks with Abiola. I don't know the details of the talk, but at that time--I think it was during a visit when you had a U.S. delegation--and he was having a meeting with them and they said some tea was made, and he collapsed. Now, Nigerians began to say there was a conspiracy theory, he was poisoned, he was this. But medically, I think if someone has endured so much stress and hardship, and already they have a medical condition, I mean it's not, you know, impossible that due to lack of medical attention he had a crisis of some sort--had a heart attack or--you know. I don't know what the details of the autopsy were, but he did have an autopsy, and they did not find that he was poisoned. But some people still joke that--about the tea though, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's why I'm just as confused about it--you know. Speaker 2: --and--no. So, they--nothing was proven to have been, you know, foul play. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: But the main problem was he was kept in detention under hard conditions and not given medical attention. Story_ID: 669747 Speaker 1: When you came back in '97 [1997], at some point you entered Harvard University, right? School of Public Health (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, 'cause I had made up my mind that I now wanted to practice public health. So I went into Harvard and got a degree from the School of Public Health, and I focused on international public health. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I graduated in 2000, and I was selected to be the graduate orator by the university to represent all the graduate school, so which was a great honor. Speaker 1: Okay. And you worked with Harvard's AIDS Prevention Initiative Nigeria, right? Is that true? Speaker 2: Yes. And after I graduated, I started working at the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts]; and I helped in facilitating a grant which was given to the School of Public Health for $25 million to fight AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in Nigeria for an AIDS prevention initiative. 'Cause at that time, Nigeria was one of the countries that AIDS was becoming an epidemic. The threshold was still under 5, but with a population--under 5 percent--but with a population of 130 million at that time, 5 percent was a large number; it was a significant number of people. And 5--under 5 percent, I should say. And 5 percent is the threshold which, you know, you want to avoid it getting to because studies in AIDS had sort of come up with the fact that at 5 percent, you had this exponential growth of the epidemic; and that in itself became more difficult to control and could be--have adverse effects on the nation because AIDS was not just an issue--a health issue, it was also an economic issue, it was a security issue. So, it sort of was an issue that was multidimensional and had to be addressed in that way by all the different areas and departments. Story_ID: 669748 Speaker 1: Did you ever work with Helene Gayle [HistoryMaker Dr. Helene Gayle] who was--I think she was (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she was, she was working with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation then; so yes, she was from the Bill and Melinda Gates side, sort of supervising the project at Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, because we interviewed her a few years ago too--yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, yes, yes. Speaker 1: She was very prominent in the, in the--in this country as an advocate of, you know, helping, you know, the African continent in terms of AIDS. Speaker 2: Yes, it was very important because one of the things, when I was at the School of Public Health, that sort of baffled one was how long it took for AIDS drugs to be given to Africa. I mean people were dying in numbers, and you would have these meetings where people were still debating, could they know when to take the drugs? How would they know when to take the drugs? I mean immaterial things which, at that time, Paul Farmer was showing that in Haiti, even if they weren't educated, you could have people--local people within the community monitor them, be their buddy in terms of taking the drugs--knowing when to take the drugs. And in public health, you found that--you go around the world and--you know, one cap doesn't fit everyone; you study what's on the ground, and you use what you have there to achieve your goal. I mean there was a time when the--treating diarrhea in children in a part of India, and they didn't have the--measuring drugs, but everybody had these water bottles--it was a common thing; they would use these water bottles to collect water for their children. So they were taught the measurements using what was available to them, which were these water bottles. So, there is a way to get around things, even if you don't have all the scientific requirements that you would have in the, in the Western world, or developed world. So, it was a good thing that the grant was given to Nigeria; and it was also an opening because then a lot of people started paying attention to the fact that Africa needs to start having these drugs sent to them. And the Clinton Foundation [New York, New York] has done so much in terms of helping and fighting AIDS in Africa and providing drugs because providing drugs was so important for so many reasons. It helped with the mother to child transmission, which was one of the way it was being transmitted. Infected mothers who weren't being treated were having babies who were infected. But if they were being treated and the seroprevalence was, you know, almost negligible, they weren't transferring it to the babies. And also it helped in terms of families who had parents who had it, so that you wouldn't leave orphans behind. There was the issue of AIDS orphans--so many kids who had parents who had died due to AIDS. So how could you look and say, "Oh, how will they know when to take the medicine?" It just did not make sense. So, there was a gap where immediately treatments should have been provided for the continent of Africa. But I'm happy that once foundations started stepping in, that that became the norm, to help Africa ensure that patients were being treated for HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], and they were getting the drugs they needed. Because at a time the drugs were so scarce, like I would say, it was like people had--it was like a luxury if they got on the list for treatment. So, getting on that list determined whether they would live or die, and that was so unacceptable when there was something that they could get that could prolong their lives. Story_ID: 669749 Speaker 1: Now, it says here that you worked with Phyllis Kanki and Hope Bryer, and Dr. Olikoye Ransome Kuti, and Dr. Gbenga Obasanjo [Olugbenga Obasanjo] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were a lot of-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --there were a lot of people that--when the grant [for AIDS Prevention Initiative Nigeria] was gotten, so a team was put together and we worked on HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in Nigeria. One of the important things that the Gates Foundation [Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, Washington] wanted was they wanted to make sure that the government--there was a political will. 'Cause if you go to a country and you don't have the political will, and the government is not party--part of what you're doing, then it's difficult to achieve your goals because you will meet obstacles at every level. So, one of the things I did, which you'll see in one of the photographs later, is I met with President Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo], I told him about the grant and got him onboard; so it was a partnership with the Nigerian government. And the political will was there, they had set up a national AIDS committee action group [National Action Committee on AIDS; National Agency for the Control of AIDS]; and they set up the state levels and also the local government levels. Story_ID: 669750 Speaker 1: So wa- were your e- your efforts with the Gates and Harvard initiative [AIDS Prevention Initiative Nigeria], were they fairly successful in, in helping to stave off AIDS in Nigeria? Speaker 2: One of the important things of the initiative was it drew attention to the plight of people and the HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] pandemic in Nigeria, so in that way it was effective. And also it, it helped to strengthen some of the institutions, and lots of nongovernmental organizations--NGOs--came and started working on AIDS projects, and they were working at the grassroot level, which was very important--getting it out there. And as a matter of fact, one of the (unclear) advisory board member consisted of a group of young Ivy League Nigerians who live here and school here at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], and they would spend their summer vacations running an HIV/AIDS camp for youth in Nigeria who come from different parts of the country and would go back to their villages and set up HIV/AIDS groups within their villages; and so that sort of multiply effect in terms of health education of HIV/AIDS was very important, and a lot of non-profits started to do that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so, did the project end in 2004 or, or did it--'cause I--or did it? Speaker 2: Well, it was in--it was in phases, so the--and the different grants were meant--they had different phases and it was going to another phase. Story_ID: 669751 Speaker 1: But I also was sitting on the board of Pan African Health Foundation-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and one of the things Pan African Health Foundation tried to do was--a board that the president of Nigeria was involved with, and he got a number of international people to come together. 'Cause he was--one thing about General Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo], he was very serious about fighting the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] pan- epidemic in Nigeria. He did not want a situation like, you know, you had in South Africa, and some parts of East Africa where so many people were dying and, you know, there wasn't that push for the political will and push for the ministries and the government to be involved in the outcome of what happened (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I remember some, some really strange remarks about Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, the president-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --who didn't believe AIDS was a crisis. Speaker 1: Yeah, so he wanted to lead by example when it came to that, so he was in the forefront, so he put together the Pan African Health Foundation and had a lot of people--international people involved on the board. And I sat on the board, and one of those--one of the things that we first addressed--we looked at was you had the technical aspect of how AIDS was being transmitted as well, which was from blood transfusion and reusing needles and syringes. So one of the things that was decided was to set up--because WHO [World Health Organization] standard was that all countries should be using syringes that could not be reused; and so we set up the foundation for this factory. We set up the factory in Port Harcourt [Nigeria], I believe it's at, and the foundation put together a public-private partnership to do that 'cause we figured that at least if you take care of that aspect, which is technical, that's a significant number of people you're helping who won't get infected by reused needles. Speaker 2: It's curious, I just got that you're saying Port Harcourt, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That's the--but you don't say it like that. Speaker 1: (Pronunciation) Port Harcourt. Speaker 2: You say it--you say it in a way that really makes the name sound African instead of a British Port Harcourt (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It--well, because it's African. Speaker 2: Right. I mean the town is-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --but, you know, it has that British name but, but you don't really pronounce it like a British name. Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Which is interesting. Speaker 1: Because it's pronounced now like--it's, it's a port city-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so, it's pronounced now like, like that. Like they--when they pronounce it in Africa, they don't pronounce it as if the name came from the fact that it's a port city; they pronounce-- Speaker 2: Port Harcourt (laughter). Speaker 1: --they pronounce it as if it's one word, not that it's a port city (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So, say it again? What you call it? Speaker 1: Port Harcourt. Speaker 2: Yeah, see--yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's how they say it in Nigeria--they say Port Harcourt. Speaker 2: That's interesting. Speaker 1: Not that it's a port and--you know, so--so the--this factory for auto-disable syringe was set up and it's functioning; and so you have all over Nigeria now the availability of auto-disable syringes. Story_ID: 669752 Speaker 1: Now, in 2006 you became the vice president of Africana Consultants [Newton Centre, Massachusetts]. Now this is--is this you and your husband [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington], right (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes. So, we decided to set up a consultancy focused on two things--or maybe more than two things, but healthcare and investment promotions were the main things; and so I was involved in healthcare consulting and also women's empowerment. Because that was an issue--women's health was not being addressed; and I felt unless you empower the woman, she would not have the ability to address her own healthcare needs. Women needed a voice, and I was vocal in making sure that women understood that their health and their lives were in their hands, and they could not allow the men to dictate to them how they would take care of themselves because the men would focus more on what affected them and not what affected the women. You had maternal mortality still very high, you had childhood diseases still very high, and malnutrition still very high. So these were areas where the women needed to be empowered to be able to advocates for themselves, so. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so--that sounds like important work. Yeah--I'm tempted to ask--well, I'll ask anyway. In what ways did men try to control women's health access? I mean how, and for what reasons? Speaker 2: Well, there were--like going to basic local levels now. I will go to like when I worked in the teaching hospital in Nigeria--University College Hospital [University College Hospital, Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria]. A lot of times, a woman would have had several children--she would be tired. She would say she's had seven, eight children, but her husband wants her to continue because either he wants her to have a son, or he feels he needs many children; and they would not be allowed to have contraceptives. So they would come to the hospital and they would say--and their husbands would come with them, and you would see them whisper that, as a doctor should ask their husband to wait outside. So it would look like the doctor wanted their husband to wait outside; and when the husband would go out, the woman would say that she is tired of having children. She almost passed on, the last one; and she wants contraceptive, but she wants something that her husband will not, you know, know what she's doing, and if he asks her why isn't she pregnant, she'll just say, "Oh, it's--," God hasn't given her a baby. So, you know, she did not have the nerve to tell her husband that, "No, I'm done," that she feels she's done with having children. And also, attention wasn't being paid to maternal healthcare. You had so many women dying during childbirth, and I think a lot of the healthcare policies weren't being addressed. Because you look at parliament, in politics, those providing the laws were mainly men, so they had no interest in issues concerning women most of the time; and so you needed to advocate that women should go into politics, women should begin to fight for their own rights, and women should realize that they have a voice. Story_ID: 669753 Speaker 1: This may seem like it's coming out of leftfield but the Nollywood, the Nigerian film industry, seems to be--from what I've seen of some of the films--a way to challenge a lot of old timey beliefs and ideas in Nigeria that keep the country from moving forward; and it seems to be used that way in--in a lot of ways. I mean it's--Nigeria makes more television programs and movies than any nation on earth except for India, I think right now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's true. Speaker 1: --they're second. Speaker 2: Bollywood and Nollywood, they are--sorry, yeah, Bollywood and Nollywood they are -- Speaker 1: Yeah Bollywood and Nollywood make more than Hollywood now. Speaker 2: Yes, they do. Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, so--and the, the, the films are so popular; the DVD [digital video disc] sales-- Speaker 2: They are. Speaker 1: --and any African shop you go into. Even in my hometown of Dayton [Ohio] there are like hundreds of these you can buy, or you can find 'em on online. Speaker 2: And everyone watches them. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You'll be surprised. It's not just Africans. You find people here watching them; you find people everywhere watching them. Speaker 1: And they're well done! Speaker 2: They're, they're, they're very--they're very--and yes, they're improving each time; they're getting better and better. And like you said, they try to address a lot of the ills in society, and that has been a very positive aspect of the economy, these--the Nollywood. Another thing that has helped the economy is the sale of mobile phones and SIM cards because ever- even in the remotest village you have people who have mobile phones, and the sale of SIM cards and recharge cards is a very boo- big booming business. Speaker 1: Yeah, these are educational tools, and I raise them in the, in the--in that sense that, you know, what we're looking at everywhere in the world--even in this country with all the education, we still have Donald Trump [Donald John Trump] as a candidate (laughter). So I mean there's a--educational issues are at the core of a lot of pain in the world, you know. I mean to reeducate people, let 'em know what's going on and get 'em to focus on it. So, when you--as a healthcare professional you--do you try to use the social media and, and these forms of technology to--? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they try--and even with the cellphone now, like one of the things my daughter [Temisan Oyowe Carrington]--'cause she did her thesis on polio immunization in Nigeria ['Religion and the Politicization of the Polio Vaccination in Nigeria'], and one of the things that she's looking into is using technology in the healthcare system--using--everybody has a mobile phone, so using the mobile phone to spread healthcare information in, you know, a positive way; correct healthcare information, so sort of mobilize it so that the wrong information out there can be debunked, and you have it coming from a reliable source. So there are tools you can use which is, which is very important that we start to use these tools because you can communicate--have mass communication using these tools. So I, I agree with you. And one of the things when we talk about women's empowerment and women in politics in Nigeria, a question I always get asked is, why haven't Ameri- why haven't we had a female president in America? I have assured them that this is the time (laughter) and we, we are there now. So I'm looking forward to that when I can go back with pride and say, I'm not just talking the talk, we do also walk the walk. Because people, they--so many other countries. Britain has had a female prime minister [Margaret Thatcher], India [Indira Gandhi], Pakistan [Benazir Bhutto]--everywhere you look. Even in some African countries you've had female presidents--Liberia [Ellen Johnson Sirleaf], Rwanda [Agathe Uwilingiyimana]. So you, you ask yourself that, why is it that Nigeria still--I'm sorry--America still hasn't had a female president? In Rwanda, the president [Paul Kagame] made sure that he have a lot of females in parliament so he said 50 percent; I mean I said Rwanda is--he's male, but he has filled his parliament with females, and his supreme court [Supreme Court of Rwanda], his judges, half are females. So you have a lot of females in these powerful positions in some African countries. Story_ID: 669754 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the--becoming a member of the board of directors of United Nations Association of Greater Boston. What does that mean? Speaker 2: Yes. The boards I sit on are boards that focus on things that I'm passionate about. I'm passionate about health and I'm passionate about education; I think these are so vi- these two are so vital, especially to our youth. And United Nations Association of Greater Boston, they run the Model UN program in schools, and they also run the global classrooms. And the main focus is to try and get the youth at an early age to begin to understand the global world we live in and how to succeed in it, and with the Model UN, they simulate sessions at the UN where they discuss various crises and they try to come to a resolution without conflict. So they teach them conflict resolution. And they also teach them how to sort of be able to succeed and understand that no nation can isolate itself; problems around the world are problems within your own area, too, because we are in the global world. And I think if we start--because we are in the urban schools and we start at an early age; and it's important that you start kids off early understanding what it is to be in the global world we live in so that you don't have them growing up and thinking that you can suddenly wake up and say you want to isolate the country. Story_ID: 669755 Speaker 1: One of the, the crises that's occurred in the last few years in Nigeria that made worldwide--got worldwide attention was the Boko Haram kidnapping of the three hundred plus girls in northern Nigeria (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, over two hundred girls were kidnapped from a school [Government Girls Secondary School, Chibok, Nigeria] and--which led to the hashtag #BringBackOurGirls; and I am happy to say that at least twenty-one have been released--this was just last week, and they're hoping that some more--eighty something will be released soon. And that was a very tragic incident and it was really heartbreaking because these girls up north were just trying to get an education. Already up north, female education is something that's not really emphasized. The women--the girls are sent up to marry at an early age; and mothers are beginning to realize that education is important, so they have been pleading with their husbands that--also let the daughters go to school. So you had a number of girls, this female education waking up; a number of girls now going to be educated, and the whole campaign for female education was beginning to get momentum; and then you have this happening. And a lot of fathers felt responsible that if they hadn't sent their girls to school they wouldn't have been kidnapped--you know, that guilt. And so it, it's sort of--could take them back, you know, to an era--well, where they feel, oh, it's not necessary to educate the girl child. But I think a lot of emphasis is being put on the fact that education of the girl child is important, and the government is trying to secure schools so that children can go to school and feel safe; and that's why they've started the Safe School campaign [Safe Schools Initiative], which I believe Gordon Brown is involved in. And unfortunately, these girls have been through so much pain. And when I was looking at the pictures when they were released and they were reunited with their parents--just the tears. And you can just see the weight that the girls were carrying. So I hope now that they be released, that they will be rehabilitated properly, and reintegrated back into society, and they can continue with their education. A lot of them have stressed that they do want to continue with their education, and I hope the remaining girls that are still in captivity will be freed, and the parents can get to have their children back. Unfortunately, some of the girls have passed, according to reports that I've been given, and they have died; and others have been married off and their husbands have taken them to places where, you know, even the Boko Haram people don't know where they are, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah the-- Story_ID: 669756 Speaker 1: The north seems to be the most different part of Nigeria and if--correct me if I'm wrong--they're the largest population, right? In the, in the--northern Nigeria with the (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm not going to go into census because I don't have the statistics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There are always debates on what is what, so. Speaker 1: I know national news was made in the early 2000s when a girl was going to be given a hundred lashes for accusing her uncle of rape, and it wasn't--that was--it wasn't--the uncle wasn't punished for raping her--they didn't dispute that--they, they wanted to punish her for even accusing her uncle, 'cause that was wrong according to Sharia law, or something. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I mean places where they have that, there a lot of incidents where you hear the, the women are treated so badly, or even if sometimes they get killed, you know. So those are--and they try to put that under the banner of religion and their laws. And in my opinion, I believe that our faith should be guided by love and not laws; and when that love is there, how do you for any--how does one for any reason kill their fellow human being because they feel they have disobeyed some law? So those are all things that, according to their beliefs, they say that they have to do, but there are things that are so wrong where the woman doesn't have a say, where she is blamed for everything. And these are issues that have to be addressed because she's at such a disadvantage. A young child barely--a young female child, barely a teenager, maybe ten, maybe nine [years old], is married off and expected to give birth at that tender age once she's able to give birth; and of course that leads to all sorts of health problems. So, those are things that have to be addressed--childhood marriages that don't allow the young girl to live her life as a child. And usually, when she gets married and she gets pregnant, and during labor develops complications and develops what we call vesicovaginal fistula, she is now abandoned by the man who now takes another young girl, so their lives are just totally ruined. So, I do not see how religion can be supportive of destroying people's lives like that; so those are things that need to be addressed. Story_ID: 669757 Speaker 1: And we always ask this question, and I was reminded--when I, when I started to ask it, I thought of the song by--I think it's Sonny O- Sonny Okosun, 'Which Way Nigeria?' be- written in the '80s [1980s], you know, where he says, "Which way Nigeria--." But, but what are some of your hopes and concerns about Nigeria today? Speaker 2: I hope that eventually they get it right. I hope that we're no longer a country that they keep saying has potential, but that we are able to harness that potential--that there's a focus on the youth and that there's a focus on health, a focus on education, a focus on the ability of--for the people to generate an income; and that corruption is put to a halt--or almost completely gotten rid of, and that when cases of corruption, they find them, there are consequences for corruption because it is wrong for people to take the wealth of a nation for their own private use while so many are suffering in squalor. And I think, also, that--I hope a time will come when Nigerians themselves begin to realize that it is their country, and that they take back--they regain that national pride, and they begin to challenge people that they elect--that they begin to realize that they, they--their future lies also in their hands. When you elect someone, you have to also continue to watch and make sure that the people you elected are serving you, and they are putting you first. Because when someone's elected in Nigeria, a lot of times it's seen as an avenue--not to serve, but to get rich; and that has to be stopped. And I--eventually, I also hope there's some form of unity where we see ourselves as Nigerians and not northerner or southerner, or not from the east or from the west, but love the country as one entity. And if we don't do that, then the ability of that country to stand as one nation is, is threatened and will always be threatened because people will put their ethnic beliefs first, and will put themselves or their ethnic group first. So, when you are in position it's not about the fact that you are from the north or from the south; you are a Nigerian and that's how you should look at that position you're holding, and you're there to serve all Nigerians. Story_ID: 669758 Speaker 1: One aspect of your life that we haven't talked about yet is the--is art; and you have--you're on the board of the--is it the Boston [Massachusetts] museum of fine art, or? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm on--I'm on the board of Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, and I'm also on the board of Beth Israel--the trustee advisory board of Beth Israel Deaconess hospital [Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], but that comes under healthcare so that's, you know, my--I feel any board that's dealing with healthcare issues is worthy and is important to be involved in, and contribute as a board member in terms of working with the hospital to try and get the best health outcomes for everyone, especially working within communities to make sure that people of different cultures don't feel intimidated seeking for healthcare; and that's what they're trying to do at Beth Israel now: to have that diversity--that reach out to people of different cultures to help them attain their healthcare goals and needs. Story_ID: 669759 Speaker 1: Going to Museum of Fine Arts [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts], my involvement came because the museum got a gift of Benin bronzes and, as you know, these Benin--the origin of the Benin bronzes was from the British during the punitive invasion of Benin; and being that I'm from the royal family, when they got these bronzes, they wanted to open up a gallery, and the Benin community, Museum of Fine Arts rightly felt, well, they needed to discuss it with the Benin community. And when they discussed it with the community and I was also called and asked what I thought, I said--well, the first thing was, I had to go and see the king and discuss the situation with the king because without the blessing of the king, no Benin person would participate in the opening of that gallery because those bronzes belong to the Benin kingdom. So the museum wrote a letter to the king of Benin--that's the late king; a new king has been installed today--his son [Ewuare II]. And so this was with Oba Erediauwa, the late king; and I met with him and explained the situation that these bronzes had been given to the museum, the museum will involve the community. And they would like to open up the gallery, but they realize that without permission from the king that the Benin community will not be involved. And that is something that was important to the Museum of Fine Arts, which I was pleased about--that they knew that the community needed--this was--they are just caretakers; this is the heritage of the Benin community. And I spoke to the king, who is like an uncle to me; and so he gave permission for the gallery--his blessing--he gave his blessing to the Benin community here for them to open the gallery and for the community to attend; and he also went--he also sent one of his brothers and two of his palace chiefs to come for the opening of the gallery, so--to show that this was something he had given his blessing to. And so the museum continues to work with the community, and one of the things I do on the visiting committee is I make sure that the museum does not forget the tradition--'cause these bronzes are not just objects; these bronzes have a meaning to the people, they have cultural significance. They were used at a time to depict events that were happening, they were used as a form of worship in some of the palace shrines; and so it's important that this history is not lost, and also that access is given to the community to go and see these bronzes, you know whenever they want to at the museum. So the community can go, you know--members of the community can get free passes to go into the museum to see the bronzes if it's a day when it's not the free night 'cause the museum has one evening that it's free. So those are the things--and also involvement of the museum in certain celebrations, the Benin community comes together to have--like when they celebrate the New Year, they have a Benin New Year they celebrate; and so sometimes some curators from the museum come and they attend the function to understand what the culture is all about. Speaker 2: Yeah, and one of the things I wanted to just mention, too, that we've been--in this country, we've been--Africa has been so vilified and, and reduced that this exhibit [Benin Kingdom Gallery] does--not only does it exhibit beautiful art, but it speaks to metallurgy in Africa at a time when people claim that it did not exist. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. I mean these works are so--as a matter of fact, sometimes they say a lot of these famous artists--Picasso [Pablo Picasso]--they got their inspiration from these sculptures that were being done in Africa; and these sculptures are so fine and so well done that people could not imagine that oh, Africa that we thought was so behind could produce things like this. But Africa was doing a lot of things before, you know, the West came. Story_ID: 669760 Speaker 1: I know you spoke to your re- your warm relationship with your husband [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington]. Tell us about your daughter [Temisan Oyowe Carrington]. Now, you have one daughter, right? Speaker 2: Yes. And that's my pride and joy, and one of my accomplishments because I feel that to be a parent is a privilege and should not be taken lightly. And I'm proud of the fact that she's become an accomplished young lady who puts humanity first. And the same principles and legacies that my father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] left me with I try to imbibe in her, and she also is following in that--in those footsteps. Story_ID: 669761 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to cover before I ask my last couple of questions? Speaker 2: What else would you like to ask me about? Speaker 1: Okay, the last two are very similar. The first one is when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything you would do differently? Speaker 2: I think basically, I've been lucky to have been given the right foundation, and to have been given--to have been guided right in life. So right from the start, my parents [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan and Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] had sort of put certain things and certain ideas and character traits that were important in life they had imbibed in me; and so I think those have been my guiding principles that have led me to do the things I have done, and I think those things have not led me astray. So I think that they set me on the right path on what's important in life. I mean, my family name, Ukponmwan, means honesty, and my father would always tell us about honesty being the best policy; and compassion being very important, character being very important. And so these are all the guiding principles that I have followed, so I think--and they're what I would like to continue to follow in things I do. Story_ID: 669762 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you still have things to do, but what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, social justice has been something that's been very important to me, and I think that social justice and defending the defenseless--those two things are things that I think are legacies that were passed on to me and I have tried to live up to and work towards achieving social justice for all wherever I can, I mean; and I think those are legacies I am passing on to my daughter [Temisan Oyowe Carrington] as well, and my nieces and nephews--the importance of it. Because one thing is that we don't choose our ancestors--that's not our decision; we don't choose the lineage we're born into--that is chosen for us. But what we can change, or choose, is our destiny. How do we define our destiny? How do we get and achieve what we need to achieve? Now, that becomes difficult if you're in a society where there's no social justice--if you're in a society where the opportunities are taken away from you. So, my, my aim and my whole philosophy in life is that it is very important that everybody is given an opportunity, is given a fighting chance to maximize their potential. Story_ID: 669763 Speaker 1: This leads to one last question before I ask the regular last question I ask, and that is I often--I run across African expatriates here like yourself; you--you're a Nigerian in America, you became a naturalized citizen, but there are many Nigerians and Ghanaians here, and people from Cameroon and other places--South Africa even, you know, and--I mean I went to an event in Chicago [Illinois] at Chicago State [Chicago State University] a few years ago, sponsored by the Ga Medical Association--these are just the Gas in Ghana; one of their groups, a subgroup. And it was a huge event to raise money to send to Ghana to build a hospital. And I just--it's--what I'm getting at is that there's so many people from--especially West Africa here--working as professionals. Does it--and I know why a lot of 'em are here because of the justice issues you, you talk about. They, they don't think they can, you know, stay there on a sustain- you know, basically because of all the problems. But do you feel you'll ever go back to Nigeria, or do you feel--what do you think your major contributions should be? Or what should your community here be doing to help Nigeria go forward? Speaker 2: I go back to Nigeria very often. My husband [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington]--my husband and I go back almost every year because we still involve ourselves with what's going on in Nigeria. We are very passionate about Nigeria, and I'm passionate about the fact that this is a country that is so blessed; it has so much talent. I mean you hear negative things about Nigeria here, but there are a lot of positive things about the people. These are people that--you know, they strive, they want to be the best of what they can be, but society is handing them, you know, a very raw end; and--but yet, despite everything, they wake up every day still striving to survive. And so, when they say about Nigerians--when you--they are pushed against the wall, they push the wall back because that's how resilient they are. So, I go back and my husband--we both go back together, and we try to see which ways we can guide the government to sort of pay attention to the people and to also work with a lot of non-profit organization, NGOs [nongovernmental organization], encourage them and see what can be done. Like the U.S. embassy consulate in Nigeria. They have named a youth fellowship--it's called Walter--it's called Carrington Youth Fellowship Initiative, CYFI, and it was named after my husband; and it--they have fellows. I think this is like their fifth year now. And it's bringing the youth, some youth, together--training them in issues of social justice, training them as entrepreneurs, training them in different areas. It's a one year program for the fellows. And what they try to do is help them imbibe the vision my husband has in terms of human rights, democracy, social justice, and sort of train a new crop of leaders, which is what we need, because maybe if we begin to change the mentality of the youth, we will get to a stage where they will become the leaders and they know better, and they will act different from, you know, what the older generation have done. So, we go back, we speak to them from time to time, and we interact with a lot of these--a lot of the youth because my focus is on the youth. I think that is where the future lies, you know? There is no future if we do not sort of harness the potential of our youth--that's what the country depends on. And they are very intelligent people; they are just waiting for an opportunity. So, I think that people over here, some do try to engage with people back home because being here, they have the privilege that some of their fellow Nigerians don't have back home. Story_ID: 669764 Speaker 1: And what about African Americans? Did you feel a, feel a special bond with African Americans? And how is it different from the bond you feel with other Nigerians? Speaker 2: I'm a people person. It doesn't matter where you come from. I try and bond with everybody; I don't restrict myself. I feel that as a human being--we're all human beings regardless of your race, regardless of your color, regardless of your sex, you are--we are one; and so in that context, I find myself bonding with everyone. And I think--it depends on the individual, so--but my main thing is spreading love--just loving one's neighbor as one would love one's self; just paying attention, being your neighbor's keeper, being, you know, the fellow human beings keeper. So I think those are things that are important. It doesn't matter where the person is from, who the person is with, what socioeconomic status the person belongs to--we are all human beings. Story_ID: 669765 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I answer that question in a different way because how I'd like to be known, even now, is to be known as somebody who believes strongly in social justice, to be known as someone who will stand for the truth and not bend to lies; someone who chooses humanity against inhumanity, someone who chooses kindness against brutality; someone who chooses love against hatred. Because I think these are all the things that are important to us as human beings--that we need to embrace so that we can have some form of peace in the world, you know? Because I remember as a kid, my mother [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan] would always say--my mother, like I--she loved to sing spiritual songs because she was brought up as a Baptist. And I would remember--she would always tell us, "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you; you want to be loved, you love first, and love will come back to you." And she would always tell us to keep active, to be busy, to be doing good, doing what we can in our own way. And she said, "Because when you are idle, that is when, you know, the mind gets into mischief." So I just try to do what I can in my own way, and I think if we all try to do what we can in our own way, we'll find that we will get somewhere. It's like everybody doing their part--eventually, the work is done. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 669766 Speaker 1: That's a picture of my father, Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan. He died October 30th, 1997; and he was a great influence in my life and taught me a lot, and I still miss him so much and I write poems to him. And this is a poem I wrote to him a couple of years ago, and it reads: to father from daughter. You taught me about honesty, you taught me about strength, you taught me to be bold in a world that favors men. Education meant the world to you. As an orphan, you said it was your light; it made that difference between day and night. Education should be paramount in every child's life. You believed in integrity; you said, "Hold your head up high, try and be above reproach in all aspects of life." Community was important--, "Be your neighbor's keeper," you would say. "Help others when you may, including those you meet on the way." Thank you for your legacy, for values I hold dear. Courage, compassion and character you always used to stress. Defend the defenseless, and all those in distress. From your daughter, Arese Carrington [HistoryMaker Dr. Arese Carrington]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That was beautiful. Thank you. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me; I think I was about five [years old] there, with my dad. It was on a Sunday; we'd just come back from church and we were taking family pictures. And I know it was on a Sunday 'cause I'm wearing my church hat. Speaker 2: And that's my mom, Dora Ukponmwan, nee Obaseki [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan]. My mother, too, was very dear to me; she died June 13th, 2013, and I also miss her dearly. She's in a traditional outfit. Speaker 1: My parents on their wedding day in England, London. I believe that was December 31st, 1952, I think. Speaker 2: My parents loved to travel, and for wedding anniversaries they would go to different parts of the world; and that was taken, I think, in Paris [France]. Speaker 1: That's my mother dressed as a Benin princess--she's from the royal family of Benin; and there's a picture where I'm also dressed as a Benin princess, but that's the one of my mother dressed as a Benin princess. Speaker 2: Those are my parents on their fortieth wedding anniversary, either fortieth--yes, fortieth; and they went on a cruise. Speaker 1: My parents, and that was a picture they took at a studio in London. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's a picture of me dressed in the Nigerian traditional outfit, and this outfit is more from the western side of the country. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my daughter Temisan [Temisan Oyowe Carrington], and that was her graduation at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me dressed in the Benin traditional outfit--dressed as a Benin--like a Benin princess. Speaker 2: That's a picture of our family home in Benin; and my father loved his lawn, so whenever I see a lawn that's well manicured I remember my childhood 'cause I used to play a lot when we'd go home for Christmas there. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me when I became a U.S. citizen--that's in Baltimore [Maryland] in 1995. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mom when she came to visit me after I had moved to the states, so that was in the year 2000. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me the day I was chose- at Harvard [Harvard School of Public Health; Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts] the day I was chosen to be the Harvard's graduate orator, so I took this picture just outside where the final competition was held and I knew I was going to be the orator. Story_ID: 669767 Speaker 1: That's a picture of me with some of my classmates during graduation at Harvard--that was 2000. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my husb- that's a picture of me and my husband. This was in Nigeria at a function with some other diplomats. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of some of the w- spouses or wives of the heads of mission when we were in Nigeria, and we had this--the spouses from this group called Wives of Heads of Mission [ph.], WHOM. Speaker 2: That's a picture at one of our community projects at the--AIDS project [AIDS Prevention Initiative Nigeria] where we would go into the community and talk with the people and try and put together programs for them at the local community level. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: This was in 2001. Speaker 1: The same thing, 2001, with the communities. We would meet with the local community leaders, and there's some members of the ministry of health [Federal Ministry of Health] there with me, and we would talk to them about HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] projects that we want to bring to their community. Speaker 2: And that's also at one of the workshops at--around two--this was around 2001, too, at some of the communities. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me with my daughter when she was about five years old. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my graduation as a doctor at University College Hospital [University College Hospital, Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria], and there's my father [Elisha Noyoze Ukponmwan] shaking my hands. Speaker 1: And that's on the day of graduation just before the ceremony, and this was 1980. Speaker 2: And that's 1980, too, the day of graduation as a medical doctor; and there's my mom [Dora Obaseki Ukponmwan] shaking my hand. Speaker 1: And that's a picture with the former president of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo--President Obasanjo, and this was at a conference here in Washington, D.--in Washington, D.C., in the states. Speaker 2: And that's a picture of me as the vice president of United Nations Association of Greater Boston giving the speech at one of our fundraising events. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me in the Museum of Fine Arts [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] when they opened the Benin gallery [Benin Kingdom Gallery]. Speaker 2: And that's a picture at a UN Day luncheon here in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: That's a picture around 2001 too in Nigeria on one of the HIV/AIDS projects, so I'm talking with some of the Nigerian officials there at a workshop. Speaker 2: And that's a picture when--with President Olusegun Obasanjo, a former president of Nigeria when I went to hand him the letter that Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation had given Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts] a grant for HIV prevention in Nigeria. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me at Harvard, 2000, getting my degree at the Harvard School of Public Health. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's--that's a picture of me giving the Harvard graduate school commencement address two--the year 2000, at the Harvard University commencement. Speaker 2: That's a picture of former President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], his wife, and with my husband and myself when they came to Nigeria. Speaker 1: A picture of me with Mrs. Carter [Rosalynn Carter] at one of the local markets in Abuja [Nigeria]. Speaker 2: Picture of me at a conference with former president of Ghana, Jerry Rawlings. Speaker 1: A picture of me at a function with my husband, Ambassador Carrington [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington]. It was a farewell function that one of our friends had for us, and they made this African outfit which we changed into during the function. Speaker 2: A picture with President Carter when he visited Nigeria. Speaker 1: A picture with President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. This was a--at an AIDS conference that was held in Abuja, and he attended. Speaker 2: This is a picture at the Oval Office [White House, Washington, D.C.]. My husband and I went to see President Clinton at the Oval Office. Speaker 1: A picture of me at the presidential inauguration--of the second presidential inauguration of President Clinton. Speaker 2: And that's also at the same event; that's my husband and I at that function. Speaker 1: Picture of me getting my master's [degree] from the school of public health, so that was at Harvard School of Public Health. Speaker 2: This is the last one. Speaker 1: And that's my manuscript, 'Defend the Defenseless' [Arese Carrington], which I've just finished, and it's about my experience during the Nigerian Civil War [Biafran War], and also about the military dictatorship of General Sani Abacha in Nigeria; those were the two darkest eras of Nigeria. And also talks about the hopes for Nigeria going forward. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my daughter, Temisan [Temisan Oyowe Carrington], and that was--she was class of '07 [2007] at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] where she graduated. Speaker 1: And how do you spell her name? Speaker 2: Her name is spelled T-E-M-I-S-A-N, and that's my pride and joy...