 Story_ID: 5372 Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer. This interview is talking place on Friday, March 18, 2005 in Chevy Chase, Maryland. Now, if you would please, for the record, tell us your full name, including your middle name and spell it. Speaker 2: Do I have to? Speaker 1: You have to. Speaker 2: My name is Janet Leola Floyd Langhart Kistner Cohen. Speaker 1: And can you spell that, please? Speaker 2: J-A-N-E-T, is Janet; Leola IS L-E-O-L-A, Floyd, F-L-O-Y-D, and Langhart, L-A-N-G-H-A-R-T. And one of my names--do you need that? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Kistner, K-I-S-T-N-E-R, and my last, last name is Cohen, C-O-H-E-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and just look right at me. And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Indianapolis, Indiana, December 22, on a Monday, 1941. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently, I'm a media consultant and media trainer for my own company, which is Langhart Communications. Story_ID: 5373 Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have to pick a favorite? Food is like children to me. Food is bread. My favorite food is bread. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Winter. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color, depends on what I'm doing with that color. If I'm wearing it, it's black. If it's in the room with me, it's green. If I'm looking at a flower, it's pink, and then, maybe this is a, a waffling answer, but I love the rainbow. Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation des--destination is home. During my career, I've traveled all over the world. During my husband's [William Cohen] time at the Department of Defense as Secretary of Defense, I saw, I've seen a lot of the world. So I'm very happy to be home. I'm on vacation when I'm home. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one? Speaker 2: I have several. Speaker 1: Please share it with us. Speaker 2: One of my favorite sayings is, "if it is to be, it is up to me". My second favorite would probably be "this too will pass". And then as a third, may I share a third? Speaker 1: Please. Speaker 2: Whenever you have a little disappointment and you're down, I remember Yeats saying, "Ah, defeat, another opportunity to rise again." Story_ID: 5374 Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother first, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl. Speaker 2: My beloved mother was born, Russell [pronounced Roosell] Mary Louise Gillenwaters. Speaker 1: And could you spell Russell for us? Speaker 2: It's like Russell, R-U-S-S-E-double L. Speaker 1: Okay, and Gillenwaters. Speaker 2: Mary Louise, Gillenwaters is G-I-double L-E-N-W-A-T-E-R-S. And I'm told it is Anglosized Indian name. I think it's a Shawnee name. And I think the Shawnee had the name as well, which was Fish in Water. So when my grandfather went to school, they said, you can't have a name like Fish in Water. So they, they called him--his name was Toad, Fish in Water, and they named him James Gillenwaters. So that's the name that stuck on the maternal side of my family. Speaker 1: And where did your mother grow up as a girl? Speaker 2: Well, my mother was born in Allen County, Kentucky, Scottsville, Kentucky. I've never been there, but plan to go there. And she was born in 1923, September 5, 1923 and migrated, as so many black people of her generation did, migrated North and the adjacent state to Kentucky would be--geographically, would be Indiana. So they moved to Indiana, and that's where I was born. Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl growing up and the things that she enjoyed doing, that kind of thing? Speaker 2: My mother had a very sad life because she lost her mother at the age of four years old. Her mother didn't die. Her mother was admitted to a mental institution in Hopkinsville, Kentucky. So my mother, apparently, her aunts and uncles brought her to Indianapolis. And she was, from one aunt to one uncle, which wasn't a very happy time for her. And then at the age of about twelve or thirteen, she entered an orphanage, and oddly enough, she said, that was the happiest time of her life. And that happiness though lasted for about a year and she wanted to leave. She wanted to be on her own, and she ran away from the orphanage. And in jumping over the fence, she broke her leg at the age of thirteen, so that the number thirteen, bad luck number. And then she went to live with another aunt and uncle, one of whom is my favorite in the whole world. The man walked on water. My Uncle George, George Gillenwaters. And then shortly thereafter, my mother had a daughter, my older sister, Myrna. And then sixteen months later, she had another daughter, and that would be me. Speaker 1: Now, your sister, Myrna, she--your aunt and uncle raised her as their own, right? Speaker 2: Yes, the same aunt and uncle that my mother spent the most amount of her youth with, also raised my mother. My mother had my sister when she was very young and unmarried. And in those days, you would become a ward of the state if you were an orphan and you had a child as, as a youth. So my Uncle George said, no, we will take the child and we'll take them both in. And my uncle raised my sister just as he had reared my mother for the most part. And she had a very happy life with him, and my Aunt Leola, the person I'm named for. Speaker 1: And how would describe your mother? Speaker 2: At this time in my life retrospectively looking back at my mother, an extraordinarily strong woman, faithful, determined--a word she often used on me, very, very bright and intuitive, a good teacher. And some of the basic values that I have were taught to me as long and as far back as I can remember. They weren't taught to me by teachers or Sunday school teachers. They were taught to me by my mother. Story_ID: 5375 Speaker 1: Let's talk now about your father, starting with his name and his background as well. Speaker 2: My father, my natural father's name is Sewell Bridges. Sewell is spelled S-E-W-E-double-L, and Bridges is B-R-I-D-G-E-S. And he too was born in Kentucky, near where my mother was born. And I believe he was born either in Glasgow or Bowling Green. I think they're ten or fifteen, maybe twenty minutes apart. And, but they didn't meet until they came to Indianapolis. They met in church, at a church called Mount Parren Baptist Church in 1940. But my father is one, I believe of three or four children. I understand he had a very strong mother, which I identify deeply--I've just gotten a picture of her countenance in the last year since the book was pub--my book was published. Her name was Rosie, Rosie Bridges. And it seems that all the women in my family, on both sides of my family, were strong women. Speaker 1: And I know that it was later in life when you really began to develop a relationship with your father, but how would you describe your father? Speaker 2: I really didn't, Racine, I really didn't have a relationship with my father. I first saw my father when I was seven years old. It was during World War II. I was born about fifteen days after, after the declaration of war, after Pearl Harbor hit on December 7th, I was born on December 22nd; hope I did the math right. My father had been sent off--he was in the Army. He had been sent off overseas. And in those days, we didn't know where anybody was. And this is before my parents were married, and we thought he may be coming back or they thought he may be coming back sooner. And it was, we didn't see him, I certainly didn't meet him until I was seven. The war was long over. It was in 1948. It was the spring that President Harry S. Truman used an executive order to integrate our military. I remember that period very well in terms of people talking about it. And my mother would say to me, "You look just like your father." And I would say, "What does he look like? I've never seen him, what does he look like?" And she would point at a man in the street that she thought resembled my father, and she'd say, he looks like him, looks like him. And I said, well, "Where is he?" And she said, "He's in the Army. He's fighting the war." And I would see pictures on the news reel in the movies. I would see billboards on buses of men in their uniforms and feel really proud that my father was one of those men because I remember seeing old men on buses get up and give their seats to young men in uniform. So I thought that's really something. And the war was over. My father was coming to see me on his way to see his mother in Kentucky. And he stopped in Indianapolis. And I remember taking piano lessons at the time. And it was my day to take piano lessons, but I couldn't, couldn't concentrate so I sat on the porch that morning, that I knew he was coming to see me. And I could see off in the horizon other people coming, and as the people got close and I could see it was a man, I thought that might be my father. But he didn't have an army uniform on, so I--(smacking sound). And finally there was someone with duffle bag coming up the road, smoking his cigarette, I remember. And as he got closer, he kept coming closer to our house, and he would smile. And then he got around the fence, and then I stood up on the porch. He dropped the duffle bag and threw the cigarette away, and opened his arms for me to come. And I remember he scooped me up, gave me a big kiss and asked me was I his baby. And I--he looked so much like the guys in, in the movies pictures, in the newsreels because he had the uniform on. And I remember his hugging and kissing me, and I remember the rough wool from the army wool. In those days, it wasn't as refined as it is now, and so to rub it up against your skin, it's like getting a beard burn. But I remember his smelling like spearmint gum, so he wanted to be fresh for us. And then we went on into the house. And for a man to be coming home from the military was a big thing in those days. And we lived in a boarding house with a lady by the name of Miss Maggie. In black neighborhoods of that socio-economic background during that time, elders were called by their first name, but it was always a Miss Maggie or Mr. John or a Mr. David or whatever. Miss Maggie was the, the head lady of the boarding house. And my Aunt Leola was there and other cousins and people coming around, and I just marveled at my father. He was so beautiful. And mom asked me to play something on the piano, as little children were often asked to do. And then I remember the adults beginning to talk more seriously about the war, what that was like, and my father making a trip below the Mason-Dixon line to go to Kentucky to see his mother. And he was saying, I don't know whether I'm gonna wear this uniform. And someone said, but you look so good in it. He said, I'm proud to wear it, but I understand colored soldiers are being beaten, lynched, murdered for wearing these uniforms. I know I'm gonna sit on the back of the bus, but I'm not sure I'm gonna wear this uniform and draw attention to myself. I want to get home in one piece. Story_ID: 5376 Speaker 1: I'd had some indoctrination to what race and racism meant from the time I was five going to a Klan meeting till the time they wouldn't serve us in an Indianapolis restaurant. It was very subtle racism. It wasn't the kind that had signs up, colored only. I never heard the word, the "n" word, but I knew we weren't welcome. It was, the word they used in Indiana during those days was "restricted". So when adults saw signs like restricted, we knew weren't welcome. So I'd had some tinges of it. But hearing my father [Sewell Bridges] talk and watching the look, particularly on my Aunt Leola's face--I remember once, all of my folks, my, my mother, my mother's or my father's mother, my aunts, uncles they worked in service, domestic work. They worked in the house of white people. So they would come home and tell stories about what it was like. And I remember my Aunt Leola having worked in the home of whites, had said, had brought a little baby home one summer, a little girl. And it was the first time I'd ever seen blue eyes in my life. And she looked like a baby, a little doll baby. And she had put her on the couch, and a little pillow next to her so she wouldn't roll over. And I remember it was summertime, I came through the door and saw her, and she's crying. And I was trying to pacify her to prevent her from crying, and I picked her up because she's about six months, easy to manage and adorable. And my Aunt Leola came through the room, and said, "put that thing down". And I was startled, I'm holding a baby. She said, "put that thing down", and I said, well, maybe she doesn't think I know how to hold the head, that I'm not gonna be a good holder, so I put the baby down. And she said, "You'll fall in love with that thing like you fall in love with your baby dolls, but as soon as it grows up, it's gonna call you a "n" word." So that, I remember that. Every racial or racist incident registered because it hurts. You remember. Connecting the dots is kind of hard. It takes a while. So when my father was talking about his having to be on the back of the bus, we really didn't have to do that in Indiana, in Northern Indiana and Central Indiana. But I knew that our people had to do that in some places. So when he talked about maybe he might be lynched or murdered, that was scary. And we had also heard that crosses had been burned on his mother's lawn during the time he was serving his country in a far-away place. So that was startling to me. It bothered me, and I watched my Aunt Leola, and then I watched my mother [Russell Gillenwaters] who gave everybody a look and said, we're not gonna have anything like that in this house. White people may need their humanity, but we're not gonna be like them. Story_ID: 5377 Speaker 1: Did you know your paternal grandparents at all? Speaker 2: No. Oh, yes, I should say, in a way I did because my mother had sent me down to be with my father's [Sewell Bridges] mother very early on. I was about six months when I went down, I think, to be with her. I think my mother had to work and needed somebody and there was nobody in the general area. So it was natural in those days to send kids South to their grandparents. And I--from what my mother tells me, I stayed with my gram, I call her now, Rosie, Rosie Bridges, my father's mother, I stayed with her for about three months. And it's funny how you feel a person. I understand that she held me the whole time I was there. She would hold me while she was cooking. She would hold me when she's hanging clothes up on the line. She would hold me for whatever, and later I found out that that's a very African thing, a very, sort of basic to the, salt to the earth thing, that you hold your child all the time and never lay it down. And it could have been they didn't want to lay it down because there was no one to watch it or whatever, but I felt that warmth and love. And somehow, looking back, when I think about it, I missed it when I came back and my mother had to leave me with strangers to take care of me, who didn't do that. So, yeah, I felt her, I felt her impact, and I--as time went on--and perhaps I'm getting ahead of your story, but after the book was published, "From Rage to Reason: My Life in Two Americas", my cousins, my paternal cousins, my father's nieces and nephews came to find me, came to gather me and invite me into the fold because all the time I was growing up, my grandmother and they were keeping scrapbooks of me. I'd be on television or "JET Magazine" or "Ebony Magazine" or whatever magazine, "Glamour", whatever, my grandmother was keeping a scrapbook. And she never called me, never tried to find me. And I asked my cousin who, who had the courage to come to me and say, why didn't you all say something to me before, particularly when she was alive. And they said, well, "We didn't know that you knew Sewell was your father. We didn't know we knew. And when we read your book, we discovered you knew who he was. So we felt it safe to come." Story_ID: 5378 Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up? What's one of the first things you remember? Speaker 2: My earliest memory--is being at the [Ku Klux Klan] Klan meeting. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. This is--. Speaker 2: My mother was working for a white couple in the suburbs of Indianapolis, and they had two lovely daughters. I was about five, maybe four or five, and they were ten or twelve or whatever, and it was in, in what we call Indian summer in October. And I remember playing with them. They were awfully nice to me. They would give me their ribbons cause I had long pigtails or plaits as you call 'em, and, and they were silk ribbons. And they would say, let Janet have our ribbons. She doesn't have any ribbons. And in one of the pictures in my book, I'm wearing their ribbons. And it's--I never thought of it being second hand except that they belonged to two very sweet girls. But one Indian summer afternoon a parade of cars were coming by, a caravan of cars were coming by, big black, shiny cars with bug-eyed lamps and beautiful grills that looked like faces. And the girls would say to me, Sally and Jane, I don't remember their names, but those are the names I gave them, said, let's go see where they're going. And I said, okay. So I went with them, and I remembered, they had me in the middle and holding my hand or running up, following the cars. And we were on this, this slope, looking down at a grade. And we can see the cars there, and we saw--and what was strange to me, it was children. It was women, men, but everybody was wearing white, white robes. And I thought that was fascinating, and we're lying on our bellies looking over at this. And then as it started to get dark, as it does during October, it gets dark earlier, the girls looked at me and said, oh, stars are beginning to come out; come on, we got to go. And just before we did that, they put something over their heads that looked like pillow slips, hoods, and they began to chant something. All of them were chanting in a strange formation. And then at the end of the clearing, this puff of flame, just (whoosh sound). It was a cross, and it was burning, and I thought as a child, fire is fascinating. And I wanted to yell out, but I remembered the girls had asked me to be quiet because they told me, we'd get into trouble if they found out we had you here. And I thought it was because I was little, and they were taking me far from home. And later--I didn't tell mother. When we got home, the kids went up, the girls went up to get ready for their dinner. My mother was preparing their parents dinner. After she prepared their dinner, I stopped with my little coloring books, and she and I had dinner. And I thought about telling her, but then I thought, no. I'd already been admonished about being quiet, going too far from home. And I thought I wouldn't tell mother that until years later we were watching TV. And I saw a Klan meeting on TV, and I said, I was at one of those. And mother said, no, you weren't (laughter), you wouldn't have survived. And I said, I was there, I saw it. This is what they do and whatever. And she said, you were? And I, and I said, yeah, I said, I can tell you the lady you were working for when, when this happened. And then mother remembered there used to be a lot of Klan meetings cause in those days, the Klansmen would walk out of their offices with their Klan uniforms on or robes, and so mother would see that. And so she knew that, well, maybe I had too. And I told her exactly how it happened. The little girls had gave me their ribbons and how nice they were. So that's one of my first memories. One of my other memories is probably sitting in front of a potbelly stove in another boarding house in a rocking chair and watching galoshes--I don't know if you know what galoshes are, but they're overshoes, rubber overshoes. We called them galoshes. And when you wear them out in the cold, they get real stiff. But if you put 'em by the stove, as they get warm, they fall over. And so I remember their falling over and scaring me, and I flipped over in the rocking chair and everybody laughing. And I remember that's the first time, I didn't like people laughing at me. It's the first time I felt embarrassed, that feeling. Story_ID: 5379 Speaker 1: And what about holidays and birthdays and, were those very special times? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother. You asked me about my mother [Russell Louise Gillenwater] earlier and my memories of her and what was she like. Considering she only had a ninth grade education and was bantered here and there, with aunt and uncle and very dysfunctional situation. She lost her mother to mental illness very early. It was amazing how my mother could think about birthdays and not just our birthdays and Christmas, but we wore green on St. Patrick's Day, and we wore black and orange on Halloween and Valentines Day. We had to draw valentines and ask people that we loved to be our valentine. Mother made our life and our home so full, and it's important to have tradition, to connect to something from your past, and particularly, if it connects to your common culture, then you're able, you're able to connect to other people when they have the ritual Hallmark days, I call them now. But my mother made sure that cleanliness was next to godliness, to always give people the benefit of the doubt that they had as much sense as you did, couldn't pull anything over on them, to be faithful, to say your prayers. I mean I was an adult, and I found myself one night saying, "Now, I lay me down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to keep", and then I realized, I've got to get a, a more adult prayer here. But it was that ritual, that repetition that mother insisted that we pray in a bowed position, in a reverent position, on our knees on the side of the bed, hands folded and focused and concentrating. Those are the things I remember. We lived very poorly. We lived in the homes with other people quite a bit, and very humble places; didn't have running water, electricity sometimes, but cleanliness was, was critical. And it didn't surprise me. I remember when I went overseas on my first trip to Africa, it didn't surprised me, but it surprised the other members of the crew, my film crew who were white that this African woman who lived in a hut with a dirt floor could be immaculate because we asked to see her house to film it. And we went in, and while her floor was a dirt floor, it was swept. Her vessels were stacked and clean. The bed was made, the children were clean. She was clean, no running water, no electricity. It was here, in the, in the character. Story_ID: 5380 Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood? Speaker 2: There's something called asphidity [bag], and I don't know--I'm saying correctly. I'm saying it phonetically, but I don't know how to spell it, and I've been trying to ever since I discovered my new family, but they're part Indian. They would know. They know what it is, but they don't know the root of it. It's a thing when I came back from living with my grandmother in Kentucky, mother discovered that I had a necklace around my neck that was made of some sort of hyde and a gauze bag that was gathered and inside was something that looked like dried liver. And it had a horrible smell. And either the Indians or the Africans, but the primitiveness of my heritage--and I say that lovingly, thought that would ward off the evil spirits of colds, scarlet fever, chicken pox, measles, the devil, whatever (laughter). That's something I remember-- Speaker 1: As a smell. Speaker 2: --as a smell. It had a pungent odor. It was foul. Speaker 1: And what sights and sounds. Speaker 2: Another odor would be the cooking of chittlin's, I remember that. And you have to like chittlin's [chitterlings] to tolerate that smell, and I do like them. So I tolerate it. Another smell is lavender. My mother had a lot of lavender and sage in the house. And I remember the, the smell of my Aunt Bertha, my grandmother, my maternal grandmother's mother, she had big breasts, and thick, puffy white hair and freckles. And she looked like a white woman. We always thought she was white, but she kept her handkerchief down in her bosom with money in it. She'd tie her little coins, money, and the fragrance was something like patchoulie , do you know the fragrance of patchoulie? I don't know where she got that fragrance, but it was patchoulie because when I finally grew up and was, you know, sniffing the little things you sniff in the holistic stores, pechulie was there, and I said, ah--it took me all the way back to swinging on her porch in Kentucky with my head nestled in her breast, loving her, the patchoulie, so. Speaker 1: And what sounds and sights? Speaker 2: I like the sound, I like the sound of a baritone black man's voice. I remembered them screaming out in our neighborhood, "ice cold ice" or "rag man" or "brown-skin man". When he would holler brown skin man, that was the pigskins that they would burn to a crisp and sell them. You know, it's like we eat potato chips now. That was kind of a, a delicacy. Hearing also, horses' hooves on the pavement, that was the milkman coming. I like that sound. Speaker 1: What sights? Speaker 2: The sight of my mother coming home from work. She sometimes worked two jobs, and I could see her silhouette on the second job. I'd look out the window and I'd wait for her at night, and I could see the shape of her body and the way she walked. That was a great sight--when she was coming home. Story_ID: 5381 Speaker 1: I want to ask you a little bit about your community that you grew up in. Do you remember the name of the street that you lived on? Speaker 2: Locke Street--. Speaker 1: And can you give--. Speaker 2: L-O-C-K-E. Speaker 1: Can you describe it for us a little bit? Speaker 2: I grew up in a government project in Indianapolis, Indiana. And it was called Locke Field Gardens, L-O-C-K-E Gardens. And it was a huge--of course when I went back, it didn't seem so big. But as a little girl, it seemed huge. It was well built. It was brick. We were nice and warm. We had running water. We literally had gardens. That's why it was called Locke Field Gardens. And this is something President [Franklin D.] Roosevelt had decided to do in an experimental housing project to see if he could build housing for poor blacks. And the prerequisite to getting in is you had to be a dependent of a service member. That was a priority. You know, I think a lot of people got in that didn't, but I think it was built in 1936, so it was virtually brand new when we lived there in '48 [1948], '49 [1949]. And when we were living in the rooming house, my mother had a dream that she had literally climbed a ladder to get into this, this apartment in Locke Field Gardens. And the people there, of course, were all black, all upwardly mobile. Before the days of integration black people lived together regardless of their socio-economic backgrounds. There were doctors and lawyers and there were postmen and teachers and there were day laborers and domestic like my mother, who lived there. And it was relatively safe. After a while, drugs started to infiltrate our neighborhood. I remember seeing a young man with a needle in his arm having a, an overdose later on. But it was a lovely place, and I always felt good around my own people because I knew as I got older, there was a world out there that if I wanted to be successful, because it seemed to be where success lay, in the integrated or white society, that I'd have to go out into that world. So I enjoyed and savored my all-black schools, my all-black church, my all-black neighborhood. Story_ID: 5382 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about elementary school. What was the name of the elementary school you attended? Speaker 2: The first one was School Number 26 on the East side of Indianapolis. I was there in the first grade. That's where the picture was taken with the little girls' ribbons which were now my ribbons. I remember my uncle, one of my uncles taking me to school there in a buckboard. He was a junkman, and he'd pick up junk and stuff and iron on the way to wherever he would go. He had a horse, an old beaten-up horse. And I thought it was really something to be taken to school in a, in a buckboard. And he'd help me get out, and all the kids were kind of--it was kind of going to school in a big car now-a-days. And I remember that. I went to, to that school for about a year. And then I moved--we moved to Locke Field. And I went to School Number 24, which was an extraordinary little school. I'll go back and look at it, and it's like one little school room. It had several, but it just looks so small now. And shortly thereafter, about the fourth grade, fifth grade, I went to School Number 17, which was very close to my high school, one of the finest high schools in the world, certainly in this country. It was called Crispus Attucks High School. It was named for the first American to have fallen during the Revolutionary War, who just happened to be black. Speaker 1: And during elementary school, were there any teachers who had a particular influence on you? Speaker 2: Oh, all of them, every single one of them. We were blessed, and, and I think we kind of even knew it then. Sometimes you can be in the moment even if you are a little person. I knew I had superior teachers. I couldn't wait to get to school. It wasn't just that school came easily for me. It was my teachers were interesting and cared about us. I remember a Mrs. Bryant, where she let us have tadpoles in a little bowl. And we watched them grow into frogs. That was wonderful. I remember Mrs. Willette, who wore a serape and always loved talking about Spanish things and Latin things. And she probably is the reason I can speak Spanish now, that interest was inspired early. I remember some, I remember my home ec [economics] teacher, Mrs. Cox, who insisted that we learn how to make spoon biscuits. It wasn't enough to get ready for the new world where women might have equal opportunity. You'd better still know how to do the home ec (unclear). And she said that would make you have a great duality of contribution. I remember Mr. Ramsey who was my Spanish teacher in high school who got me my scholarship to Butler University. Story_ID: 5383 Speaker 1: What type of student were you in elementary school? Speaker 2: I was very good. I was a pretty smart kid in elementary school. As time went on, and I discovered boys, my grades, you know, sort of slipped (laughter). But I recovered in, in time to go to college. Speaker 1: And what type of child were you during this time? Speaker 2: Not precocious, but curious, interested in things, questioning, would talk back to my mother; not to others, but to my mother [Russell Louise Gillenwaters] cause my mother is only--you have to remember, she's only about seventeen or eighteen years older than I. And she was a very modern woman, had limits and values, but she also had leeway for me, that I could speak up. I could say what I wanted to say, express my ideas, and she'd try to find answers for me. So I was very outgoing and very interested in things and people and my environment. Story_ID: 5384 Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations, like what did you want to be when you grew up? Speaker 2: Well, I knew I wanted to be successful, but I didn't know what came in between those quotes "successful". I knew because of the indoctrination of my mother and elders around me that you must be somebody and the road to that was education, doing your homework. Mother [Russell Louise Gillenwater] wanted to add frills to that with music and language, speaking the language. It was very important in our family. My mother stressed that you must speak grammatically correct. You must enunciate. And despite anybody saying, you talk white, no, I talk correctly. I speak well. And that was stressed. Cleanliness was stressed, not just cleanliness of person, your, your person, your body, but of your mind and your soul, to harbor negative thoughts could be deteriorating. It could be harmful. I'm digressing cause I'm trying to think what was your question to me. Speaker 1: No, I, I had just asked you what were your dreams and aspirations? Speaker 2: Oh, my dreams were to realize all of those, those tasks that were given me; to say, I'm going to be all the things mom wants me to be. She had a dream that she wanted me to be a concert pianist. And while that sounded pretty, I didn't have the discipline or inclination to study what you have to--how long you have to study. I was only seven or eight years old, and I didn't have the vision, the view that she had. But I knew I wanted to be somebody. I wanted--and I think it's what I wanted. I know that's what was wanted around me, for me, was to get an education and have enough knowledge and intelligence to create opportunities that no one could ever take from you, regardless of race, regardless of whether or not you are married, that you could be your own person, make your own decisions on your own terms. If you want to pick a vocation, I think the first thing that comes to most little girls in that generation is either being a teacher or a nurse. I thought I wanted to do more than that with it. I thought I could be a missionary. I thought--I remember the first song I learned in Sunday school was "Jesus wants me for a sunbeam, to shine his light on thee". So I took that rather seriously, you know, if Jesus wants me, because Jesus was this great, omnipotent, you know, almost God-like. In the, in Protestant, he's not quite God. He's son of God, but omnipotent being that if he chose you, to be chosen, then you want to be good. And you want to please. Story_ID: 5385 Speaker 1: What was the name of the church you attended growing up? Speaker 2: Mount Olive Baptist Church. Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there? Speaker 2: I didn't like going to church, only because they seemed to speak in a language I didn't understand. I think that's one of the reasons I got into communications. And oddly enough, one of my majors was religion because in the university I had to take old and New Testament in order to be a missionary, ultimately. And I remember reading in the scriptures that it was the Lord who said, "speak in the tongue o the people", and I thought, they're not doing this, at least for me, as a kid. There--they would go over and over the bible depending on the season. Here we are, we're upon the Palm Sunday, as we're having this interview, and then Easter will follow. Well, in our church, he would do a sermon, a recurring theme from last season at this time. And I was looking for the message. What does this have to do with me? I have problems. I have questions. Where are the answers? Where are the solutions in your message? You know, that happened two, three thousand years ago, so its relevance to me? And I remember mother often accusing me as being blasphemous, you know, by questioning or challenging something as serious as the pastor of the church or the word even. Story_ID: 5386 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your experiences at Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana]. Speaker 2: It was a great time. It was a great school. I think I may have said to you earlier, we got a really good education. Segregation was a bitter-sweet thing for a lot of black people because obviously segregated away from the larger society, we missed some things. And that's unnatural. We're all human, but within our culture and our people, it was convenient and comfortable and, and beautiful things began to nurture from that. I was able to get an excellent education because many of the teachers I had were trained to be college professors, and because they could not get jobs due to segregation or racism or whatever tokenism or quotas were all filled. So residual good teachers would be in, in, in high school teaching high school children. Speaker 1: What kinds of activities were you involved in, in high school? Speaker 2: I was, I played in the band and the orchestra. Speaker 1: What did you--? Speaker 2: I played the flute. I've just began taking lessons again, and I'm pretty good, if I may say so. But I was first chair in the orchestra, second chair in the band. And it wasn't really to go, to play the flute. I wanted to be a drum majorette, and our band teacher said, you can be a majorette, but first you got to play an instrument. And--to show you how good the school was, learn something before you show off. And I never was a majorette. I learned to play the flute and loved and excelled at it. Speaker 1: And anything else? Were you in student government or school newspaper? Speaker 2: I was on the debating team. I loved playing devil's advocate. I loved argument. There was a side of me that wanted to be litigator, a lawyer, and--. Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about college when you were in high school? Speaker 2: I knew I had to go. I'd had enough of school. I thought I knew everything, but I knew that the world outside had a couple of strikes against me because I was black, because I was poor. And it hadn't even occurred to me that I was a woman, that that would be a problem. That had always been an asset, being a black woman, for the most part. But I knew I had to get a degree. And they say, you can take that degree everywhere and be ahead of the class or be ahead of the line, an employment line. And I went to Butler University after acquiring a scholarship, a religious scholarship from Mr. Ramsey, who helped me, my Spanish teacher. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Crispus Attucks? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty nine [1959]. Story_ID: 5387 Speaker 1: One thing I want to ask you about that we didn't talk about. I think Emmett Till, I know that that had a particular impact on you. Can you tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Yes, I can, and if I, if you recall, I told you my sister's about sixteen months older than I. And although we didn't live together--she lived in one part of town, and I lived in another, she lived in the part of town that was more affluent and more integrated with whites. And I lived in the ghetto more or less. And I don't say that in the pejorative. It was all black. We had our problems, but it was all black. And we were debating because integration had come about on the national scene, and those of us who lived in the all-black areas had a opportunity, if you want to call it that, or a choice to go anywhere we wanted to school. And my sister had said, well, we got to live with white folks. Let's just get it on. Let me go to the integrated school. Let's start learning it now, being associated with them now. And I was sort of hesitant, and then I was about fourteen. And Emmett Till was fourteen that year. And when we saw in "JET Magazine" and heard through the grapevine that they had murdered, lynched, mutilated, castrated, brutalized this fourteen-year old boy, not man, boy who had come I think from, was it Michigan or Illinois. Was it Michigan? Speaker 1: I know it was somewhere. I'm not sure if it was Chicago? Speaker 2: He came from North to Mississippi and didn't know the ways of the South. And I understand his cousin sort of, as boys do, egged him on, and he allegedly whistled at this white woman. And they came for him. We all know that horrible story, don't we? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And that story reverberated in my neighborhood. And I saw his picture. As you know, his mother wanted his picture shown. I saw it in "JET Magazine", and I thought all the race stories I've heard, the slights I've seen by white people, understanding how they treat us, remembering the Klan meeting, later learning what that meant, and then I thought, I know where I'm going to school. I'm going to an all-black school. If my sister feels like she needs to get it on now since she's gonna live with them, since we're gonna have to live and work with this ilk of being, let me get as much nurturing of my own people, my own soul, my own culture, to strengthen me so that I'll be like an oak when I have to go out and deal with the winds or racism and hatred, if that's the kind of people that run this country, if that's who they are. Story_ID: 5388 Speaker 1: Would you characterize yourself as a, a bit of a rebel when--as a young person, even before graduating from high school? Would you have characterized yourself as a bit of rebel? Speaker 2: It depends on what you mean by the word rebel. I stayed within my lane in terms of rules and regulations. I didn't violate any of the rules. However, I did question some of the morays. You know, certain things just didn't make sense, you know, just weren't logical. I remember when I was--I had gotten the measles. I was fifteen years old. I had just gotten my first job at the Dairy Queen. My girlfriend retained the job cause she didn't get the measles. So after I'd gotten well, I went to visit her, and she would, you know, slip me an ice cream cone. While I was standing there, Dick Gregory comes up to get a Dairy Queen, and, of course, all of us go, ah--Dick Gregory. We found out he was in town to do a speech and invited me to come. And I did go. And the title of the speech was, "It's Open Season on Negroes in America", and when--and what was, what inspired that, of course, was the history of this--the lynching in this country of our people, but also the, the more recent murder of Emmett Till. So Dick had been going around the country, and he just happened to run into us. I went to hear him speak, and I don't remember all of it. All of it was excellent, and it resonated with me when he said that dogs, deer, rabbit have more rights than Negroes in America. He said, "when you kill a deer, you can only kill a deer in deer season. You have to stand at a certain distance and you can only have a certain kind of rifle and you can only kill so many. And if you violate any one of those, you can get fined or you can go to jail. But you can kill as many Negroes, any way you want, with anything you want," and that was true. That was no sanctuary for us. This country did not provide a sanctuary where we could go, whether they were enforced or not, where we could go and have lynching outlawed. But it was outlaw to be shooting deer and you weren't in deer season. So that stayed with me, has stayed with me. That made me question. If that's a rebel, I don't know. I felt like my country was rebelling against us. And it made you question so much of what you learned in school about the liberty, justice for all, the "Pledge Allegiance to the Flag", the singing of the "National Anthem", of land of the free, home of the brave. And, you know, this was approaching the '60's [1960s]. The Vietnam War was going on. Later on, I met Muhammad Ali. You know the troubles he had with the federal government by refusing to go [to Vietnam]. I mean I remember his famous chant, "Hell, no, I won't go, I'm not gonna let a white man send this black man to kill a yellow man who stole land from a red man". Is that radical? Story_ID: 5389 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about Butler University. What were your experiences like there? Speaker 2: It was very nice. It was a Christian university. It was during the days of quotas and tokenism, which you could--which quota and token were words that were part of our political correctness, which meant, we're gonna open up our universities to them, but we're only gonna let ten percent of those who apply in. And one in every ten could be black. And so I just barely got in cause they had already done the counting. They had gotten down to the ninth, and then--didn't have, didn't have anything to do really with my grades or how I acquired the scholarship. But I got in, and they were very civil. In Indiana, Central Indiana, I won't speak of Southern Indiana, they, despite that being the home of the Ku Klux Klan, and we have a history of that. My high, my high school was founded by the Klan, oddly enough. I just learned that in the last couple of years. They were very civil and polite and nice, and the irony there is my old testament professor was a rabbi, Reisinger (ph.), Rabbi, Professor Reisinger was his name. I think in my book I call him Singer, but it--I later learned from others that it's Reisinger. And we Christians are told we can't question. Whenever we don't have an answer, (whispering) you mustn't question. This rabbi, this professor said, I can question. When it comes to your soul and eternity, if that's what you believe, don't you have a right to ask the person who created you anything you want? (Gasp) And that was like giving me room to breath. I felt I could participate in my faith, in my very being, in my mortality or my immortality. And that was a lovely experience that I got there. Another experience was there was a young girl in my class, in my English class who sat next to me. And we were sitting alphabetically, and my Janet Floyd. Her name was Judy Flanders. And she would ask me all the time, can you open this page for me? What page did the professor say? And I was, okay, I'll help you. I'm happy to do that. And then I thought, she's the whitest kid in class, whites are supposed to be superior. Why is she asking me, the inferior race, where this page is or what chapter it is or constantly asking me for help? And I remember coming home and telling my mother at dinner that night, I said, this is the whitest girl in class, and she's asking me, the only black girl in class, what's what. So mother said, why do you call her the whitest girl in class? I said because she's got white, white hair, and she's got eyes like, remember that rabbit you gave me for, for Easter one year? She's got eyes like that little rabbit. They're red. And so mother put her knife and fork down, and she said, Judy may be an albino. And I said, what's that? She said, you want to be so smart, college girl, go look it up. And I did. And for a moment that superiority cause I felt superior to whites because morally we were. I hadn't seen in our history where we had done the horrible things to them, they had done to us. And so I felt morally superior. And then for a moment, I realized that kind of moral superiority or any kind of superiority, based on anything, is the beginning of being like them. And I didn't want to do that. And so I told mother, I said, yeah, I see. And so mother said, there are worse things in life--I said, I said--she said, she has to go through life being blind, nearly blind, and people feeling about her in a way that's not right. And I said, well, at the end of the day, she gets to be white. And so my mother said, there are worse things--and, oh, I said, I get to be black. And she said, there are worse things in life than being black. Story_ID: 5390 Speaker 1: One thing I want to ask you about, and we're gonna have to back up a little bit, is your experience at career day in high school. You had kind of shifted a little bit from wanting to be a missionary to now wanting to be model. Can you--. Speaker 2: I think my secret desire was to be a model, probably to be a movie star, but we come from a modest culture where you don't say I want to be this. Now-a-days the kids will say that. We, so we really kind of held that aside and had our secondary, more--less egotistical career out there. And so when this woman came, white woman came to our career day, she spoke. We had policemen come, had lawyers come, fireman, whatever, every vocation just about. And she was more exotic and more interesting and more inclined to what I wanted to do as modeling and charm. So I was listening to her every word, and she passed out a few pamphlets. So it was on a Friday, and so that next Monday, I got on the bus and went to downtown Indianapolis on Monument Circle, and I went to the Patricia Stevens Modeling School to follow up on taking the courses cause I'd saved up some money, and I could afford it. And I went in, and asked the receptionist could I see the woman that was at the Crispus Attucks High School career day. And the woman let me wait a long time. As a matter of fact, I remember reading an article, I'd waited that long. And I thought well, I'd done the wrong thing by not making an appointment. Perhaps, I should have called first. Mother had always taught me to do that. So finally the woman comes out, and she wasn't nearly as nice or together as she was when she was there for career day. And so I said, "I'm Janet Floyd, and you were at my school," and before I could say (unclear), she said, "I remember you." And she invited me to come into her office, but didn't ask me to take a seat. And she said, "what is it you want?" And I said, "well, as you spoke the other day about modeling and charm and I want to have a career in model and learn the amenities of social graces." And she said, well, "first of all we don't have the kind of facilities to do your kind of hair and secondly, it's, can't your mother teach you these things?" And I said, "well, she teaches me how to set a table, but not how to be a model, put on makeup, do my hair." She said, "I don't think you're ever going to be in a circumstance where you're gonna need this training. It would only be a waste of money for you." And, you know, even though you're not very sophisticated, no matter how curtly and directly it's said, you feel hurt. You know when you've been insulted. So I left and felt dejected, but felt angry and also felt determined. It was the beginning of, I'm not taking no for answer from anybody. And I remember the bus ride back home, I--feeling like I'm gonna be everything I want to be. And I did get to be a model, and I did get to be on television, and I did get to be the wife of the Secretary of Defense in entertaining heads of state and monarchs and using the social graces that she--I asked her to teach me. And maybe now I could teach her a few. Speaker 1: And what year did you leave Butler University? Speaker 2: Probably sixty--. Speaker 1: Sixty one [1961]? Speaker 2: --one [1961], think so. Story_ID: 5391 Speaker 1: What was happening in terms of civil rights and that kind of thing in Indianapolis and how involved were you in civil rights? Speaker 2: I wasn't aware of, short of that one speech I went to that Dick Gregory had stirred the fire of rage about racism in my soul, I really wasn't aware--you have, you have to remember that Indianapolis is very subtle about it. We all kind of knew our place. It was like those dogs who wear those collars that prevent them from crossing these invisible lines. We knew our place, and like I said before too, that segregation was somewhat of a comfort zone for us. Speaker 1: But were you reading about it in other places? Speaker 2: No, after the Emmett Till thing, I--during that time, I don't remember a whole lot about racism. I remember once we were in a car with a friend, and they thought that--some young, white kids driving by thought she was white with us, and shouted some epithets, but that's all I really ever remember witnessing, until I moved to Chicago. Story_ID: 5392 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about you, you did get to become a model--. Speaker 2: I did, I did. Speaker 1: --with Ebony Fashion Fair, tell us about that. Speaker 2: I entered a--I lost my scholarship at the college, at Butler University. And I took up jobs, and one of the jobs I took was the telephone company, but on the side, I would enter beauty contests or personality contests because there was some sort of monetary reward in addition to the trophy because I had an idea of going back to school, since I'd lost my scholarship. I'd at least be able to pay my way, and as I began to enter these contests, I discovered that dream, that other dream I had of wanting to be a model, and it was coming true. And so I modeled for local people in, in Indianapolis. And then a beautiful woman, a model by the name of Cortie King, came to Indianapolis. She married one of the outstanding local people there, Marion Stewart and opened up a modeling agency for black women called Cortie King's Castle. And I went there. She took me under her wing, and at the end of our class, when the class was over, she took me to Chicago, a group of, maybe two or three of us. But I, I felt like I was her premier person. And she took us to meet Mr. John H. Johnson who owns Johnson Publishing, the magazines. He publishes "Ebony" and "JET". And they had Ebony Fashion Fair, which is a traveling modeling agency that goes to different areas around the country and the Caribbean doing charity work for sororities and churches. And I won, I got the job to model. So I liked that. We went to sixty-two cities in three months, and there again, I saw my father after about seventeen years. I saw him again, but I did that, and I liked it. Speaker 1: And you all were kind of elevated a little bit to celebrity status when you--. Speaker 2: Oh, we were major stars. Mr. Johnson said that we were more than ladies. We were princesses. And he treated us that way. We had chaperons. We wore the best clothes, Oscar De Le Renta, Balenciaga (ph.), whoever was--Rudy Ginrich, whoever was famous at the time. I remember having a beautiful sable coat that I modeled, gold lemay on the outside, sable on the inside, and this coat is more traveled than I was at the time. It had a passport on the inside. So every time I opened it to show the sable, I had to be mindful of that and do it just right so the audience couldn't see the passport. But no, we, we had crme de la crme of clothes. Speaker 1: And what year did you begin with Ebony Fashion Fair? Speaker 2: That was 1962. Speaker 1: And you stayed with the organization until when? Speaker 2: The show only last--it's a seasonal show, and it lasted for three months, and then I came back to Indianapolis and worked for the telephone company. And fortunately for me, one of the girls dropped out the second season, and Mr. Johnson asked me to pick up the show and join. And that's when I decided my destiny was in Chicago. Story_ID: 5393 Speaker 1: I moved to Chicago in 1966. And sure enough, there I met Mahalia Jackson, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.--. Speaker 2: And you lived with Mahalia Jackson. Speaker 1: I lived with her for about two weeks. People who interview say, you lived with her. It sounds like I was there forever. It was a wonderful two weeks cause she gave me a chance to kind of get on my feet--Cortie King, who was her friend, insisted that I stay with Mahalia, a nice Christian home, until I can get a job. And I did, working at Cook County School of Nursing. I got a job there, but there I met Dr. King and [Andrew] Andy Young and Jesse Jackson [Sr.], and later on, not at her home, but I met Muhammad Ali. But Mahalia Jackson was--I had seen her at my mother's church when I was a little girl. Mahalia would go on tour and sing at various churches throughout the country, black churches, maybe some white, but I know black churches. She sang at ours, and I was in the, way in the back row. And this woman on the stage far up there with that voice, just enraptured us and embraced us. It would make your, your flesh crawl when you hear her singing. It was like an angel, and she was known by Mahalia. And the idea that I would get to know her, much less stay with her for a couple of weeks, and then have all these, august people in her home, meeting them, was just an amazing experience for me, a young twenty-four year old to do this. Story_ID: 5394 Speaker 1: When did you get bit by the television bug? When did you decide that you'd like to pursue a career in broadcasting? Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I was modeling in Chicago and doing very well as a runway model, photographer's model, industrial model, and you're black, you had to do all of it, if you were gonna work on a regular basis. The white girls had the luxury of specializing. Speaker 1: Did you ever work with Daphne Maxwell--? Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I did. I did and I can't remember whether Daphne and I were with the Ebony Fashion Fair at the same time or we worked in Chicago, but sure we did. Speaker 1: One thing I want to ask you about that she had mentioned when I interviewed her was that during her modeling career, it was great. But then there came a point where she too light skinned to be black and just the work just completely dried up. Did you experience that at all or had you moved on to television by then? Speaker 2: I had moved on to television, but I knew it was coming. I had, because of my early race training and because of my natural curiosity and interest in humanity, in human beings, the psychology of how we think, and racism was pretty predictable, I thought, that I knew it was because of Martin's [Luther King, Jr.] death, his murder that whites or the people who made the decisions who were whites, let's just say that, would through a little shame, a little guilt, maybe a little humanity and open up the door a little bit to let us in. But I knew it was just gonna be a crack, only one or two would get in, and I knew we only had five minutes to do it. Then it would be another ethnic group or another whatever. I just kind of intuitively knew this. So, yes, I was looking away from model into other avenues to make a living. After I discovered my confidence, I was pretty good at being out there. When you're young, you do have a lot of confidence, and you do think you can do anything. And I did. Speaker 1: And not to mention that you had the opportunity to meet Dr. King and that, you know, he shared some words with you to really help build your confidence. What did he tell you about what you would, you know, eventually end up becoming? Speaker 2: Well, I had bumped into Dr. King accidentally, and I talk about that in my book. I was really heading towards Sidney Poitier (laughter), I spilled coke all over Dr. King. But then later that evening he came by to visit Mahalia, and I was staying there. And this is like destiny. And the next day I was with Mahalia Jackson, she was in bed. She wasn't very well the last two years that I knew her. We were watching TV and Dr. King was struck by a brick. These hoodlums in this part of town, Cicero, Illinois, and I think it was--I can't remember now the other part of, but Cicero, they were throwing stones and bags of urine at Dr. King and the marchers. And Mahalia was very upset by that and said, they're killing my boy, they're killing my baby. She got out of her bed. She had beautiful pink lingerie on, and she put on her dressing coat, pink slippers to match, went downstairs, and said I'm going to get my car, bring my car around. And nobody would because she had heart trouble. They didn't want her driving. Then there she was dressed in her, you know, her nightgown. And she got in her car, and as she was taking off, the passenger door came open, and one of the guys that oversees her got in with her, and they went to Gage Park to get Dr. King. But that night Mahalia was cooking for him in the kitchen, and Dr. King had a wonderful sense of humor. He was joking about the day, and how they almost got killed and the brick hitting him in the head and wasn't his head big enough. They made it bigger. And I couldn't understand how a man like that could joke about something like this, and Mahalia was very upset with him. She said he mustn't do that; let those white folks alone. And then he started teasing her about, well, at the end of the line there was this pretty white girl--and, of course, that set Mahalia off. We all laughed about it, but when Mahalia went upstairs to bed and we're all sitting around in her living room talking, I asked Dr. King why do you pray when they're stoning you? Why don't you fight back? And I'd like to march with you. I'd show those white people a thing or two. And he said, sat back in his chair like this, and he said, "If we let you march, what would you do when they call you the "n" word? And he didn't say the "n" word. He said the word. And I said, "I'd call them a few words. I have a few words that we use for them, pejoratives." He said, "What would you do if they threw urine on you when they struck you?" I said, "I'd strike them back." He said, "You can't march with us, child." And I said,"Why?" I--because with all that bravado, I thought he would say, okay. And he said, no. He said, we have a strategy. It's called nonviolence. And the reason we do it is because, one, it's the right thing to do and two, we're outnumbered, three, we stand out. We can't fade into the crowd. And four, look at 'em, they have all the guns. So that's our strategy. And in the end, we're gonna make them feel so ashamed of who they are that it is, their--common decency that will win the day for us. So, you can't march. You'll get us all killed. You'll do exactly what those with the guns and the billy clubs and the stones want us to do, give them a reason to annihilate us. You can't march. Speaker 1: So, the television aspirations came to fruition? Speaker 2: Yeah, and Martin was murdered. And things opened up, and I was already modeling, so I was there on the scene, and I'd done some work for Marshall Field and Company in the ads, Carson Pirie Scott, retail department stores. And my agent, when I went in to get a check one day, she said, they're looking for weather girls over at Channel 2, which was CBS, the WBBM TV station. I said, I don't know anything about the weather. She said, oh, just looking for a pretty face. Just go on over there and, and audition. And I did, and the joke was around CBS that the reason I got the job is because he'd interviewed 350 women, and I was the last one to show up and he was exhausted. So he gave me the job, and I worked as the weekend weather girl for three and a half years at Channel 2, CBS. I was treated with great respect. I can't--I, I have radar on racism. I can pick it up, I can smell it; didn't experience any of that there. They were very, very nice. As a matter of fact, when a woman who had a interview show, who owns "The Bold and the Beautiful", Lee Phillips, she and her husband, when she went on vacation, they asked me to sit in. And the first person I ever interviewed was Woody Allen. The second person was Topol, the Israeli actor who did "Fiddler on the Roof", and then I interviewed Harry Belafonte, and then I had my rendezvous again with Sidney Portier, when they were doing "Buck and the Preacher Man", they came. Speaker 1: And what happened when you started doing interviews? Did you discover this is what, you know, I--? Speaker 2: Oh, I love it. I love--this part of the give and take of an interview, I don't like, even though it's a subject that I'm the expert on, my life. I'm much more interested in you, Racine. I'd rather be asking you questions about you and putting the spotlight on you. So that was something I really loved to do, and then the teacher in me was realizing that I was bringing out, not just having done my homework and knew what some of the answer would be, but discovering other answers and sharing them with the audience. That was a wonderful feeling to be able to be a performer, a teacher and a person to question someone. I was, I was in heaven. I really said, this is my niche. This is what I want to do. And fortunately, I was able to do that and in Chicago, in Indianapolis, my hometown, concurrently to doing the weather. Speaker 1: And what was the name of your show in Indianapolis? Speaker 2: "Indi Today with Janet Langhart," I-N-D-I, is sort of the nickname of Indianapolis. So that was, that was a lot of fun. Speaker 1: What was it like for your family? Speaker 2: My mother was excited for me because in Chicago she couldn't see me on television being that she lived in Indianapolis. With my doing this weekend day show in Indianapolis, she could see me and brag about me, and she--having a daughter who was on TV makes you a little celebrity in your bridge club, right. So she enjoyed that, but she got to see what I had been doing, that it wasn't frivolous, and that I was really asking important people important questions, that made a difference to how viewers may feel about a given subject. So it, it was important work, medias. Speaker 1: And how personally satisfying was it for you to be back in Indianapolis, the same place where you were told--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I often wondered if that woman--she probably, once I walked out of the door, probably never thought about me again and probably wouldn't recognize--. Speaker 1: Oh, she saw you, she saw you. Speaker 2: I don't know, maybe, but I did fantasize that maybe she's watching and, see there, hum. Speaker 1: And so you were in Indianapolis during the week doing your show, and then flying back--? Speaker 2: No, no, I don't like to fly. So, any occasion not to fly, I will find it. Fortunately, the proximity of Indianapolis to Chicago, I could take a bus. And I was known as the Queen of Interstate 65 [pause]. Speaker 1: Can we pause for a second, Scott? Speaker 2: Interstate, isn't it? Speaker 1: I thought it was sixty-eight. Speaker 2: No, it's sixty-five [Interstate 65]. Speaker 1: Sixty-five. Speaker 2: Sixty-five, okay. Speaker 1: Cause I knew all the Greyhound bus drivers because I would get off the air--in the Midwest, we do the news at 10:00 o'clock rather than 11:00 o'clock the way we do here on East coast. So at 10:15 I'd be off the air, having done the weather. And I could get over to the bus station and catch the 11:00 o'clock and be in Indianapolis in three hours. I leased a, a furnished apartment in the building that my mother happened to live in and the building that Jane Pauley lived in because Jane Pauley also worked for that same TV station, Wish, WISH TV, a CBS affiliate. And I would get about three or four hours sleep, and when you're young, and you're eager, and you love what you're doing, sleep is unimportant. I would get up--I couldn't wait to get up and go to work, and that--those are some of the headiest and happiest days of my life, and you know you enjoy your work when you can't wait to get up and go do. And not having that for a while, you--lately, I really miss that and treasure that time in my life. And I did that for a year. Story_ID: 5395 Speaker 1: My show was getting a lot of ratings in Indianapolis, and the competition wanted me out of town. So what they customarily do is take the competition and send your tape some place else that's looking for talent. And one of the competitors had sent my tape to Boston. And that changed my whole life. Speaker 2: And what happened in Boston? Speaker 1: I did a show called--then it was called "Good Morning", with an older, white gentleman, who was born on the same day as my father, oddly enough, ten years younger. And John Willis and I did that show--John Willis is a wonderful man. I learned a lot from him. He never thought I listened, but I did, we did that show together for three and a half years. And Boston was an awakening for me. America has a lot of surprises for black folks, it really does. Indianapolis was segregated, very racist, but subtle, unlike the South that was all of those things, but not subtle. Chicago was, had more black people in Chicago than Boston had people. So I felt insulated, and then I'd had a few months of having lived in New York in Harlem, where I saw more black people than I'd ever seen in my whole life. It was amazing for a young person. And then I moved to Boston. And some cities in our country have a history, have a nice reputation and all of that. Boston was thought to be the cradle of liberty, abolition, and the home of abolitionist where Harriet Tubman went to take her freed slaves. It was the home of John Kennedy, a president that colored people liked. It was where Martin Luther King went to school. It was where Crispus Attucks died in the Revolution and it was also the home of South Boston, which is predominantly Irish, poor Irish, that had problems with the school system experimenting at their expense on integration. And I was stunned to see my first year there, with the court-ordered busing that women, mothers with a pocketbook and a rosary in this hand and a stone in this hand, throwing at other people's children, black children on their way to school. And it troubled me because then I remembered my days of rage that were inspired in me from Dick Gregory. I--cause he always taught about racism through logic. And I thought on one hand white people say, we're lazy, we don't want to go to school, we're not educable. And on the other hand, when we try to put our babies on the school bus, they stone them. Then I was further disappointed because having seen so many movies of "Going My Way", "For Whom the Bells Toll", these Bing Crosby movies of the good priests and the nun story, that not being a Catholic, we quietly felt Catholicism was a high, higher religion. And so I expected more of the Catholics, the priests and the nuns. And I saw some nuns marching with the people that were stoning our children, and I wondered where the Cardinal was, Cardinal Maderros (ph.). Why isn't anyone speaking up and saying this is wrong, and why are the police so passive? Then I realized the police were Irish Catholic, and they had to go back into those neighborhoods, and if they start cracking heads, they'd probably be hitting the heads of their brothers and sisters or their aunts or whomever. So who was protecting us? Certainly not the representative of God in the Cardinal; certainly not the police, civil authority? Who was protecting black children on their way to school? So I got on the air, and I said, this city ought to be ashamed of itself, the religious leaders won't come out, the authorities won't come out. You ask us to obey God and obey the law, and neither is here for us, our children? This is wrong. Speaker 2: And how was it received by viewers? Speaker 1: It was received--we got 350 calls telling that "n" person to go back South, which I never lived in the South, but I guess they presumed that all black people came from the South. If you don't like the way we do things here in Boston, the door swings both ways. I remember getting off the air, going back to my desk and my producer says, what did you say? And I said, what do you mean what did I say? He said, you said something on the air, didn't you. I said, you know me, I'll say almost anything. He said, no, but we got 350 calls here. I said, what are the calls saying? Well, we got to do something about this. I said, people are calling me the "n" word, and you got to do something about me? Go look and see what I said, and he did. And I said, why aren't we--he said, Janet, why do you always have to talk about this black stuff? I said, oh, I'm the problem. They're talking about this all the way to the Vatican. They're talking about it in the nation's capital, but we can't talk about it here in Boston, and we're a live show where it's happening? Who are you--who should we silence, me? That's like, it's like blaming the victim. Speaker 2: And did you get support from your black colleagues at the station--? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --when you spoke out? Speaker 1: No, I--that was the other troubling thing because one of the things we just assumed, having gone to an all-black school, that when we step out of our all-black environment, that we would indeed have unity, we'd rally. It's like you and your sister may have a fight, but don't let anybody else come in this fight. You're gonna come together and defend each other. I kind of just expected that. And their silence is deafening, and so I didn't think--I didn't ask for help. I didn't say anything. I thought maybe they were scared, you know, who knows? Speaker 2: So do, were you well integrated in the African American community in--? Speaker 1: I was new to the community. I had just arrived there. I didn't know anybody, and by nature, I'm very reclusive, solo flyer, if you will. So I wouldn't be out looking and joining--I wouldn't be in clubs. I wouldn't be hanging out. Like I'd do my job, and I would go home, and when you do television, live television for ninety minutes a day, five days a week, that's enough socializing for me. So, no, I didn't have a, a chance nor the inclination to be involved in any community, black or white. So, no, but there were, but certain things bring you together. There are certain commonalities. And had I seen somebody on the air taking the stand that I took and getting the reverberation from it that I did, I think, even if I were white, I'd have to stand with that person. And so it was very disturbing when something happened on the air, and black people felt insulted, and I, understanding my co-host not meaning any harm, I just gave him his innocence. It was not a major thing. I understand why black people felt insulted, but that wasn't his intention, and I knew that. Sometimes it's ignorance, and his was just being ignorant. He didn't know. He doesn't understand us. They don't have to understand us, so I figured that's what had happened, and as soon as I got off the air, all the black people called me into their office, into their conference room. And I was so glad to be in their midst. They were paying attention to me because some of them wouldn't even speak to me in the hallways. And I thought, gee, I'm the only black person on television at this station, and you all don't know I'm here. You don't speak me in the hallways. That's strange, coming from a country background, I thought it was expected. And they let me know that I was way out of line to take up for this white man after he'd insulted our people. Tthat was interesting. And I asked them where they were when I was taking the lead and having all these 350 calls telling me to leave town? Where were you and where are you when our children are being stoned? And I didn't like it, and I told them they were never to speak to me that way again. But I had been in this station for almost six months and not one of them had come to welcome me to this racist town, not one of you have come up to say, what do you need? How are you doing? But when I take up for a white man on a very innocent charge, you're gonna lay me out. If you don't like what he said, you should have him in here or his boss who can do something about it. Not me. Speaker 2: Do you think you could have done a better job of, for lack of a better word, integrating yourself in, in the African American community there in Boston? Speaker 1: To what end? Speaker 2: Or even with your colleagues at the station? Speaker 1: But a better job--was it, are you suggesting that the onus was on me to integrate with black people? Speaker 2: Well, did you ever feel like the onus perhaps was on you to--instead of waiting for them to greet you, to say, hey, you know, I'm Janet, I'm here--? Speaker 1: I did that. Good manners says when you're in the hallway passing people--and that's a sort of black thing, even if you don't know the black person, you say, hey to him, where you wouldn't say hey to another white person. It's, it's a very small-town, black thing, I guess. So that should have been sufficient, saying hello, good morning. But to go and--I think it would be terribly presumptuous of me to say, okay, let's have a meeting of the colored. I'm here now. Custom says that the newest person on the block is welcomed into the fold by the ones who were there first. So I didn't--but I wasn't expecting anything. I did think it peculiar that they didn't say hello to me or make a big deal of me because whites were making a big deal of me being, just on TV in a new show and certainly being the only black on. They never said, oh, it's a big deal cause you're black, but you're new. You're new in town. And I was welcomed to their homes, homes of white people, welcomed to their parties. I was a Herdosa, Woman of the Year, the Jewish women of the community made me Woman of the Year. So everybody else was doing the protocol thing, and I just felt, okay, you know, maybe it's a little plantation thinking, and then I discovered some of us were from the islands, the Caribbean, from Barbados, from Jamaica--. Speaker 2: Haiti? Speaker 1: Haiti, and so there's a different cultural, we just--we're all black and we're experiencing white racism, but we're not all the same. We're not monolithic. So it could have been a cultural thing. I don't know. But when they decided to let me have it, that was an opportunity for me to have a meeting of the minds. Speaker 2: Let me ask you this. Do you think that you or some whites related better to you than they did with your African American colleagues at the station (unclear)? Speaker 1: That would be getting in the heads of those people, and I don't know that. You can only measure people's behavior. I'm finding more and more that when you say, all white people or all black people, you can get into trouble, cause we all have this preconceived notion how are we to behave without giving people the benefit of the doubt that they're individuals. Or we may be projecting our self on them. I can safely say that I've had my share of kindnesses from both races and my share of pain. And while white people, when they hurt me, it's expected when it's done on a racial level, and it angers me. When white--when black people hurt me, particularly, if it has to do with race and their--my need for them to be supportive, it hurts me. It breaks my heart. Speaker 2: And how did--so, your career in Boston, did things begin to get better--? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I--. Speaker 2: --with your colleagues? Speaker 1: Oh, it--I think it's human nature that if you look like a pussycat or a pushover and people knock the chip off, and you're not the wimp and you fight back, one of two things will happen. They go away or they respect you. And black people began to respect me. I think they--and they, some of them told me they had a preconceived notion that I came from a very affluent background. And I said, you're holding that against me? Isn't that what we're to achieve to do? It isn't true, but why would that be a reason you didn't like me? Speaker 2: Well, but don't you think it's part of the whole, just in terms of the African American community, light skin, dark skin, and, you know, we can't disagree that there were light-skinned-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, absolute. Speaker 2: --families who have said you can't marry a dark skinned person or associate and that there was this notion that somehow, if you were lighter, you were somehow better. You got better jobs. Speaker 1: But you see, and that's true. Everything you say is true, but they're doing to me what white people do to us is by prejudging me based on the color of my skin. And like so many whites when they judge us, these blacks were wrong. Many of them had come from upper middle class backgrounds. While they were playing on the [Martha's] Vineyard during the summer in their cottage, I was walking barefoot on glass playgrounds in the ghetto. So you really can't judge. Story_ID: 5396 Speaker 1: We were talking about your career in Boston, and you did extremely well there, and made--. Speaker 2: I was very lucky. Speaker 1: --a great name for yourself. And also, elevated yourself to this level where you weren't just a pretty face. I mean you really developed a reputation as--. Speaker 2: A person with a brain. Speaker 1: And a top-notch interviewer as well. So were you proud of where your career was going at that point? Speaker 2: I was proud, and I was very blessed and grateful. While you earn and deserve it, you don't always get what you earn and what you deserve So I felt blessed and enjoyed it. And then I was asked to go to the network, to NBC. Speaker 1: And was that an aspiration? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. I think everybody in local television, every woman that grew up watching Barbara Walters on the "Today Show" said, that's who I want to be. She was our role model. She proved that women could do it. She did it well, and I thought there was room enough at the top for even a black girl to do it. And so I aspired to that because that was really the pinnacle, that was the thing you expect to aspire to, is the next step, the highest step, which is network television. And I was fortunate enough to be part of a show, a couple of shows, both of which failed, and--. Speaker 1: What were the name of the shows? Speaker 2: The first show was "America Alive", and we all joke now, and say, oh, no, it really turned out to be America dead, but it was "America Alive", and we did that show with the son of Art Linkletter, Jack Linkletter, Bruce Jenner, Olympic champion, and a woman who now runs public broadcasting here in D.C., Patricia--Pat Mitchell. So we did that show for about six months. And we traveled all over the country, and we interviewed great people. And it was fun. And it was really the precursor to the live hookup that "Nightline" did during the hostage crisis and now that everybody does, satellite feeds. We were sort of the, the beginning of that. Speaker 1: And what was the other show? Speaker 2: The other show I did was, one was called "Home", and ABC show out of California. That was short lived. The most important thing is to work, and that was hard on me to think, okay, I'm working, but it looks we can't keep a job. And even though we didn't get fired, the shows got canceled, it does something to your psyche if you come from an industrialized mentality of people where you work nine to five, and you never get fired or laid off. And if you do, it's something you've done wrong. So it was reconciling, you know, the fact that I'm getting work, but I'm not keeping work. But it was great. Story_ID: 5397 Speaker 1: You met your second husband in Boston--. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and married, and--? Speaker 2: Well, right after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was murdered, he was assassinated, the group of us who were around him, supported him in the Chicago area, some of whom, including myself, traveled with him, he became our friend, more than a mentor and an icon. He became my friend. And when he was murdered, it really hurt us, obviously. And so we all responded and tried to affirm life in a different way. So I married Tony Langhart. That's how I got the name Langhart, who was a police officer in Chicago. But that was a rebound, a rebound of the pain of a loss of a great friend and man. So we were divorced shortly. And then when I moved to Boston, it was about ten years later, I met this wonderful doctor. I was very, very sick. I had internalized the rage and the horrible treatment of black people in Boston. I internalized that because nobody was dealing with it. And I guess I was, and it was eating me up. And I had to have surgery, and the surgeon ended up being my husband, Robert Kistner, a wonderful man. He was one of the co-developers of the oral contraceptive, the birth control pill. And we were married until his death. We were married for ten years, and then in the interim, I met Bill Cohen, my current husband and the love of my life, in fact. He was a young congressman coming through on his way to Maine, his home state. And our show was seen all over New England, and so any politician wanting to reach his constituents could do our show cause Boston was the hub, and liked him a lot, loved his mind. Andy Young really introduced us, Bill and me, cause they served together in Congress. And Bill got a divorce about two years, I think before my husband died, and I remember saying, what do you say to somebody who's divorced? Do you say I'm sorry, or congratulations (laughs)? So what do you say? (Unclear) I didn't want to say, I didn't want to get in his business. So I said, "I'm sorry," you know, cause I know how he loved her and how the children--he was very fond of his two boys. And then about three years later, my husband died, and he was an eminent surgeon, so he appeared in the "New York Times" obituary column, all of the, the press wires covered it. And Bill was kind enough to send me a condolence. And so we started talking about loss and separation and things that we have in common, and I was very interested in politics. And we dated, and then I sort of pulled back, thinking this may be another rebound here of a loss, after a loss. And then we got married. Speaker 1: One thing I want to ask you about in reference to your second husband, Dr. Kistner, at, at the time of his death, during the funeral, you were not treated very well by his children nor by many of your mutual friends. Speaker 2: By his peers, by the doctor's. All my friends were good to me. My friends came around me and lifted me up, carried me through that. Speaker 1: But were some of these people, people who you considered friends, that you had socialized with? Speaker 2: They were associates, they were doctors, who were peers and friends of my husband that we had socialized with on medical programs or meetings or whatever. And when he died, it was very stunning to me at the funeral, the memorial service that they literally shunned me. And this is the kind of thing you see in the movies and the soap operas. And I, you know, even the, the racists of people were kind and had social graces. And certainly my being the widow at my husband's memorial service. Men and their wives that I had known for the ten years of our marriage, had been to our home, would certainly give me their condolences, and it was being, literally being shunned and ignored as though I were invisible. And it was really, it was hurtful because I was already in pain at the loss cause he died suddenly, the loss of my husband. And then to be around his friends and family and their not be welcoming because that's the expectation. That's where you go to get your, be lifted up. And one man in particular, doctor--well, I won't say his name. I'll probably just say it in the book, Robert Knapp, I'll say it. He was a leading professor at Harvard and at the hospitals. And I saw him about a year later, and I said, "Bob, I said, I had no idea Bob's death troubled you so." And he said, "Well, well, I'm sorry, what?" I said, "You had to have been in bad shape to have forgotten the social graces of not saying you were sorry to me or even saying hello to me that day." Speaker 1: Do you think race played a role in that? Speaker 2: Race always plays a role. We were talking earlier about who's light, who's dark within our race. We have this intra-racism. We're perpetuating the long dead bigoted master. We're on remote control for him. So sure, race played a role. I think a lot of, may have felt that I was--because I was so much younger than my husband that I probably was this--I took advantage of him. My husband was very wealthy, but that was my interests. And it doesn't pay to count other people's money because how do they know I didn't have some. So, yeah, and I think race played a role. I think class probably played a role. I think they felt they were of a better caliber, you know, they're Bostonian, if that means anything. But no, there was--it was rudeness. Story_ID: 5398 Speaker 1: Let's talk about "Entertainment Tonight". How did that opportunity come about? Speaker 2: I think they saw me at one of the shows. What happens when you're in television-- and you probably know this, you get discovered in the strangest of ways. Either a producer sees you and wants you and calls you, calls your agent or you're out of work and your agent calls somebody else or you're at a social gathering some place, and a friend says, hey, you ought to go over there. They're casting for whatever. I really can't remember how I got the job at "Entertainment Tonight". I do remember watching the show with my late husband before he passed, watching the show, and his saying, I want you to do that show. And I said, no, they already have their one black person. So I never thought I'd ever be doing "Entertainment Tonight", but I did, and it was a lot of fun. It was, it was a very, very nice experience. I got to go to England and cover the Academy Awards from England. Speaker 1: And was, was it a little bit more celebrity driven than what you had anticipated? Speaker 2: Well, it's hard to shift gears and make adjustments when you've been told--when you first get into television, just cook and do the Aunt Jemima stuff or the girlie stuff, just cook or do light stuff. And you want to do the heavy, weighty, political substantive stuff. Speaker 1: So do the cooking segments, but not the--? Speaker 2: Not the substantive stuff, not the thinking--. Speaker 1: Not the hard news, interviews, and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: 'Cause you're a girl, not because you're black, cause you're a girl. And then you know that if you're gonna be Barbara Walters, she's doing the substantive stuff. And then if you want to beyond gender, you're gonna do, and you know you're capable of it so you do it. The celebrity driven aspects of "Entertainment Tonight" was a shift for me because I had come off doing the heavy Watergate, Vietnam, woman's rights, civil rights stuff, and now I'm gonna go into who's married to who; who's getting a divorce? How high are your shoes? You know, that was a different genre. So it was a shifting, and I was very, very heavy, going into this light world and trying to shift, and my producer wanted me to be--well, she said, which is sort of contradictory to what I've just said, but she said, "we need you to ask more substantive questions". And I said, okay, but what are you ask Arnold Schwarzenegger, this is before he was governor. How substance do you talk about "The Terminator" or "Kindergarten--what is it? Speaker 1: Cop, I think "Kindergarten Cop". Speaker 2: Was that what it was, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, what did you ask Arnold Schwarzenegger or (unclear)--? Speaker 2: I had seen, I didn't know what--I didn't know how to talk at the level of, what's your next movie, tell me. I was trying to get into that. After you shift out of trying to be light, then you have to go light. So I was in my room, I was in France, in Nice, I was in my room watching TV. And Larry King came on. And Larry King was talking to Arnold about, I think the movie. And at the same time, a book had come out about Arnold's father allegedly having been a Nazi during World War II. That piqued my interest. It, I didn't know that. It was substantive. And I watched how Arnold handled it, and Arnold said to Larry, I know nothing about this book. It's pure trash. Whatever my father did had nothing to do with me. He handled it very well, and then they moved on. So I said, I'm gonna please my producers. I'm gonna ask about the book cause that's heavy, and that's timely. And Grace Jones was there, the actress and Sharon Stone, who else? [Sylvester] Stallone. They were all standing around, and I got up to Arnold. Arnold saw me, and you wear this "Entertainment Tonight" mic, you're holding that. So he saw "ET", grabs me and gives me a big hug. And I said, maybe he remembers me from when I interviewed him years ago in Boston for pumping iron, and probably didn't. But he did see, "ET". That was a magic wand in front of stars. And he came over, and I asked him about the movie. I think it was with Danny Devito, was it, was it? Anyway, we were talking about who's in the movie, and then I had said, this is a time to get substantive so I can impress my producers back in California. And I said, how do you feel, Arnold, about this book, declaring that your father was a Nazi? His face changed, did a contortion like I've never seen. He backed away. Grace, Grace and Sharon all backed away. I could see the room, like suddenly I was in this room by myself. And he said, I don't know anything about that, and he stormed off. That night about 1:00 o'clock in the morning I get a phone call from my producer, from LA, I don't know what time it was in LA, called me in France, saying that Arnold had banned me from the next day of interviews. And if I--. Speaker 1: So he had kind of literally blackballed you from--? Speaker 2: He blackballed me. He said if she shows up, nobody gets an interview from me. And so my producer that was there with me said, why did you ask him that question? You weren't supposed to ask him that question. I said, I wasn't? Who said so? Well, he said that we all signed a document that we're not to talk about this Nazi book. And I said, nobody ever told me that. When were you gonna tell me? She said, you're gonna get me fired. I said, no, I asked the question. I'll take the responsibility, but nobody told me that we signed--that E.T. signed this agreement with Arnold that we weren't to ask that. And they said, Arnold's very important to "Entertainment Tonight". This is a celebrity-driven show. He's a big celebrity, one of us gonna go, and I think it's gonna be me. And I said, no, you're white. It's gonna be me. And we laughed about it, and it was me. I was right. Speaker 1: And--. Speaker 2: He sent word around that I was not to show up, and I had to hide out--it, it was really strange, Racine, I have to tell you. This, we're in, we were in the South of France, and I was sitting on the back door of this hotel cause I couldn't be seen until Arnold left, but it was too far from my hotel to where we did the interviews. So I had to drive in with the crew. So I hid in the back, on the back steps, a huge limousine drives, a beautiful lady, older lady gets out and she's decked out in jewels and she has her little black poodle. And there's some commotion in the hotel about the dog not being allowed in. And I'm thinking, this is France, dogs are allowed to sit at the table in France, particularly in those days. They didn't want this dog in. So they tied little Coco up, and had a little dish for her to get some water, and she was black, and I thought, here are two black girls out here on the back steps, won't let us in. And I also thought I as in the South France, and I thought about the word South, and I thought about South Boston, and I thought about the South side of my town, Indianapolis, where the real racists lived. And then I thought about the South of my own country, where so much hatred existed, and I also thought about South Africa. And I said, what in the world is it about the world South that gives people of color so much problem. Story_ID: 5399 Speaker 1: After E.T. ['Entertainment Tonight'], you did have, have the opportunity to work with America's Black Forum and BET. Speaker 2: Out of the blue. Speaker 1: And what was that like for you as an African American journalist? Speaker 2: Oh, it was heaven. It was heaven because I didn't have to worry about somebody calling up and say, tell that--go back down South. I didn't have to mince words to not, to not hurt the feelings of racists, to give them their innocence. I could, I could talk about that black stuff that my white producers had asked me not to talk about. Don't talk about that because the viewers don't think of you as black. And I said, well, do they think of me as white? No, I said, so if they don't--. Speaker 1: But just not really black. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, not that black as somebody had said once, which is insulting, isn't it? Yeah. So to be on America's Black Forum with Julian Bond, to be at Black Entertainment Television, and with all the criticism that BET got for not being substantive enough, I got to do substantive stuff. I was in heaven. It was, it was--I was just free to be me, to be all that I am and not be a black girl dressed up in a white girl's suit, dancing around things that are equally important to us. Story_ID: 5400 Speaker 1: Then your career took kind of a little bit of a change when you married your husband, Bill Cohen, and he became Secretary of Defense, and you became--. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a U.S. Senator when we were dating and engaged. And we held off on getting married because I didn't want to be married to a politician. I just didn't want to be in the political world. Politicians are great; they make laws that we all live by and save us. But I didn't want that life for myself. I'd had enough of being in the light as a television personality. I wanted to go off and be rather anon--anonymous. I remember interviewing Richard Burton shortly before his death. And I said, "Do you like being famous?" He said, yeah, I like being famous, but I don't like being recognized, and so--is everything all right? Oh, okay. He said, "Yeah, I like being famous, but I don't like being recognized." He said, I said, "well, how are you gonna do that? He said, well, think of the author, John Steinbeck, everybody knows who he is. He said, I can call up and say this is Richard Burton and get a table, but so can John Steinbeck, and nobody'll know who he is (laughter). So I liked being--when I came to Washington, despite the fact that I was seen on one of the TV stations in New York, on the Sky Network or whatever, some people recognized me, but I like the anonymity of being able to walk around town with no make up, no airs, nobody gonna--nobody confronting me. I like that, being a recluse, I really enjoyed being anonymous, being invisible. Then we got the show American black, "America's Black Forum" on BET, and there was some recognition. Not a lot, despite what you think because BET, not many people watch that because it's cable. And "America's Black Forum"--although it was on broadcast television, it was on at 2:00 o'clock in the morning. You know, I think the white programmers think black people watch TV at 2:00 o'clock in the morning. We watch TV like everybody else. And we don't go to black outlets for our news necessarily. We watch ABC News, NBC News, like news is news. It isn't color, but at any rate, Bill decided he was gonna leave the senate. And one of the other reasons, quite frankly, I didn't give Maine enough credit for being a progressive state I thought that he would not get reelected despite his 85 percent approval rating, if they discovered he was gonna marry a black woman. And I wanted him to leave on top. And Maine has welcomed me with open arms. I misjudged Maine. So then we got, we got married. We got married, and we were out of politics, and then [President] Bill Clinton called Bill to ask him to be Secretary of Defense. Speaker 1: And that was a new role for you as the first lady of the Pentagon. Tell us a little bit about what you did in that role, and how you tried to kind of form it and shape it so that it would be, you know, representative of Janet Langhart Cohen? Speaker 2: It really wasn't about me, and I didn't try to shape it or form it. I tried to be a part of it. I wanted to be with my husband. We were newlyweds, so I wanted to be with him all the time. And anybody that's been around our military, we have the finest military in the world. We really do. I'm not just saying that as a patriot. I'm saying that because I saw that. Speaker 1: What did you learn about the military? Speaker 2: So many things, but I, I discovered them. I thought when Bill got the job being secretary of defense, it would mean embassy parties, White House parties, maybe a little travel. Nothing prepared me for the men and women who wear our nation's uniforms and their families. These are committed people. They come from every walk of life, every color, every gender. They are committed to being patriots. They're professional. They're strong, they're integrated. It is a vertical, it's not a democracy, it's a vertical command. But I think private industry, civil society could learn a great deal about doing business, humanity, commitment, discipline by watching the men and women who serve in our military. Story_ID: 5401 Speaker 1: What did you think though about some of the--like just in terms, like during wartime, the disproportionate number of African Americans who, who, who die and who are part of, like not officers and not within the hierarchy of the military. They, they truly are--many of them, disproportionately representative. Speaker 2: We're, we're disproportionately represented in our military, yes. But we're not disproportionately on the front line. Contrary to popular belief, a great many of people of color, whether they are black or Latino or Asian or South Sea islanders, they go into the engineering and technical fields. People who are drawn to an all-voluntary military aren't there just because they were forced to be there. They choose to be there, and they're there to get an education, see the world and be part of something bigger than themselves. And many times young blacks are in the military because they can't get scholarships because what I said about the civilian society, it's a little more restricted. It's not as fair, it's not as together in many ways as our military is. So, yes, we're disproportionately represented, but I walk the halls of Walter Reed [Hospital]. And I don't necessarily see disproportionate numbers of black people injured and maimed and wound-wounded there, and in the hospital beds. We're disproportionately represented in prisons, and that really bothers me because there's an adverse reason for us. Indirectly, I guess racism plays a part in any time we're disproportionate. We're disproportionately dying of heart disease and diabetes--. Speaker 1: And AIDS and various other diseases. Speaker 2: Everything else, so indirectly, racism plays a part, but no, in our military, they come because they want to be somebody, and they want to serve. Story_ID: 5402 Speaker 1: Who have you most enjoyed interviewing? Who's been your favorite, your favorite interviewee? Speaker 2: So many. You have to break it down into categories. Speaker 1: Well--. Speaker 2: I inter--I, I didn't interview him, but I did have a chat, it was like an interview. We didn't have any cameras or mics, is Mandela, Mr. Mandela--Mandiba [knickname fro Mandela]. I enjoyed talking to him, listening to him really. Martin [Luther King, Jr.]--you know, does an interview, does it qualify to have lights, camera, action? Speaker 1: Well, at first I was thinking that when I asked the question, but now that you pose that, no. So because I mean an interview, especially, the, the way you've always done 'em is a, is a conversation. Speaker 2: I enjoy, I enjoyed needling David Duke, the Klansman, I liked that. I liked outwitting him in su--white supremacy. That was fun. I was a kid. Marion Anderson, I loved her, Dan Rather, it was a very good interview, Tom Brokaw. I've interviewed my husband, before he was my husband. And I liked that. I interviewed Bill Clinton. It was interesting to have him without provocation tell me how he was taught about race, and it was the same thing I was taught, to treat people fairly and decent. Speaker 1: Who would you most like to interview that you haven't interviewed? Speaker 2: Living or dead? Speaker 1: It doesn't matter. Speaker 2: Jacqueline Kennedy. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Because she never gave an interview; because she did the dignified thing and kept her family secrets and her personal feelings to herself, where we live in a society where--I mean here I am saying I would like to interview her, but we live in a society where we live on the underbelly of other people's suffering. We want to get into every aspect of their personal lives and then turn it against them. And she had the present--presence and dignity to not do that, and not succumb to that. So I would like to have interviewed her, and one of the questions would be, why didn't you ever give an interview? What set you apart? What was it in your inner compass that told you that wouldn't have been the classy thing to do? Story_ID: 5403 Speaker 1: What do you think the twenty-ish year old Janet Floyd would think about the, the woman that you are today? Would she approve? Would she be happy? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I think she'd be surprised that, that she held on to that compass that she was given by so many masters, her mother being one, teachers, peers in many cases, mentors. And when the president asked me to stand at the State of the Union because of the work we had done on behalf of our military, Martin [Luther King, Jr.] had told me when I was a young girl, that I would--I was a queen. And I thought, I'm not, I'm twenty-four years old and a poor little girl from the ghetto. How could I be a queen? And he said that you're a queen, not because of the birth canal you come from. You're not a queen because you reign or you rule. Sometimes you're a queen when you survive and overcome and rise to a level where you give back, either of spirit or self or things to those less fortunate. That's what it means to be royalty. Story_ID: 5404 Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Do I have to go? (Laughter). Speaker 1: No, eighty, a 100 years from now. Speaker 2: It's like that old song, like, you know, how can I forget you if you don't go away, right? Speaker 1: So a hundred years from now, what is it that you want people to say when they're speaking about Janet Cohen? Speaker 2: I think, I think I'd like to be remembered as a race woman. Speaker 1: What do you mean by that? Speaker 2: That I was aware of who I was, where I was, and what my role was as it related to race. That is the one divide that this country, as great as it is, doesn't ever want to talk about, especially in mixed company. When we bring it up in their company, a shield comes down. Or if they do talk to us, get the chip off, but that happened a long time ago. I didn't have slave, I didn't have anything to do with it, has nothing to do with them, per se. It has to do with what race and racism has done to this country. We are still living, and, and I want to--I would like them to say as a race woman, she contributed to the dialogue on race, to the one thing we're all in the closet about. I mean we, we don't have a class problem in this country like the Europeans do, where they can't rise above a certain class. We can, here I am, I live in the penthouse of this building. I've risen above, but if I go out there now, some white person could drive up and throw me the keys, thinking I'm parking their car. So contributing to the dialogue on race. Story_ID: 5405 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the work that you're doing on the anti-lynching legislation before congress? Speaker 2: I'm working with Dick Gregory and Dr. E. Faye Williams on the anti-lynching apology from the U.S. Senate. The Senate, unlike the congress, is not an adjoining body. It's a continuous body that never adjourns. And in the days when our people in this country, black people were being lynched, we couldn't get any anti-lynching legislation, which would have given us some legal sanctuary to stop it, to enforce those who were breaking the law and murder, lynching is murder. So they weren't able to do that. And now we're appealing them, and maybe symbolically to please, acknowledge that this happened and apologize for it. And we're having a tough time. We have two Senators, Senators Allen from Virginia and Senator Landry from Louisiana, but what was interesting is I have to go on Capitol Hill and almost lobby, and I don't get to meet with the Senators. I'm the wife of a former Senator, which protocol says you're to see me. I meet with some staffers. Well, yesterday was St. Patrick's Day, and there was an unfortunate thing that happened in Ireland. One of the Sinn Fein or the IRA was murdered, brutally murdered, and he has five sisters who've survived him. These five Irish sisters can come and have Ted Kennedy take them around, Capitol Hill, take them to the President...